ReviewSafety assessment of personal care products/cosmetics and their ingredientsGerhard J. Nohyneka,⁎, Eric Antignaca, Thomas Reb, Herve ToutainaaL'OREAL R&D, Global Safety Evaluation, 92600 Asnières, FrancebL'Oreal USA, Research and Development, Clark, NJ 07066, USAabstract article infoArticle history:Received 28 October 2009Revised 27 November 2009Accepted 2 December 2009Available online 21 December 2009Keywords:Safety assessmentPersonal care productsCosmetic ingredientsHair dyesUltraviolet ﬁltersThreshold of toxicological concernNanoparticlesWe attempt to review the safety assessment of personal care products (PCP) and ingredients that arerepresentative and pose complex safety issues. PCP are generally applied to human skin and mainly producelocal exposure, although skin penetration or use in the oral cavity, on the face, lips, eyes and mucosa may alsoproduce human systemic exposure. In the EU, US and Japan, the safety of PCP is regulated under cosmetic
and/or drug regulations. Oxidative hair dyes contain arylamines, the most chemically reactive ingredients ofPCP. Although arylamines have an allergic potential, taking into account the high number of consumersexposed, the incidence and prevalence of hair dye allergy appears to be low and stable. A recent (2001)epidemiology study suggested an association of oxidative hair dye use and increased bladder cancer risk inconsumers, although this was not con ﬁrmed by subsequent or previous epidemiologic investigations. Theresults of genetic toxicity, carcinogenicity and reproductive toxicity studies suggest that modern hair dyesand their ingredients pose no genotoxic, carcinogenic or reproductive risk. Recent reports suggest thatarylamines contained in oxidative hair dyes are N-acetylated in human or mammalian skin resulting insystemic exposure to traces of detoxi ﬁed, i.e. non-genotoxic, metabolites, whereas human hepatocytes were
unable to transform hair dye arylamines to potentially carcinogenic metabolites. An expert panel of theInternational Agency on Research of Cancer (IARC) concluded that there is no evidence for a causalassociation of hair dye exposure with an elevated cancer risk in consumers. Ultraviolet ﬁlters have importantbeneﬁts by protecting the consumer against adverse effects of UV radiation; these substances undergo astringent safety evaluation under current international regulations prior to their marketing. Concerns werealso raised about the safety of solid nanoparticles in PCP, mainly TiO2and ZnO in sunscreens. However,current evidence suggests that these particles are non-toxic, do not penetrate into or through normal orcompromised human skin and, therefore, pose no risk to human health. The increasing use of natural plantingredients in personal care products raised new safety issues that require novel approaches to their safety
evaluation similar to those of plant-derived food ingredients. For example, the Threshold of ToxicologicalConcern (TTC) is a promising tool to assess the safety of substances present at trace levels as well as minoringredients of plant-derived substances. The potential human systemic exposure to PCP ingredients isincreasingly estimated on the basis of in vitro skin penetration data. However, new evidence suggests thatthe in vitro test may overestimate human systemic exposure to PCP ingredients due to the absence ofmetabolism in cadaver skin or misclassi ﬁcation of skin residues that, in vivo , remain in the stratum corneumor hair follicle openings, i.e. outside the living skin. Overall, today's safety assessment of PCP and theiringredients is not only based on science, but also on their respective regulatory status as well as other issues,such as the ethics of animal testing. Nevertheless, the record shows that today's PCP are safe and offer
multiple bene ﬁts to quality of life and health of the consumer. In the interest of all stakeholders, consumers,
multiple bene ﬁts to quality of life and health of the consumer. In the interest of all stakeholders, consumers,regulatory bodies and producers, there is an urgent need for an international harmonization on the statusand safety requirements of these products and their ingredients.© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259Abbreviations: APAP, acetaminophen / paracetamol; 2-AF, 2-amino ﬂuoren; CCC, Consumer Commitment Code (US); CIR, US Cosmetic Ingredient Review; DA, 2,4-diaminoanisole; GM, genetically modi ﬁed; IARC, WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer; JECFA, Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives; NTP, US NationalToxicology Program; PAP, para-aminophenol; PCP, personal care products (cosmetics); PCPC, Personal Care Products Council; PPD, para-phenylened iamine; PTD, toluenediamine;
SCCP, EU Scienti ﬁc Committee of Consumer Products; SCCS, EU Scienti ﬁc Committee of Consumer Safety (2009); VCRP, Voluntary Cosmetic Reporting program (US).⁎Corresponding author. L'OREAL R&D, Global Safety Evaluation, 25-29 quai Aulagnier, 92600 Asnières, France. Fax: +33 1 47 56 44 92.E-mail address: gnohynec@rd.loreal.com (G.J. Nohynek).0041-008X/$ –see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.taap.2009.12.001Contents lists available at ScienceDirectToxicology and Applied Pharmacologyjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ytaap
ContentsIntroduction ................................................................ 2 4 0Cosmetic safety regulations ......................................................... 2 4 1European union ............................................................. 2 4 1United States .............................................................. 2 4 1Japan and East Asia ........................................................... 2 4 2Hair dyes ................................................................. 2 4 2Hair dyes —chemistry .......................................................... 2 4 2Safety of hair dyes ........................................................... 2 4 3Contact allergy ........................................................... 2 4 3Genetic toxicity of hair dyes ..................................................... 2 4 4Carcinogenicity of hair dyes ..................................................... 2 4 6
Reproductive toxicity of hair dyes .................................................. 2 4 8UVﬁlters ................................................................. 2 4 9Human exposure and regulatory status of ultraviolet ﬁlters ........................................ 2 4 9Safety evaluation of ultraviolet ﬁlters —general .............................................. 2 4 9Safety assessment of ultraviolet ﬁlters .................................................. 2 4 9Safety of ultraviolet ﬁlters in children .................................................. 2 5 0Biologically active ingredients ........................................................ 2 5 0Special safety aspects ............................................................ 2 5 1Risk of nanotechnology in sunscreens and cosmetics ........................................... 2 5 1Safety evaluation of plant ingredients .................................................. 2 5 2
The comparative approach ...................................................... 2 5 2Chemical grouping .......................................................... 2 5 3Use of the threshold of toxicological concern in the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients ........................ 2 5 3Discussion/conclusion ........................................................... 2 5 4References ................................................................. 2 5 6IntroductionMillions of consumers use cosmetic/personal care products(PCP) and their ingredients on a daily basis. Although humanexternal contact with a substance rarely results in its penetrationthrough the skin and signi ﬁcant systemic exposure, PCP producelocal (skin, eye) exposure and are used in the oral cavity, on theface, lips, eyes and mucosa. Therefore, human systemic exposure totheir ingredients can rarely be completely excluded. In addition,natural and synthetic substances may produce local effects in
human skin, such as irritation, sensitization or photoreactions. Giventhe signi ﬁcant and relatively uncontrolled human exposure to PCP,these products must be thoroughly evaluated for their safety priorto their marketing.Although cosmetics prior to the 1960s had a good safety record,there are examples when this was not the case. For example, from theclassical times through the middle ages up to the early 20th century,make-up dyes contained highly toxic heavy metals, such as lead,mercury and cadmium oxides. In the 1930s, thallium-containingdepilatory products caused cases of severe and occasionally lethalintoxications ( Malkey and Oehme, 1993 ). During 1958/1959 haloge-nated salicylanilide-containing cosmetics produced an epidemic ofphoto-allergic reactions in the UK and elsewhere ( Horio, 1976 ), and,in the 1950/60s, zirconium-containing deodorants resulted in anoutbreak of long-lasting allergic in ﬂammatory skin reactions in
consumers in Europe and the US ( Shelley and Hurley, 1958; Kleinhansand Knoth, 1976 ).
outbreak of long-lasting allergic in ﬂammatory skin reactions inconsumers in Europe and the US ( Shelley and Hurley, 1958; Kleinhansand Knoth, 1976 ).During the past decades the safety of PCP and their ingredients hasattracted increasing attention; thus their toxicological safety evalu-ation is a relatively young discipline, which evolved in the second halfof the 20th century. Up to the 1960s it was generally believed that PCPwill always remain on the surface of the human body. Therefore, localeffects were the primary safety concern. The ﬁrst standardized in vivotests for skin and eye irritation were developed in the 1940s by Draize(1944 ). Additional tools for the safety evaluation of PCP, such as invivo sensitization-, phototoxicity-, photosensitization- animal andclinical safety tests, were developed in the 1960s and 1970s. Duringthe past decades it was recognized that some topically appliedsubstances may penetrate into or through human skin and produce
human systemic exposure; this prompted the development of tests onthe percutaneous penetration potential of PCP ingredients as well asinvestigation of their potential systemic toxicity ( Corbett et al., 1999 ).Finally, during recent years, new alternative test methods weredeveloped and are increasingly being applied to the safety assessmentof PCP and their ingredients; these methods may replace animal testswithin the forthcoming years assuming their proper development,validation, and scienti ﬁc understanding.In the EU, US and elsewhere, the safety evaluation of PCP and theiringredients has to take into account their particular legal position:according to current regulations, they have to be safe underconditions of normal use. Although PCP provide bene ﬁts to thequality of life of the consumer —soap, shower gels, toothpaste arebeneﬁcial in terms of hygiene and dental care, deodorants preventbody odor, sunscreens protect human skin against adverse effects of
UV light —these bene ﬁts are dif ﬁcult to quantify and often overlooked.Without attribution of measurable bene ﬁts, a risk/bene ﬁt evaluationmay conclude that PCP should be free of risk . Moreover, humancontact with all substances, natural as well as synthetic, just like allhuman activities, will always involve some degree of risk. Thisdilemma poses a major dif ﬁculty of today's safety assessment: thesafety of PCP is frequently based on a hypothetical zero-risk situationthat does not exist in a real world. This peculiar, albeit unrealistic,aspect poses a major challenge for the risk assessment of PCP and theiringredients.Finally, from a global perspective, even the legal de ﬁnition ofcosmetic /PCPis unclear. In the EU, sunscreens are cosmetics, but inthe US, they are OTC drugs; hair dyes are cosmetics in the EU, butquasi-drugs in Japan, and their safety would be subjected to drugregulations necessitating drug-like safety dossiers. Given the com-
plex world of cosmetic products and their safety regulations as wellas the limited scope of this review, we will discuss cosmetics/personal care products that are representative and, at the same time,pose complex safety issues, such as hair dyes, ultraviolet ﬁlters andactive cosmetic substances. In addition, we attempt to discuss currenttopics concerning the safety of cosmetic ingredients, such as thesafety of hair dyes, the use of nanotechnology in cosmetic and sun240 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
care products, approaches to evaluate the safety of natural ingre-dients and the application of the threshold of toxicological concern(TTC) to the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients. Finally, theterm personal care products (PCP) or similar terms are increasinglyused in the US and some EU countries for this class of products,whereas EU regulations classify them as cosmetics. Therefore, in thefollowing paper, both terms are used for the same class of consumerproducts.Cosmetic safety regulationsEuropean unionEuropean regulations of the safety of PCP/cosmetics wereintroduced in 1976 by the EU Cosmetic Directive which has beenperiodically updated ( EU, 2007 ). According to the EU de ﬁnition,cosmetics are any substance or preparation intended to be placed incontact with various external parts of the human body (epidermis,hair system, nails, lips, and external genitals) and with the teeth ormucous membranes of the oral cavity with a view exclusively or
mainly to cleaning them, perfuming them, changing their appearanceand/or for protecting them or keeping them in a good condition .I nthe EU, cosmetic products do not require a pre-marketingclearance; the safety of cosmetics and their ingredients is theresponsibility of the manufacturer. However, certain ingredients,such as UV ﬁlters (Annex VII of the Directive), preservatives(Annex VI), colorants (Annex IV) and, most recently, hair dyesrequire approval of their safety prior to marketing. Similarly,banned ingredients are listed in Annex II of the Directive, whereassubstances are concentration-limited and are listed in the Annex IIIof the Directive. In the EU, the approval process includessubmission of a safety dossier to the EU Scienti ﬁc Committee ofConsumer Products/Safety (SCCP, former SCC, SCCNFP and recentlyre-named SCCS) that issues Opinions on the safety of theingredient; however, the decision whether an ingredient is safe
and/or may be included in the respective Annex is taken by aworking group involving the member states of the EU.Safety requirements for cosmetic ingredients are listed in the“Notes of Guidance for the Testing of Cosmetic Ingredients and theirSafety Evaluation ”(SCCP, 2006 ). General safety requirement for aregulated cosmetic ingredient, e.g. hair dyes or UV ﬁlters include thefollowing:•Use and physical/chemical data•Acute toxicity•Dermal absorption/penetration•Dermal irritation•Mucous membrane irritation•Skin sensitization•Sub-chronic toxicity•Genetic toxicity•Phototoxicity and photogenotoxicity•Human dataWhen considerable oral intake is expected, or when dermalpenetration data suggest a signi ﬁcant systemic absorption, takinginto account the toxicological pro ﬁle of the substance and itschemical structure, the following information may be necessary:•Toxicokinetics•Teratogenicity, reproductive toxicity, carcinogenicity and addi-tional genotoxicity
tional genotoxicityIn the EU, manufacturers or importers of PCP are required togenerate safety dossier on each cosmetic product, including compo-sition, speci ﬁcations and a product safety assessment on the ﬁnalproduct as well as its ingredients; the safety assessment has to beperformed by a qualiﬁed expert. ( Pauwels and Rogiers, 2004; Pauwelset al., 2009 ). Key aspects of cosmetic safety evaluation in the EU andthe challenge of new restrictions of animal testing have recently beenreviewed ( Pauwels and Rogiers, 2010 ).United StatesThe U.S. Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 designated the U.S.Food and Drug Administration as the agency responsible for the safetyof PCP/cosmetics. The provisions of this act ensure the proper labelingand purity of cosmetics marketed in the United States. The U.S.deﬁnition of PCP/cosmetics is somewhat narrower than that in theEU, i.e. articles to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or otherwise applied to
the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting
EU, i.e. articles to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or otherwise applied tothe human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promotingattractiveness, or altering the appearance, and articles intended for use asa component of any such articles, except that such term shall not includesoap (US FDA, 2007 ).Certain products regarded in the EU as cosmetics have beenclassi ﬁed by the US FDA as Over –the-Counter (OTC) drugs,including sunscreen products, anticavity toothpastes, antiperspir-ants, antidandruff preparations, skin protectants and hair restorers(Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 2004 ). OTC drugs areregulated under a Monograph system for each claimed indication.The active ingredients in the respective monographs are evaluatedby the agency for safety and ef ﬁcacy. Those deemed to be safe andeffective can be used in products within speci ﬁed concentrationranges. Sunscreens and antiperspirants require additional clinical
testing to demonstrate ef ﬁcacy. Cosmetic colorants, but not hairdyes, are also regulated under US law and require FDA approval,including certiﬁed colors and permitted colors .H a i rd y e sa r eexempted under the regulations provided that certain warningsand pre-use testing conditions (testing for sensitization) areincluded in the product labeling. The safety of all other cosmetic/PCP and their ingredients is the responsibility of the manufacturer.If a cosmetic has not been evaluated for safety by the manufacturerit must bear a warning label indicating that the safety has not beensubstantiated. How a product must be substantiated is notprescribed by the agency.The FDA operates a Voluntary Cosmetic Reporting Program (VCRP)which allows industry to ﬁle the formulas of their products.Information on cosmetic formulations in the VCRP is availablethrough Freedom of Information (FOI) requests to the agency.The FDA also collects consumer complaint data from the
public and from physicians. This information can be relayed tothe manufacturer and/or can be used to initiate investigations.In 1976, the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance Association (CTFA,now the Personal Care Products Council or PCPC) established theCosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) which provides a mechanism forvoluntary self regulation of the industry. The CIR provides anindependent Expert Panel to review relevant data on cosmeticingredients and to decide whether they are safe under their currentconditions of use ( CIR, 2007 ). The Panel consists of Toxicologists,Dermatologists, and Chemists from academic institutions that serve asvoting members. Non-voting members of the panel include repre-sentatives from FDA, Consumer Groups, and Industry (PCPC)representatives.Current minimal data requirements of the CIR for a cosmeticingredient are the following ( Corbett et al., 1999 ):•Concentration of use•Chemistry data , including manufacture and impurities
•Skin irritation and –sensitization•Dermal absorption data; if signi ﬁcant dermal absorption occurs,repeated-dose dermal toxicity and developmental toxicity•Genetic toxicity, if positive a 2-year dermal carcinogenicity assay isrequired241 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
Additional data may be requested based on the nature and use ofthe ingredients.Safety evaluations on each ingredient reviewed by the ExpertPanel conclude that the material is either:•Safe Under the Current Conditions of Use (based on the FDA VCRPand industry survey)•Safe with Quali ﬁcation (of concentration, application site, etc.)•Insufﬁcient Data —missing data was requested but not supplied•UnsafeFinal safety evaluations of cosmetic ingredients by the CIR areperiodically published in the International Journal of Toxicology . In 2008,the PCPC initiated a program called the Consumer Commitment Code(CCC) on a voluntary basis for all companies in the industry. Under thiscode signees agree to follow the recommendations of the CIR, participatein the FDA VCRP, produce their products in a manner consistent with goodmanufacturing procedures, and substantiate the safety of their rawmaterials and ﬁnished goods. To further strengthen industry safeguards
for consumers, in 2008 the PCPC initia ted a program called the ConsumerCommitment Code (CCC) on a voluntary basis for all companies in theindustry ( CCC, Consumer Commitment Code, 2008 ). Under this codesignees agree to follow the recommendations of the CIR, participate in theFDA VCRP, produce their products in a manner consistent with goodmanufacturing procedures, and substantiate the safety of their rawmaterials and ﬁnished goods. There are six principles to the CCC as follows:(1) A company should market cosmetic products only afterensuring that every ingredient and ﬁnished product has beensubstantiated for safety. The decision that an ingredient hasbeen substantiated for safety may be based on a ﬁnding by theCosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel that such ingredientis safe for the use intended by the company or on otherappropriate data and information.(2) When marketing a cosmetic product containing an ingredient
that exceeds limits on concentration or product type estab-lished by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, acompany should possess information suf ﬁcient to substantiatethe safety of the ingredient for its intended use in such aproduct and be willing to make that information available forinspection by the Food and Drug Administration.(3) When marketing a cosmetic product containing an ingredientfor which the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel hasfound insuf ﬁcient data to determine safety, a company shouldpossess information suf ﬁcient to substantiate the safety of theingredient for its intended use in such product and be willing tomake that information available for inspection by the Food andDrug Administration.(4) A company should participate in the applicable parts of the FDAVoluntary Cosmetic Reporting Program set forth in 21 CFR Parts710 and 720 for products marketed in the United States, andﬁle timely reports regarding its manufacturing establishments
and ingredient usage.(5) Although adverse events that are both serious and unexpectedare extremely rare for cosmetic products, a company shouldnotify the Food and Drug Administration of any known seriousand unexpected adverse event as a result of the use of any of itscosmetic products marketed and used in the United States.“Serious ”and “Unexpected ”are de ﬁned in accordance withFDA's de ﬁnition for such experiences related to drugs in 21 CFR314.80(a). Information related to other product experiences asdescribed in the Council's Safety Information SummaryProgram should be maintained in the safety informationsummary described in Paragraph 6 below. Such informationshould be made available for inspection by FDA under theconditions speci ﬁed in that program.Japan and East AsiaJapanese regulations of the safety of cosmetics and cosmeticingredients are amongst the most stringent of all industrializednations. Whereas the de ﬁnition of cosmetics categories resembles
that of the U.S., Japanese regulations specify additional product
ingredients are amongst the most stringent of all industrializednations. Whereas the de ﬁnition of cosmetics categories resemblesthat of the U.S., Japanese regulations specify additional productcategories, so-called quasi-drugs. This product class, which includeshair dyes, skin bleaching agents, hair growing and anti-hair lossagents is subject to a registration process, including evidence forefﬁcacy and safety. Details of registration requirements, whichresemble those required for drugs may be found at the web site ofthe Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare ( MHLW, 2007 ). In addition,only approved cosmetic ingredients, i.e. those included in an of ﬁcialpositive list (CLS=comprehensive licensing standards of cosmeticsby category) and corresponding to of ﬁcial speci ﬁcations, may be usedin cosmetic articles. During recent years, other Asian countries, suchas China, South-Korea, Taiwan and others, have introduced cosmeticregulations similar to the Japanese model.
regulations similar to the Japanese model.Although international regulatory schemes on PCP/cosmeticsshare the same objective, i.e. consumer safety, there are majordifferences in their approach, in particular the classi ﬁcation of certainproducts as quasi-drugs in Japan or OTC drugs in the US, whereas mostof these products are classi ﬁed as cosmetics in the EU. In addition, therecommended hazard assessment (oral or dermal toxicity studies, useof alternative or in vitro tests) is not always consistent. Some of themajor differences between international regulatory schemes arediscussed in the Discussion section of this article.Hair dyesHair dye ingredients are the most reactive chemicals used in thecosmetic industry. As such, they are the most studied materials andproducts in the industry. An in-depth review of the work that hasbeen done on hair dyes is demonstrative of the type of studies thatmay be performed on cosmetic ingredients and products.Hair dyes —chemistry
Hair dyes —chemistryThe chemistry and categories of hair dyes have been reviewed byZviak and Millequant (2005) . Hair dyes are classi ﬁed into thefollowing categories:•Oxidative (permanent) dyes•Direct (temporary or semi-permanent) dyes•Metal salts•Natural dyesOxidative hair dyes are the most important group and have amarket share in the EU or the US of approximately 80% ( Corbett et al.,1999 ). They differ from other dye categories since they consist of twocomponents that are mixed before use and generate the dye on/in thehair by chemical reactions. Modern oxidative dyes contain severalingredients (primary intermediates, couplers, oxidants) with differentfunctions (examples in Fig. 1 ):•Primary intermediates : arylamines, such as para-phenylenedia-mine (PPD), para-toluenediamine (PTD) and other substitutedpara-diamines, ortho- or para-aminophenols. Oxidation of thesesubstances and subsequent reaction with couplers produces
colored reaction products. Content of primary intermediates inon-head hair dye formulations range from 0.05% (light shades) to2.0% (dark shade dyes)•Couplers : these include meta-substituted arylamines or theirderivatives such as m-phenylene-diamines, m-aminophenols,resorcinol or others. Couplers determine the ﬁnal shade byreaction with the oxidized form of primary intermediates,followed by further oxidative coupling reactions ( Fig. 2 ). In242 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
modern hair dyes, couplers and primary intermediates arecontained at an approximate molar ratio of 1: 1.•Oxidants : hydrogen peroxide, urea peroxide, sodium percarbonateor perborate.•Alkalinizing agents : ammonia, monoethanolamine oraminomethylpropanol.Direct dyes represent the second category of economicallyimportant hair colorants, and include semi-permanent and temporarydyes. Temporary coloring agents include azo-, triphenylmethane-,anthraquinone- or indamine dyes, whereas semi-permanent coloringagents contain nitro-phenylenediamines, nitro-aminophenols andsome azo dyes.Metal salts are mainly used for coverage of graying hair and aregenerally based on lead acetate. Products are restricted in the EU to amaximum of 0.6% content of lead.Natural dyes extracted from plants are of relatively small, butgrowing, economic importance. The majority of natural dyes use
henna (produced by extraction of the leaves of a North African shrub(Lawsonia inermis ) or its pure dye ingredient (Lawsone; 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone).Safety of hair dyesThe safety and toxicology of hair dyes has been the subject ofrecent reviews ( Corbett et al., 1999; Nohynek et al., 2004a; Bolt andGolka, 2007 ) and for more detailed information the reader is referredto these articles.Contact allergyThe epidemiology of contact sensitization to hair dyes and,especially, to p-phenylenediamine (PPD), has recently been reviewed(Uter et al., 2007; Krasteva et al., 2009 ). Therefore, the followingsection will be restricted to the principal aspects of contactsensitization. PPD, one of the most common primary intermediatesof oxidative hair dyes as well as related hair dye components, such asp-toluenediamine (PTD), have a potential to induce and elicit contactallergy. This has been con ﬁrmed by numerous animal and human
studies ( SCCNFP, 2002 ). The allergic potential of PPD and relatedcompounds is most likely due to the generation of oxidized productssubsequent to oxidation by air exposure ( Aeby et al., 2009 ).Consequently, labels of commercial oxidative hair dyes in the EUbear warning phrases such as “Can cause allergic reactions. Containsphenylenediamines. Do not use to dye eyelashes or eye brows. ”Consumers are advised to perform an allergy test prior to the use ofthe product ( Krasteva et al., 2005 ) and hairdressers are cautioned toprevent skin exposure by wearing gloves during the hair dyeing process.In the US, oxidative hair dye labels bear similar warning phrases.The allergenic potential of PPD and related aromatic aminesremains a signi ﬁcant cause of occupational allergy, particularly incosmeticians and hairdressers. Standard patch tests in Germanyreported a prevalence of contact allergy to PPD in 4.8% of 36000unselected eczema patients; PPD was the 5th most frequent contact
Fig. 2. Theoretical chemical pathways of oxidative dye formation of PPD. Reaction pathway (A) in the presence of a coupler (resorcinol) results in the desire d dye. The hypotheticalreaction pathway (B) may occur in the absence of couplers, resulting in autooxidation and subsequent formation of Bandrowski's base (adapted from Spengler and Bracher, 1990 ).Fig. 1. Structures of primary oxidative hair dye intermediates para-phenylenediamine(PPD), para-toluenediamine (PTD) and resorcinol (coupler).243 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
allergen after nickel, fragrance mix, balsam of Peru and thimerosal(Schnuch et al., 1997; Uter et al., 2007 ). A recent study estimated, onthe basis of patch tests of more than 83000 patients, that 0.2% of thegeneral population may have hair dye-related contact allergy againstPPD ( Schnuch et al., 2008 ).The prevalence of contact allergy to PPD appears to have decreasedin recent years despite the increasing use of hair dyes in theindustrialized world: in 1969, about 40% of women reported to usehair dyes in 1969, whereas, in 1996, some 60% dyed their hair(industry data). For example, the North American Contact DermatitisGroup reported a decreasing “Signiﬁcance Prevalence Index Number ”(the relative clinical importance of contact allergens in the popula-tion) for allergenic reactions to PPD, i.e. from rank 3 in 1984 to rank 10in 1996 ( Maouad et al., 1999 ). This observation is consistent withEuropean ﬁgures, which described PPD as the 5th most frequent
allergen during the 1985 –1990, and as the 15th most frequentallergen during 1991 –1996; in the same study, PTD was described tobe the 16th most frequent allergen during the period of 1991 –1996(Gossens and Merckx, 1997 ).A recent overview of clinical epidemiology of contact allergy toPPD (positive patch test reactions) in Europe, North America andSingapore, during the period of 1969 to 2001 (more than 200000unselected eczema patients) showed, with a few exceptions, a steadyor diminishing rate of positive reactions against a background ofincreased exposure to hair dyes with an estimated prevalence ofconﬁrmed hair dye dermatitis amongst unselected eczema patientsremaining stable at 0.1 to 0.6% since 1969 ( Wilkinson and Shaw, 2005;Krasteva et al., 2009 ). The low and stable rate of allergy was con ﬁrmedby a recent analysis of cosmetovigilance reports recorded by fourmajor hair dye producers on undesirable events attributed to hair
dyes ( Krasteva et al., 2010 ). However, it is increasingly recognizedthat today's wide spread body art fashion of “temporary tattooing ”with PPD-containing dyes ( “Black Henna ”), particularly among theyouth of Europe and the US, may play an important role in theinitiation of hair dye contact allergy ( DeLeo, 2006; Redlick andDeKoven, 2007 ) as well as other sources, such as occupationalexposure, textiles and patch testing by dermatologists ( Uter et al.,2007; Schnuch, 2009 ). Interestingly, a possible causal association ofhair dye allergy with a past history of black henna tattoos was alsoobserved by the analysis of cosmetovigilance reports recorded bymajor hair dye producers ( Krasteva et al., 2010 ).The general trend to a stable or decreasing prevalence of hair dyecontact allergy has been attributed to the successful introduction ofrisk management measures, i.e. precautionary labeling, improvedcompliance with occupational safety measures, such as wearing
protective gloves, minimizing the contact of the hair dye with thescalp during application and the increased risk awareness consumersand hairdressers ( DeGroot, 1998 ). For example, it has been recentlyshown that, under standard safety precautions, occupational skinexposure of hairdressers to hair dyes are unlikely to pose a risk of skinallergy ( Hueber-Becker et al., 2007 ). Although the majority of hair dyeallergy cases are related to oxidative hair dyes, some direct dyes(nitro- and anthraquinone class dyes) have also been shown topossess a sensitizing potential; however, the prevalence of humanallergy to direct dyes appears to be minimal.In summary, some ingredients of oxidative and direct hair dyespossess an allergenic potential. Taking into account their widespreaduse and the huge number of consumers exposed, they producerelatively few adverse reactions, which have been estimated to be inthe order of one per one million applications ( Corbett et al., 1999 )o rt o
be less than 0.5% of the general populations ( Schnuch, 2009 ). It has been
be less than 0.5% of the general populations ( Schnuch, 2009 ). It has beendemonstrated that occupational contact allergy can be successfullymanaged or limited by introduction of simple precautionary measures.Genetic toxicity of hair dyesGenetic toxicity tests were originally developed as short-termscreen studies for the prediction of the carcinogenic potential ofsubstances in rodents. Tiered test strategies to evaluate the genotoxichazard of a substance and its mechanism were proposed by severalauthors and organizations, and are based on a combination of in vitroand in vivo tests.In vitro studies. Theﬁrst genotoxicity test was the Ames test,which measures the incidence of reverse mutations in histidinesynthesis-de ﬁcient mutants of Salmonella typhimurium . In 1975, theresults of the Ames test triggered the debate about a genotoxic and/or carcinogenic potential of hair dyes, when Ames et al . (1975)suggested that nearly 90% of oxidative hair dye ingredients were
mutagenic in the Salmonella typhimurium test and may thereforepose a carcinogenic risk to consumers. Although a recent review ofthe Ames test suggested a correlation of 77% for a series of 368rodent carcinogens and non-carcinogens ( Zeiger, 1998 ), other datasuggested that only about 50% of rodent carcinogens are positive inthis test ( Ashby and Tennant, 1991 ). In the past 25 qqyears, numerouspositive results were reported in Ames tests or other in vitrogenotoxicity tests on hair dyes and their ingredients. This is notsurprising, since the experience of the past 30 years suggested thatpositive results in the Ames as well as other in vitro genotoxicity testhave a poor predictive value for the rodent carcinogenic potential ofarylamines, the chemical class of the primary intermediates ofoxidative hair dyes. Generally, arylamines tend to be indiscriminatelypositive in in vitro genotoxicity tests. For example, 33 aromatic
amines that were tested by the US National Toxicology Program inmice and rats and had invariably positive results in the Ames test,Table 1Predictive power of in vitro genotoxicity tests for rodent carcinogenicity of arylamine oxidative hair dye ingredients ( Burnett and Corbett, 1987 ).Chemical Carcinogenicity (NTP) Salmonella assay Mouse lymphoma assay Cell transformation testa2,4-diaminoanisole + + + +4-amino-2-nitrophenol + + + NT2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine − ++ +4-nitro-p-phenylenediamine − ++ +m-phenylenediamine − ++ +p-phenylenediamine − ++ +p-toluenediamine − +N TbNTHC Blue No. 1 + + NT NTHC Blue No. 2 − +N T N THC Red No. 3 − +N T N TDisperse Blue No. 1 + + NT NT2-amino-4-nitrophenol − +N T N T2-amino-5-nitrophenol − +N T N T(+)=presence, ( −)=absence of genotoxic/carcinogenic activity.a(Non-modi ﬁed) Syrian Hamster Embryo cell transformation test.
bNot tested (mouse lymphoma and cell transformation tests were discontinued by the NTP due to excessive levels of false positive results).244 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
although only 16 were found to be carcinogenic in rodents ( Ashbyand Tennant, 1991 ).Similarly, results of in vitro mutagenicity tests in mammalian cells,such as the thioguanine resistance (HPRT) test, the Mouse LymphomaTK +/−qqassay and traditional cell transformation assays wereshown to have little predictive power for rodent carcinogenicity ofaromatic amines ( Burnett and Corbett, 1987; Nohynek et al., 2004a ;Table 1 ).Moreover, it is unfeasible to perform in vitro genotoxicity testsunder conditions resembling the chemistry of oxidative hair coloring.For example, the standard protocol of the Ames test or other in vitroassays requires incubation of the test organism with the testsubstance for many hours, whereas the oxidative hair dye develop-ment on human hair is completed within approximately 30 min. Inaddition, most in vitro genotoxicity investigations on hair dyeseliminated hydrogen peroxide, a key ingredient of oxidative dyes,
since hydrogen peroxide is cytotoxic and genotoxic. Moreover, thehigh, non-physiological pH of oxidative hair dye solutions cannot beemployed under conditions of most in vitro genetic toxicity tests.Given that the current in vitro genotoxicity tests do not take intoaccount the actual use conditions of oxidative hair dyes, their resultsshould be interpreted with caution.Animal and human genetic toxicity studies. Results of in vivogenotoxicity tests are thought to be more relevant for the predictionof rodent carcinogenicity of arylamines than those of in vitro assays.The results of genetic toxicity studies in humans exposed to hair dyeswere recently reviewed ( Preston et al., 2009 ). When hair dyes weretested under conditions of use, the results of genotoxicity tests weregenerally negative. For example, a topical (twice weekly treatment for10 weeks) heritable transformation study in male rats on an oxidative,PPD-, resorcinol- and m-aminophenol-containing dye or a semi-
permanent dye containing various direct dye ingredients yielded noevidence that hair dyeing under exaggerated exposure conditionscause stable chromosome rearrangements, such as translocations thatwould result in reduced fertility of the offspring. The percutaneouspenetration rate in this study was estimated to be 1.6% to 2.0% of theapplied dose ( Burnett et al., 1981 ). A recently developed test, the invivoRodent Comet Assay is of particular interest. It was reported to bepositive in the respective target organs of mice for 20 aromatic aminesthat are carcinogenic in rodents, while 10 non-carcinogenic aromaticamines, including the oxidative hair dye ingredients PPD and PTD,were negative in the test ( Sasaki et al., 1999 ).A single study measured mutations in target organs of transgenicmice (Muta ™Mouse) after topical application of carcinogenic (2,4-diaminotouene, 2,4-DAT) and non-carcinogenic (2,6-diaminotoluene,
2,6-DAT) arylamines. Whereas 2,4-DAT produced a positive responsein the liver and a marginal response in the kidneys, 2,6-DAT wasnegative, suggesting that this test may distinguish carcinogenic fromnon-carcinogenic arylamine isomers ( Kirkland and Beevers, 2006 ).A number of genotoxicity studies in humans were published in theliterature. Studies in female volunteers exposed to up to 13cumulative hair dye applications found no increased incidence insister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) or chromosome breaks/aberra-tions in peripheral lymphocytes, con ﬁrming the results of an earlierstudy, which found no increased prevalence of chromosome breaks oraberrations in the lymphocytes of 60 professional hairdressers(Kirkland et al., 1981, 1978 ). Moreover, no evidence of an increasedprevalence of DNA strand breaks or SCEs in peripheral lymphocytes orSalmonella -positive mutagenic activity in the urine was found in apopulation of 15 heavily exposed hairdressers who had an extensive
history of work without protective measures ( Sardas et al., 1997). A
population of 15 heavily exposed hairdressers who had an extensivehistory of work without protective measures ( Sardas et al., 1997). Asingle study reported an increased incidence of Salmonella -positiveactivity in the urine of cosmetologists, when compared with that of acontrol population of dental personnel ( Babish et al., 1991 ). Giventhat the study population contained a higher percentage of smokersand a higher daily cigarette consumption when compared with that ofthe control population, the results of this study cannot be conclusivelyinterpreted. Overall, the weight of evidence of available humanstudies support the absence of a genotoxic risk in consumers orpopulations occupationally exposed to hair dyes.It is important to note that even a positive in vivo genotoxicactivity of hair dye ingredient does not necessarily indicate a humanhealth risk. For example para-aminophenol (PAP), an oxidative hairdye ingredient, was reported to be positive in vivo producing an
increased incidence of micronuclei in the bone marrow andsplenocytes of mice ( Benning et al., 1994 ). In addition, PAP waspositive in several in vitro assays, such as chromosome aberration,mouse lymphoma and sister chromatid exchange tests, whereas Amestests, bone marrow chromosome aberration and dominant lethal testsin rats, SCEs in peripheral lymphocytes of human volunteers or theSex-Linked Recessive Assay in Drosophila had negative results. Theabsence of a carcinogenic potential of PAP was con ﬁrmed by negativeresults of an oral carcinogenicity study in rats ( PAP, 2005 ). Overall,these data suggest that, although PAP is non-carcinogenic in rodents,it may pose a potential in vivo genotoxic hazard —provided that theapplication of PAP in hair dyes results in actual human systemicexposure.However, there is evidence that humans are unlikely to besystemically exposed to PAP after contact with PAP-containing
oxidative hair dyes. Results of in vitro metabolism studies suggestedthat human epidermis quantitatively transforms PAP into anacetylated metabolite, N-acetyl-p-aminophenol, i.e. paracetamol(APAP, acetaminophen), a common analgesic and antipyretic drug.In the same study, PPD was transformed by human skin and humanhepatocytes into N-mono and N,N ′-diacetylated metabolites, whichare detoxi ﬁed, i.e. non-genotoxic ( Nohynek et al., 2005 ;Fig. 3 ;Garrigue et al., 2006 ). In the meantime, skin metabolism resulting indetoxi ﬁed N-acetylated metabolites has been shown for all aryla-mine-type oxidative hair dye ingredients ( Skare et al., 2007 ).In vivometabolism/toxicokinetic studies in two different animal modelsconﬁrmed that topical application of [14C]-PAP and [14C]-PPD resultedin minimal blood concentrations of [14C]-equivalents ( Fig. 3 ), whichwere identi ﬁed as [14C]-APAP (N-acetyl-p-aminophenol=acetami-nophen), its conjugates or N,N'-diacetylated PPD, respectively
(Dressler and Appelqvist, 2006 ). No parent compounds were detectedin the blood, although the studies were performed under maximizedexposure conditions. Compariso n of the quantitative systemicexposure dose to APAP in animal models after dermal administrationof [14C]-PAP (AUC 0–12 h values) with human data after intake of asingle, oral standard therapeutic dose of 500 mg acetaminophen(APAP) yielded toxicokinetic safety margins of 22- to N700-fold.Taking into account that acetaminophen is (a) a drug that is widelyused in infants, children and adults, (b) does not pose a genotoxic riskFig. 3. Transformation in re-constructed human epidermis of para-aminophenol (PAP)by N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) to its N-acetylated metabolite (acetaminophen,paracetamol).245 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
at standard therapeutic doses ( Kirkland et al., 1992 ), and (c)recommended for daily use at a total oral dose of up to 4 g in adults(4×1000 mg per 24 h), the intermittent (oxidative hair dyes are usedatN4-week intervals) and minimal human systemic exposure totraces of APAP following a hair coloring process with PAP isreasonably expected to pose no or a negligible human health risk.This example underlines the key role of metabolism and toxicokineticdata for the safety evaluation of hair dyes and illustrates that oraltoxicity data resulting in a high systemic exposure to the parentcompound may be irrelevant for the risk assessment of topicallyapplied substances that undergo ﬁrst-pass metabolism in the skin,such as PAP, PPD and others.In summary, the complexity of the genotoxicity of PAP and PPDunderlines the uncertain relevance of in vitro genotoxicity tests for theassessment of a human health risk of hair dyes, keeping in mind that
genotoxicity data on their own represent only a surrogate endpointforrodent carcinogenicity, which in turn, is another, albeit uncertain,surrogate endpoint for a carcinogenic risk in humans ( Gold et al.,1992; Neal and Doull, 1995 ). This uncertainty particularly applieswhen carcinogenicity studies in rodents are performed with high oraldoses, whereas human exposure is via the topical route.Without consideration of the chemical reactions of oxidative hairdyes, class effects (Ames test results on arylamines), the nature ofhuman systemic exposure (skin metabolism) and its magnitude(toxicokinetics), an uncritical application of genotoxicity data forhuman risk assessment of hair dye use appears unlikely to yieldmeaningful results. Most importantly, one should take into consider-ation the weight of evidence: in vivo animal as well as human studiesfailed to detect evidence for a possible human genotoxic risk of hairdyes.Carcinogenicity of hair dyes
dyes.Carcinogenicity of hair dyesThe potential carcinogenicity of hair dye ingredients has attractedthe attention of toxicologists and epidemiologists for many decades,given that oxidative hair dye ingredients belong to the large chemicalfamily of arylamines, which includes known human carcinogens, suchas benzidine, 4-aminobiphenyl and 2-naphthylamine. The carcino-genic activity of some arylamines was recognized as early as in thelate 19th century producing an increased incidence of bladder cancerin occupationally exposed workers of the dye industry ( Rhen, 1895 ).Although some arylamines are known to be carcinogenic in humansand other mammals, many substances of this large chemical class aredevoid of carcinogenic activity. However, given the potential classhazard of arylamines, the carcinogenic potential of hair dyeingredients has been of major concern and has been investigated bythe dye and hair dye industries, the U.S. National Toxicology Program,
independent investigators and the International Agency for theResearch on Cancer (IARC) of the World Health Organization ( IARC,1993; Baan et al., 2008 ).Epidemiology. Numerous epidemiological studies have beenpublished on the cancer incidence in hair dye users and professionallyexposed populations. The epidemiological evidence of the cancer riskof occupational or consumer exposure to hair dyes has been reviewedbyCordle and Thompson (1981), Colditz (1994), LaVecchia and Airodi(1999), LaVecchia and Tavani (1995 and 2001 ),Rollison et al. (2005),Bolt and Golka (2007) and the International Agency on the Researchon Cancer ( IARC, 1993; Baan et al., 2008 ).Concerning occupational exposure, a recent study on the occupa-tional exposure of hairdressers to a [14C]-PPD-labeled hair dyeconcluded that the daily systemic exposure of hairdressers ( b0.36μgPPD eq/kg/working day) is very low suggesting that a systemic health
or carcinogenic risk is de minimis (Hueber-Becker et al., 2007 ). Theabsence of a cancer risk from occupational exposure to hair dyes
or carcinogenic risk is de minimis (Hueber-Becker et al., 2007 ). Theabsence of a cancer risk from occupational exposure to hair dyeswas supported by a recent investigation on the cancer incidence ina population of 38866 Swedish female and 6824 male hairdressersover a period of 39 years. Although the study found some smallincreases in the incidence of some cancers (lung, pancreas, cervix,colorectal, skin), the incidence of other cancers (urinary bladder,Hodgkin's disease, upper digestive tract, thyroid) was lower thanthat in the general population. It is noteworthy that the standardincidence ratio (SIR) for bladder cancer (SIR=0.95) in femalehairdressers was lower than that of the general population ( Czeneet al., 2003 ).A recent case-control study reported an increased incidence ofurinary bladder cancer in female hair dye users ( Gago-Dominguez etal., 2001 ). A second publication by the same authors on the same
study subjects suggested that the increased risk of bladder cancer inhair dye users was principally con ﬁned to N-acetyltransferase 2(NAT2) slow acetylator genotypes ( Gago-Dominguez et al., 2003 ).NAT2 is considered to be a key enzyme responsible for detoxi ﬁcationof arylamines in the liver; therefore, Caucasians of the NAT2 slowacetylator phenotype occupationally exposed to carcinogenic aryla-mines may be at higher risk to develop bladder cancer ( Golka et al.,2002 ). However, given that hair coloring principally produces dermalcontact with hair dye ingredients and taking into account that hairdye ingredients such as para-phenylenediamine may be acetylated inthe skin by NAT1, and not by NAT2 ( Kawakubo et al., 2000; Nohyneket al. 2004b, 2005; Skare et al., 2007 ), it is likely that NAT2 plays aminor, if any, role in the detoxi ﬁcation and/or activation whenaromatic amines are in contact with the skin.Very recent and well-conducted epidemiology studies on the
association of hair dyes and bladder cancer in Europe ( Kogevinas etal., 2006 ) and the US ( Lin et al., 2006 ), as well as two meta-analysis ofall epidemiology data on personal use of hair dyes and cancer(Takkouche et al., 2005; Kelsh et al., 2008 ) con ﬁrmed that there is noevidence of a causal association between personal use of hair dyes andurinary bladder or other cancers. Finally, a recent and large cohortstudy in more than 70,000 women over 7 years detected no increasedincidence of any cancer in hair dye users ( Mendelson et al., 2009 ).Overall, incidence and death from bladder cancer in women duringthe period 1970 to 1990 have decreased or stabilized in the US,Germany, UK and Sweden ( LaVecchia and Airodi, 1999 ), although theuse of hair dyes has dramatically increased during the same period.Taking into account the weight of evidence of all published studies,
the conclusions of former as well as very recent reviews of theassociation of hair dyes and the risk of bladder cancer remainunchanged, i.e. “that the available evidence, despite some inconsis-tency, excludes any appreciable risk of bladder cancer from personaluse of hair dyes ”(LaVecchia and Tavani, 1995 )o r “today, there seemsto be no relevant bladder cancer risk from the use of oxidative hairdyes ”(Bolt and Golka, 2007 ). This view was con ﬁrmed by theconclusion of the 2008 IARC Working Group that there personal use ofhair colors is “not classiﬁable as to its carcinogenicity in humans ”(Baan et al., 2008 ).Animal carcinogenicity testing on hair dyes. A large number ofstudies on the carcinogenicity of hair dyes and their ingredientshave been reported in the literature; their results were reviewed ina recent textbook and review articles ( Corbett et al., 1999; Nohyneket al., 2004a; Bolt and Golka, 2007 ). Numerous oxidative hair dye
mixtures were tested in carcinogenicity studies under conditions ofhuman exposure, i.e. topical application of commercial formulationsthat included arylamines, couplers, alkalizing agents and hydrogen
human exposure, i.e. topical application of commercial formulationsthat included arylamines, couplers, alkalizing agents and hydrogenperoxide. Lifetime topical application in mice of 3 differentcommercial hair dye formulations containing 1,4-phenylenediamine,2,5-toluenediamine, resorcinol, 1,3-phenylenediamine, 2,4-diami-noanisole and 2,4-toluenediamine found no evidence of systemictoxicity or carcinogenicity ( Burnett et al., 1975 ). Similarly, 23-month once-weekly topical application of 12 different hair dyeformulations to mice produced no evidence of systemic toxicity orcarcinogenicity ( Burnett et al., 1980 ). Finally, an in-depth study246 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
investigated the reproductive toxicity and carcinogenicity of 6different hair dye formulations by twice weekly topical applicationin rats for 2 generations, followed by a complete 2-year topicalcarcinogenicity study; these commercial formulations thatcontained a total of 18 different hair dye ingredients, includingPPD, PTD, PAP, resorcinol and other common hair dye ingredients(Burnett and Goldenthal, 1988 ;Table 2 ). No evidence of systemictoxicity, adverse reproductive effects, or carcinogenicity was found.Interestingly, the study included hair dye formulations containing2,4-diaminoanisole (DA), which was later found to be carcinogenicin an oral NTP carcinogenicity study ( Table 3 ). A similar observationwas made in two carcinogenicity studies in mice topically treatedwith 2,4-toluenediamine (TDA) alone or hair dye formulations,which revealed no evidence of systemic toxicity or carcinogenicity(Burnett et al., 1975 ), although TDA was found to be carcinogenic in
later oral carcinogenicity tests performed by the US NationalToxicology Program ( NTP, 1978 ; see Table 3 ).Overall, with the exception of occasional local irritation, noevidence of adverse effects, systemic toxicity or carcinogenic activitywas observed when complete, commercial hair dye formulationswere tested in rodent via the topical route under exaggeratedconditions of human exposure, underlining the importance of theexposure route for the carcinogenic risk assessment of this class ofcompounds.A series of dye ingredients was tested for their carcinogenicpotential within the framework of the US National ToxicologyProgram (NTP). Given that NTP studies were designed to investigatethe potential hazard and not the health risk of substances, theprotocol of these studies maximized systemic exposure in mice andrats by daily oral administration (oral gavage or dietary exposure) upto the maximum tolerated dose (MTD). Although the majority of
tested hair dye ingredients were found to be non-carcinogenic, someingredients, such as DA, TDA and HC Blue 1 were deemed to becarcinogenic in rodents and classi ﬁed as showing clear evidence forcarcinogenicity (carcinogenic in both species, multiple organs and/orboth sexes). Other hair dyes were classi ﬁed as having some evidencefor carcinogenicity orequivocal evidence for carcinogenicity ,i . e .carcinogenic in one species and/or sex only (see Table 3 ). In responseto the NTP ﬁndings, a range of hair dye ingredients were banned in theEU and are no longer used, although it may be argued that someresults of certain NTP studies have only limited relevance for anassessment of the human health risk when mechanistic aspects and/or the route (dermal) of potential human exposure are taken intoaccount.Table 3
account.Table 3Assessment of the results of oral carcinogenicity studies on oxidative or direct hair dye ingredients performed by the U.S. National Toxicology Prog ram ( Selkirk and Soward, 1993 ).(M)=male; (F)=females. Rating: NE=no evidence; EE=equivocal evidence; SE=some evidence; CE=clear evidence.Dye ingredient Rat (Fischer 344) Mouse (B6C3F1) Carcinogenicity ratingHC Blue 2 NE NE NegativeHC Yellow 4 EE (M); NE (F) NE NegativeHC Red 3 NE EE (M); NE (F) NegativeAcid Orange3 NE (M); CE (F) NE PositiveDisperse Blue 1 CE (M); CE (F) EE (M); NE (F) PositiveHC Blue 1 EE (M); CE (F) EE (M); NE (F) Positive2,5-Diaminotoluene NE NE Negativep-Phenylenediamine (PPD) NE NE Negative4-Nitro-o-phenylenediamine NE NE NegativeN-Phenyl-p-Phenylenediamine NE NE Negative2-Chloro-p-phenylenediamine NE NE NegativeResorcinol NE NE Negative2,4-Diaminophenol NE NE Negative2-Amino-4-nitrophenol SE (M); NE (F) NE Negative
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol SE (M); NE (F) NE Negative2-Amino-5-nitrophenol SE (M) ; NE (F) NE NegativeHydroquinone SE (M) ; SE (F) NE (M); CE (F) Negative2-Nitro-p-phenylenediamine NE (M); CE (F) NE (M); CE (F) Positive4-Amino-2-nitrophenol CE NE Positive2,4-Diaminotoluene (PTD) CE NE (M); CE (W) Positive2,4-Diaminoanisole (DA) CE CE PositiveTable 2Topical combined multi-generation reproduction/carcinogenicity study in rats on 6 commercial oxidative hair dyes (No. 7401 through 7406) contain ing various ingredients. Noevidence of systemic toxicity, reproductive toxicity or carcinogenicity was observed ( Burnett and Goldenthal, 1988 ).No. 7401 No. 7402 No. 7403 No. 7404 No. 7405 No. 7406INGREDIENT (%)p-Phenylenediamine 2.0 1.0 ––– 4.0p-Toluenediamine – 3.0 6.0 –––2,4-Diaminoanisole 2.0 4.0 ––––2,5-Diaminoanisole –––– 6.0 –Resorcinol 1.7 1.7 – 1.0 2.0 –m-Aminophenol –– 0.7 –– 0.7p-Aminophenol –– 1.0 –––2-Nitro-p-phenylenediamine 1.1 –––––4-Nitro-o-phenylenediamine – 0.25 –––
4-Nitro-o-phenylenediamine – 0.25 –––1-Naphthol –– 0.50 –––N-Methyl-p-aminophenol ––– 1.0 ––p-Aminodiphenylamine ––– 2.0 ––m-Phenylenediamine ––– 1.5 ––o-Phenylenediamine ––– 1.0 ––o-Aminophenol –––– 0.3 –2-Amino-4-nitrophenol –––– 0.4 –2-Amino-5-nitrophenol ––––– 0.54-Chlororesorcinol ––––– 2.0247 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
Although more than 10 carcinogenicity studies on the major hairdye ingredient PPD were negative, a single study on PPD incombination with hydrogen peroxide using topical or subcutaneousadministration ( Rojanapo et al., 1986 ) claimed a positive carcinogeniceffect —although the combination of PPD and hydrogen peroxide aloneis not used in hair dyes. The authors reported an increased incidenceof mammary gland and uterine tumors in both topically andsubcutaneously-treated groups. Although the validity of the studyhad been previously rejected by the EU SCC due to insuf ﬁcient numberof animals and duration of treatment ( SCC, 1991 ), a recent re-evaluation considered the results to be possibly supportive of acarcinogenic potential of PPD+hydrogen peroxide ( SCCP, 2006a ).However, that study had severe weaknesses in that (a) theformulation was not representative for actual hair dyes due to theabsence of couplers, (b) although subcutaneous injection may result
in a higher systemic exposure dose than topical treatment, the tumorincidence in subcutaneously or topically treated groups was similar;thus there was no dose –response, (c) the study reported an absence ofmammary tumors in female control groups, although the spontaneousincidence of benign mammary tumors in untreated rats of this age andstrain is generally in the range of 12% to 45%, and the spontaneousincidence of mammary carcinoma normally ranges from 0 to 23%(Prentice, 2002 ). Thus the zero-incidence of mammary tumorsreported in female control groups of the study was highly implausible.Finally, the tumor nomenclature was unclear and included misclas-siﬁcation of non-neoplastic lesions. Overall, taking into accountcurrent criteria for a weight-of-evidence approach, the study shouldbe regarded as ﬂawed and unacceptable for an evaluation of thepotential carcinogenicity of PPD, particularly when taking into
account the results of more than ten well-conducted oral and topicalcarcinogenicity studies on PPD and PPD-containing hair dye formula-tions that were all negative ( Table 3 ).Overall, although US NTP studies suggested that some hair dyeingredients used prior to the 1980s possess a carcinogenic potential inrodents after lifetime exposure to high, daily oraldoses, there is noevidence that topical exposure of rodents to oxidative hair dyes(including dyes containing ingredients that were positive in oralcarcinogenicity studies), produced systemic toxicity and/or carcino-genic effects.Mechanistic studies on hair dye carcinogenicity. It is known that N-oxidation leading to the formation of an N-hydroxylamine is thecritical metabolic step in the conversion of carcinogenic arylamines tothe proximate carcinogenic metabolite that ultimately leads to thedevelopment of bladder cancer. Thus the formation of an N-hydroxylamine in human liver should be regarded as key evidence
concerning presence or absence of a human cancer risk from exposureto individual arylamines ( Kadlubar and Hammons, 1986; Freudenthalet al., 1999 ). In a key study, PPD, one of the most important arylaminesused in oxidative hair dyes, was incubated in parallel with the knownbladder carcinogen 2-amino ﬂuorene (2-AF) with human hepatocytesor human liver microsomes. Human hepatocytes converted PPD to itsN-mono- and N,N ′-diacetylated metabolites, and no evidence for N-hydroxylation was found, whereas 2-AF was converted to its N-hydroxylated metabolite. This study demonstrated that humanhepatocytes were unable to convert PPD into a proximate carcinogen(Stanley et al., 2005 ). Recently, absence of formation of N-hydroxyl-ated metabolites by human hepatocytes has been shown for all majorarylamines that are currently used in oxidative hair dyes ( Skare et al.,2009 ). Finally, there is increasing evidence that humans, after dermal
contact with arylamine-type hair dye ingredients, are not systemicallyexposed to the parent arylamines, but rather to their N-acetylated
contact with arylamine-type hair dye ingredients, are not systemicallyexposed to the parent arylamines, but rather to their N-acetylatedmetabolites. The N-acetylation of hair color arylamines takes place inhuman skin and is catalyzed by NAT1 ( Kawakubo et al., 2000;Nohynek et al., 2004b, 2005; Skare et al., 2007 ). N-acetylationrepresents a detoxifying reaction, which results in non-genotoxic,non-carcinogenic and non-sensitizing metabolites ( Garrigue et al.,2006; Skare et al., 2007; Aeby et al., 2009; Goebel et al., 2007 ). N-acetylation in the skin would also explain why those arylamines thatwere carcinogenic in rodents via the oral route were non-carcinogenicwhen administered dermally. A very recent study on human systemicexposure to a PPD-containing oxidative hair dyes demonstrated thathuman systemic exposure is limited to traces of N,N ′-diacetyl-PPD, anon-genotoxic metabolite of PPD ( Meuling and deBie, 2009 ).
Overall, the results of epidemiology, animal toxicity, humanexposure and mechanistic studies on occupational exposure as wellas personal use of hair dyes and animal carcinogenicity studies areconsistent; when taken together, they present a convincing weight ofevidence that hair dyes do not pose a carcinogenic risk. The absence ofa carcinogenic risk to consumers from the use of oxidative hair dyeswas con ﬁrmed by IARC and, recently, by a major EU regulatory agency(Baan et al., 2008; BfR, 2009 ). Most likely, humans using or havingoccupational contact with oxidative hair dyes are not exposed to theparent arylamines, but to traces of N-acetylated, i.e. detoxi ﬁedmetabolites that pose no systemic human health risk.Reproductive toxicity of hair dyesEpidemiology. During recent years, potential adverse reproductiveeffects of occupational exposures to hair dyes and other substancespresent in hairdressing salons were investigated in a number of
epidemiological studies. Most studies investigated reproductiveparameters such as the prevalence of low birth weight (LBW), smallfor gestational age (SGA) infants and preterm births.A few studies suggested a slightly higher prevalence of low birthweight ( b2500 g at delivery) in the offspring of hairdressers. Forexample, a Swedish study reported a slightly increased risk of LBW inhair dressers when compared with that in a control group, althoughmean birth weight in hairdresser as well as control populations werewell above the Swedish national prevalence ( Rylander et al., 2002 ).Other investigations that reported a slightly increased risk of LBW inhairdressers included a study from Finland or New York State ( Herdt-Losavio et al., 2009; Halliday-Bell et al., 2009 ). In contrast, a recent studyfound a lower prevalence of LBW in Swedish hairdressers whencompared with the offspring of their sibling controls ( Axmon and
Rylander, 2009 ), whereas most studies found the same prevalence ofLBW in hairdressers, cosmetologists and respective control populations(Gallicchio et al., 2009; Goulet and Thériault, 1991; Kersemaekers et al.,1995, 1997; McDonald et al., 1988 ). Overall, the weight of evidencesuggests that hairdressers or cosmetologists have the same prevalenceof LBW or other reproductive disorders when compared with that of therespective national mean values; there is no evidence that occupationalor consumer exposure to hair dyes or other substances present inhairdresser salons adversely affects human reproduction.Animal data. In response to regulatory safety requirements in theEU, the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare or the US CIR, hairdye ingredients have been investigated for their potential reproduc-tive toxicity, i.e. embryo-fetal toxicity and, if appropriate, male/female fertility or peri-/post-natal toxicity. Identi ﬁcation of a human
reproductive risk would preclude the use of an ingredient in hair dyes.Overall, reproductive effects of hair dye ingredients in non-clinical
reproductive risk would preclude the use of an ingredient in hair dyes.Overall, reproductive effects of hair dye ingredients in non-clinicalstudies are rare. A published study reported teratogenic effects of 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine and 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine aftersubcutaneous administration of high doses to mice, whereas 2,5-toluenediamine was found to be non-teratogenic ( Marks et al., 1981 ).Given that the effects occurred at extreme multiples of the expectedhuman exposure and via a different route of exposure, a relevance ofthese ﬁndings to a human health risk is unlikely, taking into accountthat the same ingredients yielded no evidence of reproductive effectsor systemic toxicity in a topical multi-generation reproduction studyon a large series of hair dye ingredients ( Burnett and Goldenthal,248 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
1988 ). Overall, a series of oral reproductive toxicology or embryo-fetaltoxicity studies on commercial hair dyes found no evidence forreproductive effects ( IARC, 1993 ).A risk assessment on a hypothetical human reproductive risk fromthe exposure to the hair dye ingredients para-aminophenol (PAP) andortho-aminophenol (OAP) concluded that the worst-case margins ofsafety for consumers or hairdressers were 102,000- or 4350-fold forPAP and 26,000- or 11,140-fold for OAP, respectively. These marginswere calculated on the basis of potential skin penetration data,frequency of application and respective NOAEL values in animalstudies ( Cantox, 1997 ). Margins of safety at this order of magnitudesuggest no or negligible risk. In addition, the results of in vivo studieson these ingredients clearly indicated that these compounds have nopotential to adversely affect reproduction ( Burnett and Goldenthal,1988; Rutkowski and Ferm, 1982 ).UVﬁlters
1988; Rutkowski and Ferm, 1982 ).UVﬁltersDuring the past decades, skin cancer has become the mostfrequent neoplastic disease of the Caucasian population of Europe,North America and Australia. Its incidence has reached epidemicalproportions: the risk to develop skin cancer is currently estimated tobe 10000 to 20000 cases per 1 million of the population and year,amounting to a total of N1 million new cases per year (EU, NorthAmerica, Australia). The reason of this epidemic is most likely to be aconsequence of changes in human behavior, i.e. in contrast to the past,the current perception of Western societies considers a tanned skin asfashionable and beautiful. In contrast, ultraviolet (UV) light has beenclassi ﬁed by the World Health organization as carcinogenic andproduces additional adverse effects, such as mutagenic effects,immune depression of the skin and the organism, accelerated skinageing and photo-dermatoses ( Nohynek and Schaefer, 2001 ). Sunsc-
reens contain organic and inorganic ﬁlters, which absorb, re ﬂect orscatter ultraviolet light. Taking into account that these substancesoffer an actual protection of the consumer against a health risk,including cancer, the safety of these cosmetic ingredients should beregarded taking into account a risk/bene ﬁt relationship.Human exposure and regulatory status of ultraviolet ﬁltersDuring their summer vacation, millions of consumers in the EU,US and elsewhere treat a large part of their body surface, includingtheir face and lips, with sunscreens. In addition, ultraviolet ﬁltersare also used in modern skin creams and make-up products. Giventheir potential to produce considerable human local and systemicexposure, ultraviolet ﬁlters have to be safe. In the EU, ultravioletﬁlters are considered to be cosmetic ingredients; their safety isevaluated by the EU SCCS. A positive list of approved ultravioletﬁlters is published in the Annex VII of the EU Cosmetic Directive. In
the US, Canada or Australia, ultraviolet ﬁlters are classi ﬁed as OTCdrugs. This means that evidence for their safety and ef ﬁcacy isrequired as well as approval by the respective medical agencies. InJapan, ultraviolet ﬁlters have to be approved by the responsiblehealth agency.Safety evaluation of ultraviolet ﬁlters—generalUltraviolet ﬁlters are subjected to a stringent safety assessment,including in vitro as well asin vivo investigation of their potential toproduce local toxicity, such as irritation, sensitization, photo-toxicityand -sensitization, photo-genotoxicity, photo-carcinogenicity, as wellas systemic toxicity, such as long-term toxicity, reproductive toxicity,carcinogenicity and photo-(co)-carcinogenicity. In addition, theirsafety and ef ﬁcacy is determined in clinical studies using humansubjects. Safety and ef ﬁcacy requirements for ultraviolet ﬁlters are
comparable with those of human dermatological drugs. Only thosesubstances that are safe and ef ﬁcient will obtain approval by thecompetent authorities. The key parameters in the safety assessment of
comparable with those of human dermatological drugs. Only thosesubstances that are safe and ef ﬁcient will obtain approval by thecompetent authorities. The key parameters in the safety assessment ofultraviolet ﬁlters are the following:•NOEL or NOAEL ( No-observable-adverse-effect-level ), an oral ordermal daily dose (mg/kg/day), which produces no measurableadverse effect in subchronic or chronic animal toxicity studies.•Systemic exposure dose (SED), the human systemic exposure doseafter topical application of an ultraviolet ﬁlter in a typical sunscreen,w h i c hm a yb ee s t i m a t e do nt h eb a s i so f in vitro and/or in vivopercutaneous penetration studies using appropriate models.•Local tolerance: absence of irritation, sensitization, photo-inducedtoxicity.Safety assessment of ultraviolet ﬁltersUltraviolet ﬁlters must be free of locally toxic as well as photo-toxic effects —otherwise they could not be placed on the market. In the
EU, the potential systemic health risk of ultraviolet ﬁlters is evaluatedas follows ( SCCP, 2006a ): the maximal amount of a sunscreen isestimated to be 1 mg/cm2of skin which is applied to a human bodysurface area of 18000 cm2, amounting to a total of 18 g of a sunscreen.Taking into account the concentration of the ultraviolet ﬁlter in thesunscreen product and its percutaneous absorption/penetration rate(μg/cm2of skin) a Systemic Exposure Dose (SED) is estimated andcompared with the NOAEL of the substance in subchronic or chronicoral toxicity studies. The relation of the NOAEL to the SED yields aMargin of Exposure (MoE) or Margin of Safety (MoS), which should beat least 100-fold. The factor of 100 is empirical and takes into accountdifferences between susceptibility of man and test species (inter-species differences) as well as differences between individuals (intra-species differences).The MoE of 100 fold is only applied to nonspeci ﬁc toxic effects; for
more severe toxic effects the MoE is increased in order to excludepossible health risks for the consumer. However, severe toxic effects,such as in vivo genotoxicity, carcinogenic or reproductive effects areinconsistent with the principle that cosmetic ingredients must notpose a health risk and would exclude use of the substance insunscreens.The safety evaluation of sunscreens in the EU represents ananalysis under worst-case condi tions, since the actual humanexposure to ultraviolet ﬁlters may be estimated to be far lower thanthe nominal and in-vitro-based SED, taking into account the followingaspects:•Generally, consumers apply sunscreens to less than 100% of theirbody surface area;•Sunscreens are lost from the skin by washing off, sweating, skindesquamation, loss through absorption to clothes;•Sunscreens are generally used seasonally;•Consumer studies showed that the actual use of sunscreens is inthe order of 0.5 mg sunscreen per cm2of skin or less ( Bach-
T1homsen and Wulf, 1993 );•The human exposure to UV ﬁlters is via the dermal, and not theoral route. Due to different kinetics, e.g. lower plasma Cmax levels,NOAELs of oral toxicity studies tend to be lower than those ofdermal toxicity studies, even with similar internal exposure ( Rosset al., 2000 ).Moreover, the EU system of safety assessment relies on a route-to-route extrapolation (relating human dermal exposure to animal oraltoxicity data), although it has been recognized that this approachyields highly unreliable results, which would be unacceptable fordermatological drugs, both in the EU and the US ( Pepelko and Withey,1985; Wilkes et al., 1993 ). The overestimation of human systemicexposure on the basis of in vitro skin penetration data was con ﬁrmedin a recent study, which measured human systemic exposure in vivo249 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
after topical application of a [14C]-labeled ultraviolet ﬁlter (MexorylSX®). In human subjects, only 0.014% of the applied ﬁlter wassystemically available, whereas a parallel in vitro skin penetrationstudy performed under identical exposure conditions and using thesame formulation, suggested a skin penetration rate of 0.37%, i.e. theresults of the in vitro study produced a 25 fold overestimation of thehuman systemic exposure as well as that of the potential humanhealth risk ( Benech-Kieffer et al., 2003 ).Overall, the percutaneous absorption, the toxicity and the humanhealth risk of ultraviolet ﬁlters appears to be overestimated. A safetyassessment on the basis of route-to-route-extrapolation is scienti ﬁ-cally untenable (see Discussion ). Similarly to drugs, a realistic riskassessment may only be performed on the basis of toxicity studiesperformed by the appropriate route of exposure or toxicokinetic datafrom animal studies with respective data in humans.
Safety of ultraviolet ﬁlters in childrenEpidemiological investigations suggest that excessive exposure toultraviolet radiation in children is a main risk factor in the etiology ofmelanoma and other skin cancers in adults ( Nohynek and Schaefer,2001 ). Therefore, the protection of children against the adverse effectsof sunscreen is of pivotal importance.Generally, national and international health organizations adviseto protect children against UV radiation by (a) keeping them out ofthe sun, (b) wearing of protective clothing and hats and (c) byapplication of sunscreens. However, application of sunscreens toinfants at the age of b6 months is generally not advised. There havebeen many discussions whether the current risk assessment ofultraviolet ﬁlters (related to an adult of 60 kg body weight and abody surface area of 18000 cm2) also covers the safety of sunscreenapplication on children.With the exception of the ﬁrst few weeks of life, the skin of children
and its susceptibility to local adverse effects is similar to that of adults;the permeability of human skin to topically applied substancesremains relatively constant throughout life ( Schaefer and Redelmayer,1996; Marzulli and Maibach, 1984 ). The main difference in the riskassessment of topically applied products between children and adultsis the larger relative body surface area of children when related to bodyweight ( Table 5 ). Nevertheless, in our view, there is little need toperform an additional risk assessment concerning the safety ofsunscreens for children, for the following reasons:•The current EU Margin of Exposure/Safety (100fold) is highlyconservative and takes into account a 10fold intra-individualhuman variation, which should cover persons of small body heightas well as children.•Given their relatively larger body surface, children not only receive
a higher systemic exposure dose from dermally applied ultravioletﬁlters, but they also receive, on the basis of their different bodysurface area/body weight relation, a proportionally higher dose ofUV radiation than adults; they are therefore at higher risk andrequire more protection than adults.Overall, when compared with the risk/bene ﬁt relation in adults,children may have higher health bene ﬁts from the use of sunscreensthan adults.Biologically active ingredientsAccording to the current US de ﬁnition, drugs are (a) articlesintended for use in the diagnostic, cure, mitigation, treatment, orprevention of disease in man …(b)articles listed in certain compendia,principally the US Pharmacopeia and (c) articles intended to affect thestructure or any function of the body of man. The EU de ﬁnition of a drugis similar.Taking into account these de ﬁnitions, the term Cosmeceuticals(cosmetic products with a pharmacological and/or therapeutic
activity) is misleading, and not recognized by the US FDA sinceproducts with such activities are drugs per de ﬁnition, and not
(cosmetic products with a pharmacological and/or therapeuticactivity) is misleading, and not recognized by the US FDA sinceproducts with such activities are drugs per de ﬁnition, and notcosmetics. Nevertheless, ascribing an activity affecting the structureor function exclusively to drugs is inconsistent with today's knowledgeabout the actual biological activity of cosmetics.Almost every substance that is placed on human skin has thepotential to produce physiological changes in the skin. For example,soaps may produce slight skin irritation and enzyme induction of theepidermis, certain mineral waters have been shown to have an anti-allergic and anti-in ﬂammatory activity, simple cosmetic creams mayproduce an increase in skin hydration and accompanying physiolog-ical changes. To illustrate this, on the basis of its potential to affect thephysiology of the skin (increase in hydratation, activation ofproteases, stimulation of division of basal cells), the traditionalTable 5
Table 5Margin of exposure/margin of safety of an ultraviolet ﬁlter (Mexoryl XL®) in adultsaand children.Parameter Adult Infant (2 –3 years)Body weight 60 kg 14.0 kgBody surface area 18000 cm26030 cm2Amount sunscreen applied (1 mg/cm2) 18 g 6.03 gMax. amount applied ultraviolet ﬁlterb1.8 g 0.6 gPercuatneous penetration ofultraviolet ﬁlter0.8% 0.8%Systemic Exposure Dose (SED) 14.4 mg=0.24mg/kg/day4.8 mg=0.34mg/kg/dayNOAEL of oral subchronic toxicity studies 1000 mg/kg/day 1000 mg/kg/dayMargin of Safety (MoS=NOAEL/SED) 4170 2900aSCCNFP Opinion of 24 June, 1997.bSunscreen applied twice per day, containing 5.0% ultraviolet ﬁlter.Table 4Cosmetic ingredients with biological activity.Ingredient Use ActivityAlpha-hydroxy acids (lactate, maleate) Skin care, peeling Increase in permeability of the stratum corneum,induction of cell division/thickening of epidermisBeta-hydroxy acids (salicylic acid,
Beta-hydroxy acids (salicylic acid,salicylic acid derivatives)Skin care, peeling Increase in permeability of the stratum corneum, inductionof cell division/thickening of epidermis, antimicrobial activityVitamin A (retinol, retinyl palmitate) Skin care Delay in cell differentiationRetinaldehyde Skin care Delay in cell differentiation2,4-DPO (aminexil) Hair care, anti-hair loss preparations Inhibition of lysyl hydroxylase ( in vitro )Kojic acid Skin lightening Inhibition of tyrosinaseVitamin E (alpha-tocopherol) Skin care, skin ageing preparations AntioxidantLucinol Skin lightening Inhibition of tyrosinaseVitamin C (ascorbic acid and derivatives) Skin care, skin ageing preparations AntioxidantCaffeine Cellulitis preparations Vasodilatation, inhibition of cAMPNicotinic acid esters Sport preparations VasodilatationKetoconazole Anti-dandruff shampoos Antifungal, inhibition of sterol-14 α-demethylase250 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
cosmetic ingredient glycerol could be classi ﬁed as a drug undertoday's de ﬁnitions ( Verdier-Sevrain and Bonte, 2007 ).Given the current de ﬁnitions of drugs (physiological/pharmaco-logical activity and a favorable bene ﬁt in terms of risk/risk relation)and cosmetics (no permitted physiological activity and risk-free) it isunavoidable that a grey zone between these product categories exists.A number of cosmetic ingredients have occupied the grey zone, i.e.traditional or novel cosmetics substances, which possess some degreeof biological activity. Examples are shown in Table 4 . However, incontrast to drugs, these biologically active ingredients do not claim totreat or cure pathological skin conditions, but correct non-patholog-ical variations of normal skin (oily skin, dry skin, skin wrinkles) or thehair (hair loss).For example, retinol or retinyl esters have a weak pharmacologicalactivity; they are used in food supplements or cosmetic preparations
against skin ageing and wrinkles, whereas related retinoids with apowerful pharmacological activity, such as all-trans- or 13-cis retinoicacids, are used in oral or topical drug preparations, e.g. for thetreatment of acne, and were banned in the EU for cosmetic use (AnnexII of the EU Cosmetic Directive). Given that cosmetic use of retinol andretinyl esters has to be safe for the consumer, an internationalindustry consortium sponsored a large study in human subjects thatconclusively showed that topical application of these substances tohuman subjects at maximal concentrations did not affect endogenousplasma levels of retinol, retinyl esters and retinoic acids ( Nohynek etal., 2006 ).Similarly, alpha- and beta-hydroxy acids are used in cosmetic skincare preparations at relatively low concentrations, whereas highconcentrations are applied in dermatological preparations or medicaldevices for skin peeling. Another example is Kojic acid, a traditional
Japanese food ingredient, which has been widely used in Japan andAsia as a skin lightening agent. Pivotal data on the safety of thiscompound, particularly genotoxic aspects have recently beenreviewed and concluded that this substance poses no risk for humanhealth at the concentrations currently used ( Nohynek et al., 2004c ).Given the diversity and different use of biologically active cosmeticingredients, a standard list of safety requirements cannot be proposedhere. However, the existing guidelines of the EU SCCS, CIR orrespective drug regulation guidelines should be carefully reviewedas a minimal requirement in support of the safety of such substances.Safety studies should be adapted according to the product type, theactivity, concentration and, above all, the potential human local andsystemic exposure to the substance.Special safety aspectsRisk of nanotechnology in sunscreens and cosmeticsMany modern cosmetic or sunscreen products contain nano-
sized components, including nano-sized formulations or insolublesolid particles in the nano-range, i.e. 1 to 100 nm in diameter.Nanoemulsions are transparent and have unique tactile and textureproperties. Nanosomes, niosomes or liposomes are small vesicles(range: 50 to 5000 nm) consisting of traditional cosmetic materials,and are mainly used to protect light- or oxygen-sensitive cosmeticingredients. Given that such formulations are inherently unstableand rely on liquid/liquid interactions, it is unclear whether theyshould be quali ﬁed as genuine nanoparticles. However, numerousstudies have shown that vesicle materials generally do not seem topenetrate human skin beyond the super ﬁcial layers of the stratumcorneum (Choi and Maibach, 2005 ). When compared with the skinpenetration of ingredients in traditional formulations (solution, gelsor creams), nano-sized cosmetic formulations may enhance orreduce skin absorption or penetration, albeit at a limited order of
magnitude ( Nohynek et al., 2007, 2008 ). Although very recently
or creams), nano-sized cosmetic formulations may enhance orreduce skin absorption or penetration, albeit at a limited order ofmagnitude ( Nohynek et al., 2007, 2008 ). Although very recentlynovel vesicular pharmaceutical formulations ( “transferosomes ”)have been developed that appear to produce a genuine andsigniﬁcantly increased percutaneous drug delivery of drug ingredi-ents, these pharmaceutical formulations are still under development(El Maghraby et al., 2008 ).Modern sunscreens often contain insoluble titanium dioxide(TiO2) or zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles (NP), which are colorlessandﬁlter UV light more ef ﬁciently than micron-sized ( N100 nm)particles. In addition, the combination of particle-based and organicUVﬁlters has a synergistic effect of UYV scattering (particles) withUV-absorption (organic UV ﬁlters), which permitted the develop-ment sunscreen with high ( N30) sun protection factors (SPF). All
available evidence, including numerous studies on skin penetrationin human subjects, demonstrated that TiO 2or ZnO NP do notpenetrate into or through normal as well as compromised human oranimal skin ( Nohynek et al., 2007, 2008; Pinheiro et al., 2007; Filipeet al., 2009; Gopee et al., 2009 ). This is supported by the experienceof transdermal drug delivery research, which demonstrated thatsigniﬁcant passive skin penetration may only be achieved forsubstances combining a low molecular weight, melting point anda favorable logP O/W, which would exclude insoluble nanoparticles(Bos and Meinardi, 2000 ).Oral and topical in vivo toxicity tests revealed that TiO 2and ZnO NPhave low toxicity and are well tolerated on the skin. Subcutaneous orintravenous administration of TiO 2nanoparticles produced no toxicityor unexpected body distribution ( Gopee et al., 2007; Fabian et al.,2008 ). Cytotoxicity, genotoxicity and photo-genotoxicity studies on
TiO 2NP found no difference in the safety pro ﬁle of micro- or nano-sized materials, all of which were non-toxic or non-genotoxic(Theogaraj et al., 2007 ). Although ZnO particles have been suspectedto be photo-genotoxic in vitro , recent results demonstrated absence ofa genuine photo-genotoxic potential ( Dufour et al., 2006 ).Published in vitro investigations on TiO 2and other insolubleparticles reporting uptake by cells, oxidative cell damage orgenotoxicity should be interpreted with caution, since such ﬁndingsmay also be attributed to adverse effects secondary to phagocytosis ofmammalian cells exposed to high concentrations of insolubleparticles. Results of studies on wear debris particles that includenanoparticles from surgical implants and other toxicity studies oninsoluble NP support the experience of traditional toxicology that thetoxicity of small particles is mainly related to their chemistry, ratherthan their particle size.
Overall, there is no evidence supporting a general rule that effectsof particles to the skin or other tissues increase with smaller particlesize, or produce novel toxicities when compared with those of micro-sized materials. The current weight of current scienti ﬁc evidencesuggests that the use of nano-sized cosmetic or sunscreen ingredientsposes no or negligible potential risk to human health ( Stern andMcNeil, 2008 ). The safety of insoluble nanoparticles in sunscreens hasbeen reviewed and con ﬁrmed by several, international regulatoryauthorities ( Nohynek et al., 2007, 2008; TGA, 2009 ).In summary, concerning the exposure of human skin and thehuman organism to nano-materials originating from topical applica-tion of cosmetics or sunscreens, the present knowledge may besummarized as follows:Soluble nano-scale materials: given that vesicle- or emulsion-typenano-sized formulations of cosmetic ingredients are intrinsically
instable and rely on physical/chemical liquid/liquid interactions,it is uncertain whether they should be classi ﬁed as genuinenanoparticles. Such formulations may produce reduced or en-
instable and rely on physical/chemical liquid/liquid interactions,it is uncertain whether they should be classi ﬁed as genuinenanoparticles. Such formulations may produce reduced or en-hanced skin uptake when compared with that from solutions,although at a limited scale. Therefore, the potential human skinand systemic exposure from nano-scale vesicle-type formulationsshould be rated similar to those of solutions of the respectiveingredients. Skin penetration of vesicle materials has been shownto be negligible.251 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
Insoluble nanoparticles: at present, the scienti ﬁc evidence suggeststhat insoluble nanoparticles used in sunscreens do not penetrateinto or through normal or compromised human skin and produceno human local or systemic exposure or adverse health effects.Intravenous toxicity studies on TiO2nanoparticles showed lowtoxicity and no evidence of new or unexpected toxicities.In conclusion, the weight of evidence suggests that nano-materialscurrently used in cosmetic preparations or sunscreens pose no risk tohuman skin or human health, in the contrary, they provide a largebeneﬁt to human health by protecting human skin against the adverseeffects of UV radiation, including that of skin cancer.Safety evaluation of plant ingredientsAccording to the latest statistics from the journal Organic Monitor ,natural and organic cosmetics account for 3% of all cosmetic sales inEurope in 2008. Although a relatively small percentage, their market
share increased by 20% a year; in some countries, the sector's marketshare is expected to approach 10% by 2012. The major driver of thismarket is the public demand for products that are natural and/ororganic and therefore regarded as healthy .Botanical cosmetic ingredients include aqueous or non-aqueousplant extracts, tinctures, fatty or essential oils, expressed juices andpuriﬁed plant ingredients. The variety of plants providing theseingredients is large, ranging from staple food sources such as cereals,fruit, and vegetables, to herbs used in traditional medicines ( Allemannand Baumann, 2009 ). Plant-derived ingredients may be obtained fromcultivated or wild plants. Although many of these ingredients arederived from plants with a history of traditional use as food, teas, and/or herbal medicines, it is crucial to consider that the terms beingnatural ortraditionally used does not mean that these ingredients are
safe, i.e. the absence of evidence of a known health risk is not equal toevidence of absence of a health risk when such ingredients are appliedunder different conditions of use.A considerable number of cases of intoxication with plant-derivedingredients used as food supplements have been reported during thepast decade ( Nortier et al., 2000; Ernst, 2002 ). For example, the USFDA declared dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids asadulterated under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, sincethey presented an unreasonable risk of illness or injury ( FDA, 2004 ).Other cases of intoxication reported for botanical products resultedfrom contamination of plant materials with other plant species orspecies misidenti ﬁcation ( Nortier et al., 2000; Fu et al., 2009 ). Forexample, Aristolochia species in herbal teas produced renal failure inlarge number of affected persons, including lethal outcomes. Theexposed population may have been affected by an increased
incidence of urothelial cancer, possibly due to exposure to aris-tolochic acids ( NTP, 2008 ). Later it was shown that these adverseevents were due to a contamination by Aristolochia species contain-ing high levels of aristolochic acids or misidenti ﬁcation of plants(EMEA, 2005 ).It is well known that certain plant-derived ingredients may alsoproduce adverse local reactions when applied onto the skin, which is acritical issue for their use as cosmetic ingredients. Thus, St. John'sWort ( Hypericum perforatum ) extracts have been shown to bephototoxic in a dose- and irradiation-dependent manner ( EMEA,2008 ). Similarly, essential oils, complex natural substances with awide range of traditional use as topical drugs, fragrances, andcosmetics may contain varying amounts of naturally occurring contactallergens ( Lalko and Api, 2006 ).These examples demonstrate that botanicals derived from plantsthat appear to have a history of safe use in food and/or traditional
medicines may nevertheless pose health risks to the consumer when
These examples demonstrate that botanicals derived from plantsthat appear to have a history of safe use in food and/or traditionalmedicines may nevertheless pose health risks to the consumer whenused as food supplements and/or cosmetic ingredients. Accordingly,the food industry and international regulatory authorities haveextensively debated the safety assessment of plant-derived ingredi-ents as food, food ingredients or drugs. As a result, several guidancedocuments have been published that address issues of safetyassessment of plant-derived ingredients as food or food ingredientsand herbal drugs ( Schilter et al., 2003; Kroes and Walker, 2004;Rousseaux and Schachter, 2003 ). At the same time, the EuropeanMedicines Agency and the US FDA published guidelines on the safetyassessment of herbal medicines which included particular emphasison identi ﬁcation and characterization of plant-derived drugs ( FDA,2004; EMEA, 2006 ).
2004; EMEA, 2006 ).Whatever their regulatory status, the safety of plant products mustbe established for their intended use. Concerning their use in PCP/cosmetics, EU regulations state that (1) a cosmetic product should notproduce damage to human health and (2) the manufacturer isresponsible for the safety of cosmetic products placed on the market.A safety assessment should be performed on ﬁnished products takinginto consideration the toxicological pro ﬁle of the ingredients, theirchemical structure, and their potential to produce human local andpotential systemic exposure. Guidance on the safety assessment of thecosmetic ingredients has been published by the EU Scienti ﬁcCommittee on Consumers Products ( SCCP, 2006 ). Although theseguidelines were adapted to the safety assessment of chemically well-deﬁned ingredients, they appear to be less suited for the safetyassessment of natural substances. Given the absence of a consensus on
the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients of natural or organicorigin is a major challenge for the cosmetic industry.In the following, we discuss a pragmatic approach to assess thesafety of natural and organic cosmetic ingredients, which has receivedscienti ﬁc and regulatory acceptance for the safety assessment ofplant-derived ingredients as food supplements, novel foods, and novelfood ingredients ( EC, 1997a,b ). The comparative approach focuses ona comparison between a novel plant-derived cosmetic ingredient withthat of other plant extracts with a traditional history of use as food,food ingredient, herbal drug or cosmetic ingredient, i.e. comparator(s). Alternative tools for the safety assessment are Chemical Groupingand Read-Across approaches ( OECD, 2007 ). These concepts rely oncomprehensive botanical and chemical characterization, which isembedded within the general risk assessment paradigm, i.e., hazard
identi ﬁcation, hazard characterization, exposure assessment, and riskcharacterization while keeping in mind the topical nature of humanexposure. Such an approach also complies with current Europeanregulations on cosmetics and future revisions concerning a ban onanimal testing on cosmetic ingredients.The comparative approachHistorically, the comparative approach is based on the concept ofsubstantial equivalence. It was introduced by a joint FAO/WHOconsultation on biotechnology and food safety in 1990 and wasfurther developed in 1992 by the Food Safety Working Group of theOECD's Group of National Experts in Safety in Biotechnology ( WHO,1995 ). The concept initially intended as a practical approach to thesafety evaluation of foods which are or are produced from geneticallymodi ﬁed (GM) organisms. The safety assessment of GM plants andderived food is based on appropriate methods and approaches toequate GM-foods to non-GM comparators. Since many GM foods are
obtained from conventional food plants, the comparator(s) selectedfor the safety evaluation is usually the parent (host) or other ediblevarieties of the same species.
obtained from conventional food plants, the comparator(s) selectedfor the safety evaluation is usually the parent (host) or other ediblevarieties of the same species.During the same period, a number of exotic food plants having notraditional history of use were introduced to the US and Europeanmarket. Accordingly, novel food regulations were introduced in the EUin 1997 ( EC 1997a,b ). The principles of the safety assessment of novelfoods were extensively discussed and guidelines were developed bynumber of regulatory bodies and the food industry ( Jonas et al., 1996;SCF, 1997; ILSI, 2003; Edwards, 2005 ). The safety assessment of novel252 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
foods and novel food ingredients also raised new technical issues,given that foods are highly complex mixtures that contain manydifferent substances. It has been recognized that whole foods cannotbe tested on their own according to the standard safety evaluationprinciples used for single substances such as pharmaceuticals, foodadditives or food contaminants ( WHO, 1987; Barlow et al., 2002 ).Although traditional foods may be considered to have a history ofsafe use , no food can be considered to be completely safe under allcircumstances, i.e. different individuals may have different tolerancesto the same food. Moreover, traditional food may be considered to besafe within the context of its traditional consumption by therespective population under prevailing dietary, preparation andprocessing regimes or cultural practices. Some foods that have a his-tory of safe use in one part of the world may be deemed to be novel if
introduced into another part of the world. For example, wildmushrooms listed as edible in a guide of one European country maybe listed as poisonous in another country's guide (author's personalobservation).To assess the safety of a novel food, the ﬁrst step is to determinewhat existing food should be used as a comparator. The absence of asuitable comparator does not suggest that a novel food is unsafe, but asafety assessment program may be required. If a comparator exists anddeemed to be traditional and safe within the context of its use, itsproperties are compared with the novel food in order to gather themaximal information relative to its safety. In some instances, the use ofmore than one comparator may be appropriate to address differentsafety issues. A comparison may be performed on the basis of botanicalcharacterization, chemical composition, methods of processing,known human exposure pattern and estimated intake focusing on
equivalence, similarity, or differences between the new food and itstraditional counterpart. The comparative approach is a practical toolwhich allows, on a case by case basis, a pragmatic safety assessmentwithout additional toxicological testing. Focusing on equivalence andsimilarity would also reveal dissimilarities, which may require anadditional safety assessment ( Constable et al., 2007 ). In addition to theregulatory safety assessment o f novel foods and novel foodsingredients, the comparative approach has also been recentlyrecognized as a useful method to assess the safety of botanical foodsupplements in the EU ( Schilter et al., 2003; EFSA, 2009 ).Chemical groupingAccording to OECD (2007) , the term grouping or chemical groupingdescribes a strategy to assess several chemicals according to theirchemical structures and properties. Chemical grouping may includedeﬁnition of a chemical category or identi ﬁcation of chemical
analogues for which read-across data may be applied. A chemicalcategory is a group of de ﬁned substances with physical, chemical andtoxicological and/or environmental toxicological properties and/orenvironmental fate properties that are likely to be similar or follow aregular pattern as a result of structural similarity (or other chemicalcharacteristics). Generally, a number of members may be present inan individual chemical category; analysis of their principal toxicolog-ical effects may permit detection of trends across individualtoxicological endpoints. Within a chemical category, data gaps maybeﬁlled by a read-across approach: a hazard endpoint for onesubstance may be predicted by using data from a chemically similarsubstance. Overall, chemical grouping is an interesting in silicoalternative to animal testing; it allows the evaluation of substancesas groups, rather than on a case-by-case basis.Chemical grouping and read-across have recently received
regulatory acceptance by REACH, the EU regulation of chemicals.Interestingly, complex materials, known as substances of Unknown or
Chemical grouping and read-across have recently receivedregulatory acceptance by REACH, the EU regulation of chemicals.Interestingly, complex materials, known as substances of Unknown orVariable Composition (UVCB substances), including plant extracts,were listed as typical examples of substances to which chemicalgrouping should be applied. The application of chemical grouping tothe safety assessment of UCVB substances of natural origin wasjustiﬁed by the fact that they are complex mixtures and thereforecannot be separated into their constituent chemical species ( EU,2006 ).The chemical grouping approach has been applied for the safetyassessment of ﬂavoring agents by the JECFA (1998) and more recentlybyEFSA (2004) . The procedure integrated human intake, metabolism,and structure –activity relationships with toxicity data ( JECFA, 1998 ).Flavoring substances were compiled into groups of structurallyrelated materials ( congeneric groups ) that were expected to have
common routes of metabolism and similar toxicity. According to theJECFA approach, the risk of substances with a simple structure, whichwere known or presumed to be readily metabolized to innocuousproducts, may be evaluated in the absence of toxicity data. Substances,for which the metabolism was less well de ﬁned or were expected tobe metabolized to reactive products, require toxicity data in order toperform a safety evaluation. Given that metabolism or toxicity dataare rarely available for all members of a group, the safety evaluation ofindividual group members that lack toxicity data depends upon theavailability of data from other group members. Using this approach,the safety of more than 1400 ﬂavoring substances has been evaluated(Munro and Kennepohl, 2001; Munro and Danielwska-Nikiel, 2006 ).Given that ﬂavoring agents are plant metabolites, constitute the mainfraction of essential oils and show similar chemical properties ( Smith
et al., 2005 ), the chemical grouping approach may be a pragmatic toolfor the safety assessment of essential oils used as cosmetic ingredientsand other types of plant-derived extracts. However, a comprehensivechemical characterization of plant-derived ingredients is the basis forthe application of these concepts.In our view, the safety assessment of new or established plantingredients in PCP should follow the established ways of safetyevaluation of food use. However, potential human health risks of plantingredients in PCP should be rated to be far lower than that of theiruse in food; after all, they are not eaten, but used on the skin.Use of the threshold of toxicological concern in the safety evaluationof cosmetic ingredientsMost cosmetic ingredients are used in formulations at 1% orgreater and generally require a complete toxicological evaluation to
assess their safety. However, many ingredients are used in cosmeticproducts at lower levels for various reasons or are carried into aproduct because they are contaminants, byproducts of the manufac-turing process, residual starting materials, processing aids or others.Also, cosmetic ingredients may be complex mixtures of a variety ofmaterials, such as a botanical extract. Although exposure to themixture itself may be relatively high, exposure to the individualcomponents may be very low.The challenge for the toxicologist in the cosmetic and personal careproduct industry is how to evaluate the safety of materials with lowlevel exposure without a high output of resources or relying to animaltesting. One of the ways to do this is the use of the concept of aThreshold of Toxicological Concern or TTC. The concept that athreshold exists for the toxicity of an unknown chemical was ﬁrstused by the FDA as early as 1967 ( Frawley, 1967 ) to evaluate the
safety of indirect food additives, i.e. materials that may leach out ofpackaging material, adhesives, etc., that come into contact with the
safety of indirect food additives, i.e. materials that may leach out ofpackaging material, adhesives, etc., that come into contact with thefood item. This value was set at 1.5 µg human intake per day based ondose response data from animal studies with both cancer and non-cancer endpoints. As summarized by Re et al. (2009) , the applicationof the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC) as a concept for thesafety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients has evolved from theevaluation of food chemicals and ﬂavoring materials.Brieﬂy, the TTC is a concept that is based on the assumption thatfor all substances there is a level of human exposure below whichthere is a negligible probability of an appreciable risk to human healthwith regards to systemic toxicity. This concept has been reviewed in a253 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
concise manner by Renwick (2004) and Kroes et al. (2005) . In the TTCprocess, a decision tree approach based on chemical structure is usedto place substances into 3 classes ( Cramer et al., 1978 ) with thresholdsof toxicity as assigned by Munro et al. (1996) and Kroes et al. (2005) ,producing the following scheme:Class I —1800 μg per person/day;Class II —540μg per person/day;Class III —90μg per person/day.It should be noted that Munro has recently recommended thatClass III be changed to 180 μg/day, when organophosphorussubstances are excluded ( Munro et al., 2008 ).Kroes et al. (2007) extended the TTC concept to the safetyevaluation of cosmetic ingredients. This publication also describes indetail a method to determine default values for percutaneousabsorption of chemicals on the basis of their molecular weight andlog P octanol/water values. Justi ﬁcation for using these default valuesand their conservative nature is also outlined in this publication. The
paper also presents the justi ﬁcation for using conservative skinabsorption default factors in calculating a systemic equivalent dose incomparison to the oral TTC approach. The use of TTC for dermalapplication of chemicals and of speci ﬁcally for cosmetics is furthersupported by Munro et al. (2008) . Approaches which refer to the TTCconcept have also been used to evaluate the safety of complex naturalﬂavors and essential oils used as ﬂavorings in foods ( Smith et al., 2004,2005 ).An example of how the TTC approach can be used for theevaluation of a complex mixture for cosmetic use was published by Reet al. (2009) using Calendula Flower Petals. Over 150 distinctchemicals from Calendula were identi ﬁed from various literaturesources. In order to make the number of individual evaluationsworkable, the following were excluded from analysis:•Mineral matter;•High molecular weight carbohydrates (e.g. mucilage);•Fatty acid esters (reviewed by CIR, food additives, etc.);
•Amino acids;•Resins;•Components with MW N1000 (negligible skin penetration);•Inert plant material such as cellulose;•Components present at b0.5%.The justi ﬁcation for eliminating components present at b0.5% wasbased upon a conservative assumption of 0.1% of plant material in apersonal care product that is applied to the body at 18 g per day (i.e.body lotion, maximum use of cosmetic products as de ﬁned by the EUSCCP). At this use level, all components below 0.5% would have apossible systemic exposure below 90 μg/day (assuming 100%absorption).For the remaining substances, i.e. approximately 30 components,chemical structures were identi ﬁed and classi ﬁed according to theCramer decision tree ( Cramer et al., 1978 ). The molecular weight andlog P o/wwere calculated for each component to estimate their skinpenetration potential. It was determined that the potential humansystemic exposure from each of the components was at or below its
respective TTC value. The mixture was therefore deemed to be safe foruse for any cosmetic application of up to 18 g per day. Therefore, forlow level exposures to chemicals without an established toxicologyproﬁle, the TTC approach could possibly be used —provided one knowsthe chemical structure of the substance, its log P o/w,concentration inthe formulation and application rate to the skin.Discussion/conclusionAll stakeholders, consumers, regulatory agencies and producers,share a common aim: they want cosmetics/personal care products(PCP) and their ingredients to be safe, that is, posing no or negligiblehealth risk to the consumer under conditions of normal use. Risk isdeﬁned as a function of human (local and systemic) exposure, hazard(toxicity) and dose –response. The previous examples show thenumber and variety of parameters that play a role in the safetyassessment of PCP and their ingredients.Overall, the key element of the safety evaluation of PCP and their
ingredients are their potential to produce external, local and systemic
assessment of PCP and their ingredients.Overall, the key element of the safety evaluation of PCP and theiringredients are their potential to produce external, local and systemicexposure. Local health risks of PCP ingredients (intolerance, irritation,and sensitization) may be excluded by safety assessment ofingredients and evaluation of the results of preclinical and humanin-use testing prior to marketing of the end product. New ingredientsmay be screened by appropriate safety/toxicology tests, and theirlocal safety con ﬁrmed by subsequent human use tests.The nature and magnitude of human systemic exposure andpotential health risks from topical use of PCP and their ingredients ismore dif ﬁcult to assess. Although the order of magnitude of potentialhuman systemic exposure may be estimated on the basis of in vitroskin penetration data, the limits of this test should be taken intoaccount. Generally, the test uses cadaver skin which is devoid of
metabolic activity. However, ﬁrst-pass skin metabolism is importantfor substances, such as arylamine hair dye ingredients which are N-acetylated by dermal NAT1 ( Kawakubo et al., 2000; Nohynek et al.,2005 ). For example, it has recently been shown that the systemicexposure of human consumers exposed to a PPD-containing oxidativehair dye is limited to traces of N,N ′-diacetylated PPD ( Meuling anddeBie, 2009 ), a detoxi ﬁed and non-genotoxic metabolite ( Garrigue etal., 2006 ). First-pass skin metabolism has also been shown forparabens, which are largely hydrolyzed to p-hydroxybenzoic acid bydermal carboxyesterase-2 in rat, pig and human skins ( Bando et al.,1997; Prusakiewic et al., 2006; Jewell et al., 2007 ). Although theresults of in vitro skin penetration studies suggested that parabenspenetrate into or through human skin at a rate of N20%, a recent CIRExpert Panel estimated that, taking into account their hydrolysis by
skin esterases, as little as 1% of topically applied parabens reaches theorganism intact ( CIR, 2008 ).In addition, recent data suggested in vitro skin penetration testsmay have an inherent inability to distinguish small residues that areoutside from those within the living epidermis. There is increasingevidence that the current EU interpretation (SCCP, 2003 and 2006 )o fin vitro skin penetration results may classify small residues as beingwithin the living skin, i.e. systemically absorbed, although theyactually remain outside the living skin. In vitro skin penetration testsrely on the ef ﬁcacy of skin stripping to remove the stratum corneumquantitatively; skin residues that remain after skin stripping areinterpreted as residing in the living skin and, therefore, beingpotentially bioavailable. In contrast, it has recently been shown invivo, i.e. human subjects, that skin stripping is unable to remove all
residues of substances applied to the skin residing in/on the stratumcorneum, hair follicle openings or skin furrows, even when up to 80skin strips are performed ( Jacobi et al., 2005; Mavon et al., 2007;Lademann et al., 2008 ). Therefore, a prediction of a signi ﬁcant humansystemic exposure may be created by combining sophisticated modernanalytical methods of the 21st century with the results of a relativelycrude and mechanical method developed in the 1960s ( Tregar andDirnhuber, 1962 ). These discrepancies call for a new interpretation ofin vitro skin absorption data that should take into account thequestionable ef ﬁcacy of a mechanical method to remove traceamounts of test substances from the stratum corneum , skin furrowsand hair follicle openings.Finally, there is growing evidence that the in vitro skin penetrationtest tends to overestimate actual human systemic exposure whencompared side-by-side with actual human internal exposure data.
This has been shown for a direct hair dye ( Lademann et al., 2008 ), a[14C]-labeled and other ﬁlters ( Benech-Kieffer et al., 2003; Mavon et
This has been shown for a direct hair dye ( Lademann et al., 2008 ), a[14C]-labeled and other ﬁlters ( Benech-Kieffer et al., 2003; Mavon etal., 2007 ), a [14C]-PPD containing oxidative hair dye ( Hueber-Becker254 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
et al., 2004 ), a [14C]-thioglycolate-containing depilatory product(Hueber-Becker et al., 2009 ) and very recently, in a large study onthe systemic exposure of human volunteers to a [14C]-PPD-containingcommercial oxidative hair dye ( Meuling and deBie, 2009 ). Theoverestimation may even be further increased by the calculation ofhuman systemic exposure on the basis of the highest singlepenetration value observed in a single Franz cell of an in vitro testas recommended by current EU guidelines ( SCCNFP, 2003 ).Maximizing exposure data and a ccumulating worst-possiblescenarios may create imaginary health risks where actually noneexist. A potential human systemic exposure would require investiga-tion of the systemic ( in vivo ) toxicity of the compound in question.Paradoxically, although the in vitro skin penetration test wasintroduced with the expectation to replace the earlier in vivo animalmodel, its conservative interpretation could trigger additional safety
testing, including in vivo toxicity studies on compounds that produceno actual human systemic exposure: instead of reducing the numberofin vivo animal tests, this may ultimately produce unnecessary invivo tests, including repeat-dose or reproductive toxicity studies thatwould be conducted to investigate a potential human systemic healthhazard ( Lademann et al., 2008 ). In contrast, when such small residuesactually remain outside the living human skin, their systemic healthhazard should be considered to be negligible and performance of invivo toxicity studies would be unwarranted. This aspect raisesimportant questions concerning the interpretation of the results ofin vitro skin absorption/penetration studies that has not beenaddressed by current guidelines, i.e. where to draw the line for adeﬁnition of negligible skin absorption/penetration of substances.The order of magnitude of potential skin absorption/penetration
of substances may also be conservatively estimated on the basis oftheir physical and chemical properties ( Kroes et al., 2007 ). When nosigniﬁcant systemic exposure to a substance is expected on the basisof physical/chemical as well as in vitro skin penetration data,investigation of the systemic toxicity of the respective ingredientcould be waved. It has been suggested that epidermal/dermal in vitroresidues at the order of 1.0 μg/cm2of skin, corresponding to a nominalhuman systemic exposure dose of 0.01 mg/kg (e.g. for a hair dyeapplied to a 600 cm2scalp surface area) could be considered to benegligible for substances that with a physical/chemical pro ﬁle (highwater- or lipid solubility, insolubility, molecular weight of N1000 Da;melting point of N200 °C) that predict negligible skin absorption(Lademann et al., 2008 ). Such an approach could result in waving invivo tests on systemic toxicity; it would also be a pragmatic way
forward towards the aim of the 3 Rs (reduction, replacement,reﬁnement of animal tests).Traditionally, the safety assessment schemes of all substances thatmay produce human systemic exposure, whether it is drugs,pesticides or industrial chemicals, ideally attempt to apply the bestscience available, i.e. human, animal as well as alternative tests. Thus,up to the present, US-, EU- and Asian regulatory schemes relied on avariety of available human, in vitro as well as in vivo animal safetydata for local and systemic hazard identi ﬁcation of PCP and theiringredients. Yet, up to the present, there is no global harmonization interms of type and extent of testing required, such as the internationalICH scheme on the safety evaluation of pharmaceuticals ( ICH, 2009 ). Acommon approach to the safety assessment of cosmetic ingredients isfurther confused by the difference of regional regulatory schemes thatclassify e.g. in USA or Japan, some ingredients, such as UV ﬁlters or
hair dyes as OTC- or quasi-drugs, which require a drug-like dossier
classify e.g. in USA or Japan, some ingredients, such as UV ﬁlters orhair dyes as OTC- or quasi-drugs, which require a drug-like dossierincluding appropriate evidence for their safety and ef ﬁcacy. Incontrast, in the EU the safety of these substances is evaluated undercosmetic guidelines.The lack of international harmonization and consistency is evidenteven in some basic aspects of hazard assessment. For example, EUGuidelines for safety testing/risk assessment of cosmetic ingredientsrely on repeated-dose oraltoxicity data that are generally performedby oral gavage, whereas US and Japanese regulations (as well as EUdrug and chemical regulations) suggest toxicity tests to be done bythe route of administration that corresponds to the route of humanexposure. Although toxicity studies performed by oral gavage seemappropriate for drug substances that are taken orally by humans, theirrelevance to human dermal exposure is questionable. There is a
general consensus that route-to-route extrapolation should beavoided in risk assessment, unless data on kinetics and metabolismof the test compound are available ( Pepelko and Withey, 1985 ).Cosmetic ingredients are no exception to this rule; for example, recentstudies showed that kinetic and metabolic parameters of the UV ﬁlter3-(4-methylbenzilidene)camphor (4-MBC) in orally treated rats weredifferent from those in topically exposed humans, whereas dermalapplication of 4-MBC to rats reproduced the human kinetic andmetabolic patterns ( Schauer et al., 2006; Völkel et al., 2006 ). It has alsobeen shown that, even for the same magnitude of systemic exposure,oral toxicity studies tend to produce more severe adverse effects thandermal toxicity studies, presumably due to higher Cmax values ( Rosset al., 2000 ).All toxicologists would agree that investigation of the safety of oralhuman drugs via dermal toxicity studies would make little sense; the
converse should apply to the investigation of the safety of substancesthat produce dermal exposure of humans. Yet the EU risk assessmentscheme for key cosmetic ingredients, such as ultraviolet ﬁlters,preservatives or hair dyes is based on oral toxicity data and asubsequent route-to-route extrapolation. Given that all internationalsafety schemes claim that toxicity studies are undertaken with thesame purpose, i.e. to safeguard the safety of the consumer, it issurprising that such inconsistencies existed for decades up to the verypresent. Clearly, an international harmonization of safety standards,protocols and regulatory requirements is urgently needed; such aprocess could follow the example of pharmaceutical regulationswhere all stakeholders greatly bene ﬁted from an internationalharmonization under the ICH (International Conference on Harmoni-zation) process ( ICH, 2009 ).Additional complexity was introduced by a recent amendment to
the EU Cosmetics Directive stipulating that, after March 2009, certainin vivo toxicology investigations, such as in vivo genetic toxicity tests,may no longer be performed on ingredients in the EU for the purposeof the Cosmetics Directive, nor the data generated in such tests used.Taking into account that the currently recommended in vitro genetictoxicity test battery has a N80% chance to yield at least one false-positive result, the available in vitro test battery when used aloneappears to be unable to distinguish between carcinogens andcarcinogens ( Kirkland et al., 2007 ). Therefore, in the absence offollow-up in vivo genetic toxicology tests, it is dif ﬁcult to see how anysubstance, including a new PCP ingredient, could escape theclassi ﬁcation genotoxic and thus being unacceptable for their use inPCP. The need for in vivo genotoxicity tests has been acknowledged bythe EU SCCP who stated that in vivo testing has a decisive role in current
mutagenicity testing since it is not possible to predict the results in vivo
the EU SCCP who stated that in vivo testing has a decisive role in currentmutagenicity testing since it is not possible to predict the results in vivobased on the outcome of positive in vitro tests alone (SCCP, 2009 ). Thecosmetics industry through its European Federation Colipa togetherwith academia, is currently conducting a research program onimproving the predictive capacity of these in vitro tests.From March 2009, all in vivo (animal) toxicity tests on ingredientstested for the purpose of the Cosmetics Directive are banned in the EU.In March 2013, a marketing ban of the products tested or containingingredients tested in vivo (animal) for the purpose of the CosmeticsDirective after this date will be in place in the EU. This would be incontrast to current regulations in other parts of the world. Forexample, the People's Republic of China safety regulations requires aseries of animal tests for new cosmetic ingredients ( Ministry of
Health, Peking, 2009 ). Given these con ﬂicting demands, the globaltrend appears to point towards global disharmony rather thanharmonization. Since global cosmetic producers not only have a255 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
legal responsibility for the safety of their products, but also forcompliance with local laws and regulations, this may result in theparadoxical situation that in vivo safety tests in support of consumersafety may be legally required in one part of the world, whereuponthe same ingredient would be declared illegal in another part of theworld because such tests were performed.Over the past decade, tremendous efforts have been made todevelop alternative, non-animal safety tests ( Eisenbrand et al., 2002;Hartung, 2009 ). It is beyond the scope of this review to discuss thesetests in detail. These tests include in vitro genetic toxicity tests, skinand eye irritation and corrosion, phototoxicity, skin penetration testsand the LLNA (Local Lymph Node Assay, actually a re ﬁnement andreduction animal use and not a replacement test) that are routinelyused in the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients. However, forpivotal toxicological endpoints, including repeated-dose toxicity,
target organ toxicity, toxicokinetics, reproductive toxicity andcarcinogenicity, no alternative tests are currently available and noneare visible on the horizon. Today, EU Guidelines on the safetyevaluation of cosmetic ingredients, such as hair dyes, UV ﬁlters,preservatives or hair dyes include a list of mainly in vivo and some invitro toxicity tests ( SCCP, 2006 ; see II.1). Overall, it is highly unlikelythat validated alternative test methods on all toxicological endpointswill be available by 2013 ( Hartung, 2009; Pauwels and Rogiers, 2009 ).In the absence of validated safety tests it appears improbable thatinternational safety regulations, which tend to be conservative andare based on the state of the art of available science will change withinthe coming 4 years. However, huge efforts in these areas are currentlyongoing under the EU Framework Programmes 6 and 7, as well as arecent partnership between the EU Commission and Colipa on
research in the area of systemic toxicity. In 2011, the EuropeanCommission will review the progress and technical dif ﬁculties ofcompliance with the ban of animal testing.In conclusion, the safety assessment of PCP and their ingredientsis a complex topic that is not only affected by scienti ﬁc questions,but also by the respective regional regulatory status of the productas well as other issues, such as the ethics of animal testing. In theinterest of all stakeholders, consumers, regulatory bodies andproducers, there is an urgent need for an international harmoniza-tion on how the safety of these products and their ingredientsshould be evaluated.ReferencesAeby, P., Sie ber, T., Beck, H., Gerberick, F.G., Goebel, C., 2009. Skin sensitization to p-phenylenediamine: the diverging roles of oxidation and N-acetylation for dendriticcell activation and the immune response. J. Invest. Dermatol. 129, 99 –109.
Allemann, I.B., Baumann, L., 2009. Botanicals in skin care products. Internat. J. Dermatol.48, 923 –934.Ames, B.N., Kammen, H.O., Yamasaki, E., 1975. Hair dyes are mutagenic: Identi ﬁcationof a Variety of Mutagenic Ingredients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72 (6),2423 –2427.Ashby, J., Tennant, R.W., 1991. De ﬁnitive relationships among chemical structure,carcinogenicity and mutagenicity for 301 chemicals tested by the US NTP. Mut. Res.257, 229 –306.Axmon, A, Rylander, L., 2009. Birth weight and fetal growth in infants born to femalehairdressers and their sisters. Occup. Environ. Med. 66 (3), 198 –204.Baan, R., Straif, K., Grosse, Y., Secretan, B., El Ghissassi, F., Bouvard, V., Benbrahim-Tallaa,L., Cogliano, V., 2008. Carcinogenicity of some aromatic amines, organic dyes andrelated exposures. Lancet Oncol. 9, 322 –323.Babish, J.G., Scarlett, J.M., Voekler, S., Gutemann, W.H., Lisk, D.J., 1991. Urinary mutagens
in cosmetologists and dental personnel. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 34, 197 –206.Bando, H., Mohri, S., Y amashita, F., Takakura, Y., Hashida, M., 1997. Effects of skin
in cosmetologists and dental personnel. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 34, 197 –206.Bando, H., Mohri, S., Y amashita, F., Takakura, Y., Hashida, M., 1997. Effects of skinmetabolism on percutaneous penetration of lipophilic drugs. J. Pharmaceut. Sci. 86(9), 759 –761.Barlow, S.M., Greig, J.B., Bridges, J.W., Carere, A., Carpy, A.J.M., Galli, C.L., Kleiner, J.,Knudsen, I., Koëter, H.B.V.M., Levy, L.S., Madsen, C., Mayer, S., Narbonne, J.F.,Pfannkuch, F., Prodanchuk, M.G., Smith, M.R., Steinberg, P., 2002. Hazardidenti ﬁcation by methods of animal-based toxicology. Food Chem. Toxicol. 40(2002), 145 –191.Bach-Thomsen, M, Wulf, H.C., 1993. Sunbather's application of sunscreen is probablyinadequate to obtain the sun protection factor assigned to the preparation.Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 9, 242 –244.Benech-Kieffer, F., Meuling, W.J.A., Leclerc, C., Roza, L., Leclaire, J., Nohynek, G., 2003.Percutaneous absorption of Mexoryl SX® in human volunteers: comparison with in
vitro data. Skin Pharmacol. Appl. Skin Physiol. 16, 343 –355.Benning, V., Brault, D., Duvinage, C., Thybaud, V., Melcion, C., 1994. Validation of the invivo CD1 Mouse Splenocyte Micronucleus Test. Mutagenesis 9 (3), 199 –204.BfR (2009). Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Berlin, Germany, 15 October, 2009.Summary published at the BfR web site: http://www.bfr.bund.de/cd/31861 .Bolt, H.M., Golka, K., 2007. The debate on carcinogenicity of permanent hair dyes: newinsights. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 37, 521 –536.Bos, J.D., Meinardi, M.M.H.M., 2000. The 500 Dalton rule for the skin penetration ofchemical compounds and drugs. Exper. Dermatol. 9, 165 –169.Burnett, C., Lanman, B., Giovacchini, R., Wolcott, G., Scala, Keplinger, M., 1975. Long-term toxicity studies on oxidation hair dyes. Food Cosm. Toxicol. 13, 353 –357.Burnett, C., Jacobs, M.M., Seppala, A., Shubik, P., 1980. Evaluation of the toxicity andcarcinogenicity of hair dyes. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 6, 247 –257.
Burnett, C, Loehr, R, Corbett, J., 1981. Heritable translocation study on two hair dyeformulations. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 1, 325 –328.Burnett, C.M., Corbett, J.F., 1987. Failure of short-term in vitro mutagenicity tests to predictthe animal carcinogenicity of hair dyes. Food Chem. Toxicol. 25 (9), 703 –707.Burnett, C.M., Goldenthal, E.J., 1988. Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicitystudies in Sprague Dawley rats exposed topically to oxidative hair coloringformulations containing p-phenylenediamine. Food Chem. Toxicol. 26, 467 –474.Cantox Inc. (1997). Assessment of the reproductive risks posed to the users of hair dyeproducts containing monoethanolamine, p-aminophenol and o-aminophenol.Cantox Inc., Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, September 10, 1997 (unpublished).CCC, Consumer Commitment Code (2008). Available at: http://www.personalcarecoun-cil.org/Content/NavigationMenu/About_Us/Consumer_Commitment_Code1/Con-sumer_Commitment_Code.htm .
sumer_Commitment_Code.htm .Choi, M.J., Maibach, H.I., 2005. Liposomes and niosomes as topical drug deliverysystems. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 18, 209 –219.CIR (2007). The Cosmetic Ingredient Review. Available at: http://www.cir-safety.org/CIR, 2008. Final amended report on the safety assessment of methylparaben, ethylparaben,propylparaben, isopropylparaben, butylparaben, isobutylparaben and benzylparabenas used in cosmetic products. Intern. J. Toxicol. 27 (Suppl. 4), 1 –82.Colditz, G.A., 1994. Hair dye and cancer: reassuring evidence of no association. J. Natl.Cancer Inst. 86, 164 –165.Constable, A., Jonas, D., Cockburn, A., Davi, A., Edwards, G., Hepburn, P., Herouet-Guicheney, C., Knowles, M., Moseley, B., Oberdorfer, R., Samuels, F., 2007. History ofsafe use as applied to the safety assessment of novel foods and foods derived fromgenetically modi ﬁed organisms. Food Chem. Toxicol. 45, 2513 –2525.
Corbett, J.E., Sharma, R.K., Dressler, W.E., 1999. Cosmetic toxicology. In: Marquardt, H.,
genetically modi ﬁed organisms. Food Chem. Toxicol. 45, 2513 –2525.Corbett, J.E., Sharma, R.K., Dressler, W.E., 1999. Cosmetic toxicology. In: Marquardt, H.,Schäfer, S.G., McClellan, R.O., Welsch, F. (Eds.), Toxicology. Academic Press, SanDiego, CA, USA, pp. 899 –918. Chapter 30.Cordle, F., Thompson, G.E., 1981. An epidemiologic assessment of hair dye use. Reg.Toxicol. Pharmacol. 1, 388 –400.Cramer, G.M., Ford, R.A., Hall, R.L., 1978. Estimation of toxic hazard —decision treeapproach. Food Cosm. Toxicol. 16 (3), 255 –276.Czene, K., Tiikaja, S., Hemminki, K, 2003. Cancer risks in hairdressers: assessment ofcarcinogenicity of hair dyes and gels. Int. J. Cancer 105, 108 –112.DeGroot, A.C., 1998. Fatal attractiveness: the shady side of cosmetics. Clin. Dermatol. 16,167–179.DeLeo, V., 2006. P-phenylenediamine. Dermatitis 17 (2), 53 –55.Draize, J.H., 1944. Methods for study of irritation and toxicity of substances applied
topically to the skin and mucous membranes. J. Pharmacol. Experim. Therapeutics82, 377 –390.Dressler, W.E., Appelqvist, T., 2006. Plasma/blood pharmacokinetics after dermalexposure to para-aminophenol or para-phenylenediamine. Food Chem. Toxicol. 44,371–379.Dufour, E.K., Kumaravel, T, Nohynek, G.J., Kirkland, D., Toutain, H., 2006. Clastogenicity,photo-clastogenicity or pseudo-photo-clastogenicity? Genotoxic effects of ZnO inthe dark, in pre-irradiated or simultaneously irradiated Chinese hamster ovarycells. Mut. Res. 607, 215 –224.EC (1997a). Regulation (EC) No. 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Councilof 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients. Of ﬁcialJournal of the European Communities, L 43/1-7, 14 February 1997.EC (1997b). Commission Recommendation 97/618/EC of 29 July 1997 concerning thescienti ﬁc aspects and the presentation of information necessary to support
applications for the placing on the market of novel foods and novel foodingredients and the preparation of initial assessment reports under Regulation(EC) No. 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Of ﬁcial Journal ofthe European Communities, L 253/1-36, 16 September 1997.Edwards, G., 2005. Safety assessment of novel foods and strategies to determine theirsafety in use. Toxicol. Applied Pharmacol. 207, S623 –S627.EFSA, (2004). Panel on Food Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Materials inContact with Food, 2004. Opinion on Flavouring Group FGE.03 Acetals of branched-and straight-chain aliphatic saturated primary alcohols and branched- andstraight-chain saturated aldehydes, and an orthoester of formic acid, from chemicalgroups 1 and 2. Opinion expressed on 7 October 2004.EFSA Scienti ﬁc Committee, 2009. Guidance on safety assessment of botanicals andbotanical preparations intended for use as ingredients in food supplements. EFSAJournal 7 (9), 1249.
Journal 7 (9), 1249.Eisenbrand, G., Pool-Zobel, B., Baker, V., Balls, M., Blaauboer, B.J., Boobis, A., Carere, A.,Kevekordes, S., Lhugenot, J.C., Pieters, R., Kleiner, J., 2002. Methods of in vitrotoxicology. Food. Chem. Toxicol. 40, 193 –236.El Maghraby, G.M., Barry, B.W., Williams, A.C., 2008. Liposomes and skin: from drugdelivery to model membranes. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 34 (4-5), 203 –222.256 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
Ernst, E., 2002. The risk-bene ﬁt proﬁle of commonly used herbal therapies: Ginkgo, StJohn's Wort, Ginseng, Echinacea, Saw Palmetto, and Kava. Annals of InternalMedicines 136, 42 –53.EU (2007). Council Directive of July 27, 1976 on the approximation of the laws of theMember States . relating to cosmetic products. 76/768/EEC. At: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1976L0768:20070508:EN:PDF.EMEA (2005). European Medicines Agency. Committee on herbal medicinal products.Public statement on the risks associated with the use of herbal products containingaristolochia species. EMEA/HMPC/138381/2005.EMEA (2006). European Medicines Agency. Committee on herbal medicinal products .Guideline on non-clinical documentation for herbal medicinal products inapplication for marketing authorisation (bibliographical and mixed applications)and in applications for simpli ﬁed registration. EMEA/HMPC/32116/2005.
EMEA (2008). European Medicines Agency. Committee on herbal medicinal products.Draft assessment report on Hypericum perforatum L., herba. EMEA/HMPC/101303/2008 Corr.EU (2006). Regulation (EC) 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and the EuropeanCouncil of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisa-tion and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European ChemicalsAgency, amending Regulation 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC)No 93/793 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as CouncilDirective 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/677/EEC, 93/105/EEC and 2000/21/EC. Off. J. Eur. Comm. L 369, 30 December 2006, pp. 1 –849.Fabian, E., Landsiedel, R., Ma-Hock, L., Wiench, K., Wohlleben, W., Ravenszwaay, B.,2008. Tissue distribution and toxicity of intravenously administered titaniumdioxide nanoparticles in rats. Arch. Toxicol. 82 (3), 151 –157.
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (2004). US Food and Drug Administration.Available at: http://www.fda.gov/opacom/laws/fdcact/fdctoc.htm .Filipe, P., Silva, J.P., Silva, R., Cirne de Castro, J.L., Marques Gomes, M., Alves, L.C, Santus,R., Pinheiro, T., 2009. Stratum corneum is an effective barrier to TiO2 and ZnOnanoparticle percutaneous absorption. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 22, 266 –275.FDA, 2004. Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 119. February 11, 2004. FinalRule Declaring Dietary Supplements Containing Ephedrine Alkaloids AdulteratedBecause They Present an Unreasonable Risk; Final Rule. Fed. Reg., Volume 69,Number 28, Page 6787-6854.Frawley, J.P., 1967. Scienti ﬁc evidence and common sense as a basis for food-packagingregulations. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 5, 293 –308.Freudenthal, R.I., Stephens, E., Anderson, D.P., 1999. Determining the potential ofaromatic amines to induce cancer of the urinary bladder. Intern. J. Toxicol. 18,353–359.
353–359.Fu, P.P., Chiang, H.M., Xia, Q., Chen, T., Chen, B.H., Yin, J.J., Wen, K.C., Lin, G., Lin, G., Yu, H.,2009. Quality assurance and safety of herbal dietary supplements. J. Environ.Science Health, part C 27, 91 –119.Gago-Dominguez, M., Castelao, J.E., Yuan, J.M., Yu, M.C., Ross, R.K., 2001. Use ofpermanent hair dyes and bladder cancer risk. Int. J. Cancer 91, 575 –579.Gago-Dominguez, M., Bell, D.A., Watson, M.A., Jian-Min, Y., Castelao, J.E., Hein, D.W.,Chan, K.K., Coetzee, G.A., Ross, R.K., Yu, M.C., 2003. Permanent hair dyes and bladdercancer: risk modi ﬁcation by cytochrome P450A2 and N-acetyltransferase 1 and 2.Carcinogenesis 24 (3), 483 –489.Gallicchio, L., Miller, S., Greene, T., Zacur, H., Flaws, J.A., 2009. Cosmetologists andreproductive outcomes. Obstet. Gynecol. 113 (5), 1018 –1025.Garrigue, J.L., Ballantyne, M., Kumaravel, T., Lloyd, M., Nohynek, G.J., Kirkland, D.,Toutain, H., 2006. In vitro genotoxicity of para-phenylenediamine and its N-
monoacetyl and N,N'-diacetyl metabolites. Mut. Res. 608, 58 –71.Goebel, C., Sieber, T., Göttel, O., Chassot, L., Gerberick, F., Aeby, P., 2007. N-acetylation of
monoacetyl and N,N'-diacetyl metabolites. Mut. Res. 608, 58 –71.Goebel, C., Sieber, T., Göttel, O., Chassot, L., Gerberick, F., Aeby, P., 2007. N-acetylation ofaromatic amines antagonizes haptenization. Toxicol. Lett. 172S, S31.Gold, L.S., Manley, N.B., Ames, B.N., 1992. Extrapolation of carcinogenicity betweenspecies: qualitative and quantitative factors. Risk Analysis 12 (4), 579 –588.Golka, K., Prior, V., Blaszkewicz, M., Bolt, H.M., 2002. The enhanced bladder cancersusceptibility of NATY2 slow acetylators towards aromatic amines: a reviewconsidering ethnic differences. Toxicol. Lett. 128, 229–241.Goossens, A., Merckx, L., 1997. L'allergie de contact aux cosmetiques. Allergie etImmunologie 24 (10), 300 –303.Gopee, N.V., Roberts, D.W., Webb, P., Cozart, C.R., Siitonen, P.H., Warbritton, A.R.,Yu, W.W., Colvin, V.L., Walker, N.J., Howard, P.C., 2007. Migration ofintradermally injected quantum dots to sentinel organs in mice. Toxicol. Sci.98 (1), 249 –257.
98 (1), 249 –257.Gopee, N.V., Roberts, D.W., Webb, P., Cozart, C.R., Siitonen, P.H., Latendresse, J.R.,Warbitton, A.R., Yu, W.W., Colvin, V.L., Walker, N.J., Howard, P.C., 2009. Quantitativedetermination of skin penetration of PEG-coated CdSe quantum dots indermabraded but not intact SKH-1 hairless mouse skin. Toxicol. Sci. 111 (1), 37 –48.Goulet, L., Thériault, G., 1991. Stillbirth and chemical exposure of pregnant workers.Scand. J. Work Environ. Health 17, 25 –31.Halliday-Bell, J, Gissler, M, Jaakola, JK., 2009. Work as hairdresser and cosmetologist andadverse pregnancy outcomes. Occup. Med. 59, 180 –184.Hartung, T., 2009. Toxicology for the twenty- ﬁrst century. Nature 460, 208 –212.Herdt-Losavio, ML, Lin, S, Druschel, CM, Hwang, SA, Mauer, MP, Carlson, GA., 2009. Therisk of having a low birth weight or preterm infant among cosmetologists in NewYork Sate. Matern. Child Health J. 13, 90 –97.
York Sate. Matern. Child Health J. 13, 90 –97.Horio, T., 1976. The induction of photocontact sensitivity in guinea pigs without UVBradiation. J. Invest. Dermatol. 67 (5), 591 –593.Hueber-Becker, F., Nohynek, G.J., Meuling, W.A.J., Benech-Kieffer, F., Toutain, H., 2004.Human systemic exposure to a [14C]-paraphenylenendiamine-containing oxida-tive hair dye and correlation of in vitro percutaneous absorption in human and pigskin. Food Chem. Toxicol. 42, 1227 –1236.Hueber-Becker, F., Nohynek, G.J., Dufour, E.K., Meuling, W.J.A., de Bie, A.T.H.J., Toutain,H, Bolt, H.M., 2007. Occupational exposure of hairdressers to a [14C]-para-phenylenediamine-containing oxidative hair dyes: a mass balance study. FoodChem. Toxicol. 45, 160 –169.Hueber-Becker, F., Dufour, E.K., Meuling, W.A.J., deBie, A.T.H.J., Toutain, H., Nohynek, G.J., 2009. Systemic exposure of women of childbearing age to a [14C]-thioglycolate-
containing depilatory product: implications for risk assessment and animal testing.Submitted to Food. Chem. Toxicol. October 2009.IARC (1993). International Agency for the Research of Cancer, World HealthOrganisation. Occupational exposure of hairdressers and barbers and personaluse of hair colorants. Some hair dyes, cosmetic colorants, industrial dyestuffs andaromatic amines. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk toHumans. Volume 57, World Health Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland.ICH (2009). The International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirementsfor Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. Available at: http://www.ich.org/cache/compo/276-254-1.html .ILSI, (2003). The safety assessment of novel foods and concepts to determine theirsafety in use. ILSI Europe Report Series.Jacobi, U., Weigmann, H.J., Ulrich, J., Sterry, W., Lademann, J., 2005. Estimation of the
relative stratum corneum amount removed by tape stripping. Skin Res. Technol. 11(2), 91 –96.JECFA (1998). Safety evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. In: 49thMeeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. World Health
(2), 91 –96.JECFA (1998). Safety evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. In: 49thMeeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. World HealthOrganization (WHO), International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS), Geneva,Switzerland, WHO Food Additives Series, No. 40.Jewell, C., Prusakiewic, J.J., Ackermann, C., Payne, A.N., Fate, G., Voorman, R., Williams, F.M.,2007. Toxciol. Appl. Pharmacol. 225, 221 –228.Jonas, D.A., Antignac, E., Antoine, J.M., Classen, H.G., Huggett, A., Knudsen, I., Mahler, J.,Ockhuizen, T., Smith, M., Teuber, M., Walker, R., De Vogel, P., 1996. The safetyassessment of novel foods. Food Chem. Toxicol. 34, 931 –940.Kadlubar, F., Hammons, G.J., 1986. In: Guengrich, F.P. (Ed.), Mammalian CytochromP-450, Vol. 2. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fl, US, pp. 81 –130.Kawakubo, Y., Merck, H.F., Al Masaoudi, T., Sieben, S., Bloemeke, B., 2000. N-acetylationof paraphenylenediamine in human skin and keratinocytes. J. Pharmacol. Exp.
Therapeutics 292 (1), 150 –155.Kelsh, M.A., Alexander, D.D., Kalmes, R.M., Buf ﬂer, P.A., 2008. Personal use of hair dyesand risk of bladder cancer: a meta-analysis of epidemiologic data. Cancer CausesControl 19 (6), 549 –558.Kersemaekers, W., Roeleveld, N., Zielhus, G., 1995. Reproductive disorders due tochemical exposure among hairdressers. Scand. J. Work Environ. Health 21,325–334.Kersemaekers, W., Roeleveld, N., Zielhus, G., 1997. Reproductive disorders amonghairdressers. Epidemiology 8 (4), 396 –401.Kirkland, D.J., Lawler, S.D., Venitt, S., 1978. Chromosomal damage and hair dyes. Lancet124–128 July 15, 1978.Kirkland, D.J., Honeycombe, J.R., Lawler, S.D., Vernitt, S., Crofton-Sleigh, C., 1981. Sisterchromatid exchanges before and after hair dyeing. Mut. Res. 90, 279 –286.Kirkland, D.J., Dresp, J.H., Marshall, R.R., Baumeister, M., Gerloff, C., Gocke, E., 1992.
Normal chromosome aberration frequencies in peripheral lymphocytes of humanvolunteers exposed to a maximal daily dose of paracetamol in a double blind trial.Mut. Res. 279, 181 –194.Kirkland, D., Beevers, C., 2006. Induction of LacZ mutations in Muta™Mouse candistinguish carcinogenic from non-carcinogenic analogues of diaminotoluenes andnitronaphthalenes. Mut. Res. 608, 88 –96.Kirkland, D., Pfuhler, S., Tweats, D., Aardema, M., et al., 2007. How to reduce falsepositive results when undertaking in vitro genotoxicity testing and thus avoidunnecessary follow-up animal tests: report of an ECVAM Workshop. Mut. Res. 628,31–55.Kleinhans, D, Knoth, W., 1976. Granulomas of the axilla. Dermatologica 152 (3),161–167.Kogevinas, M, Fernandez, F, Garcia-Closas, M, Tardon, A, Garcia-Closas, R, Serra, C,Carrato, A, Castano-Vinyals, G, Yeager, M, Chanock, SJ, Lloreta, J, Rothman, N, Real,FX, Dosemeci, M, Malats, N, Silverman, D., 2006. Hair dye use is not associated with
risk for bladder cancer: evidence from a case-control study in Spain. Eur. J. Cancer42, 1448 –1454.Krasteva, M., Cottin, M., Cristaudo, A., Laine, G., Nohynek, G., Orton, D., Toutain, H.,Severino, V., Wilkinson, J., 2005. Sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of the consumer openskin allergy as a method of prediction of contact dermatitis to hair dyes. Eur. J.Dermatol. 15 (1), 18 –25.Krasteva, M., Bons, B., Ryan, C., Gerberick, F.G., 2009. Consumer allergy to oxidative haircoloring products: epidemiological data in the literature. Dermatitis 20 (3),123–141.Krasteva, M., Bons, B., Tozer, S., Rich, K., Hoting, E., Hollenberg, D., Fuchs, A., Fautz, R.,2010. Contact allergy to hair colouring products. The cosmetovigilance experienceof four companies (2003-2006). Eur. J. Dermatol. 20 (1), 1 –11 E-publication.Kroes, R., Walker, R., 2004. Safety issues of botanicals and botanical preparations infunctional foods. Toxicology 198, 213 –220.
functional foods. Toxicology 198, 213 –220.Kroes, R., Kleiner, J., Renwick, A., 2005. The threshold of toxicological concern concept inrisk assessment. Toxicol. Sci. 86, 226 –230.
functional foods. Toxicology 198, 213 –220.Kroes, R., Kleiner, J., Renwick, A., 2005. The threshold of toxicological concern concept inrisk assessment. Toxicol. Sci. 86, 226 –230.Kroes, R., Renwick, A.G., Feron, V., Galli, C.L., Gibney, M., Greim, H., Guy, R.H., Lhuguenot,J.C., van de Sandt, J.J., 2007. Application of the threshold of toxicological concern(TTC) to the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients. Food Chem. Toxicol. 45 (12),2533 –2562.Lademann, J., Richter, H., Jacobi, U., Patzelt, A., Hueber-Becker, F., Ribaud, C., Benech-Kieffer, F., Dufour, E., Sterry, W., Schaefer, H., Leclaire, J., Toutain, H., Nohynek, G.J.,2008. Human percutaneous absorption of a direct hair dye comparing in vitro and257 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
in vivo results: implications for safety assessment and animal testing. Food Chem.Toxicol. 46, 2214 –2223.Lalko, J., Api, A.M., 2006. Investigation of the dermal sensitization potential of variousessential oils in the local lymph node assay. Food Chem. Toxicol. 44, 739 –746.LaVecchia, C., Tavani, A., 1995. Epidemiological evidence on hair dyes and the risk ofbladder cancer in humans. Eur. J. Cancer Prevention 4, 31 –43.LaVecchia, C., Airodi, L., 1999. Human bladder cancer: epidemiological, pathological andmechanistic aspects. IARC Scienti ﬁc Publication No. 147, 139-157. InternationalAgency for Research of Cancer, Lyon, France.LaVecchia, C., Tavani, A., 2001. Hair dyes and bladder cancer: an update. Eur. J. CancerPrevention 10, 205 –208.Lin, J., Dinney, C.P., Grossman, H.B., Wu, X., 2006. Personal permanent hair dye use is notassociated with bladder cancer risk: evidence from a case-control study. Canc.Epidemiol. Biomarkers 15 (9), 1746 –1749.
Malkey, J.P., Oehme, F.W., 1993. A review of thallium toxicity. Vet. Hum. Toxicol. 35,445–453.Marks, T.A., Gumpta, B.N., Ledoux, T.A., Staples, R.E., 1981. Teratogenic evaluation of 2-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, 4-nitro-phenylenediamine and 2,5-toluenediamine-sulfate in the mouse. Teratology 24, 253 –256.Maouad, M., Fleischer, A.B., Sherertz, E.E., Feldman, S.R., 1999. Signi ﬁcance-prevalenceindex number: a re-interpretation and enhancement of data from the NorthAmerican Contact Dermatitis Group. J. Am. Academ. Dermatol. 41 (4), 573 –576.Marzulli, F.N., Maibach, H.I., 1984. Permeability and reactivity of skin related to age. J.Soc. Cosm. Chem. 35, 95 –102.McDonald, A.D., McDonald, J.M.C., Armstrong, B., Cherry, N.M., Nolin, A.D., Rober, D.,1988. Prematurity and work in pregnancy. Brit. J. Ind. Med. 45, 56 –62.Mavon, A., Miquel, C., Lejeune, O., Payre, B., Moretto, P., 2007. In vitro percutaneousabsorption and in vivo stratum corneum distribution of an organic and a mineral
sunscreen. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 20, 10 –20.Mendelson, J.B., Qi-Zhai, L., Bu-Tian, J., Shu, X.O., Yang, G., Li, H.L., Lee, K.M., Yu, K.,Rothman, N., Gao, Y.T., Zhang, W., Cjow, W.H., 2009. Cancer Sci. 100 (6), 1088 –1091.Meuling, W.A.J., deBie, A.T.H.J. (2009). Consumer exposure to an actual, dark-shadeoxidative hair dye. A [14C]-PPD labelled mass balancestudy. TNO, Zeist, The Netherlands,Report No. 7852. 1 September, 2009 (unpublished). Publication in preparation.MHLW (2007). Ministry of Health Labor and Welfare, Tokyo, Japan. Quasi drugs.Available at: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/links/index.html .Ministry of Health, Pejing, People's Republic of China (2009): Review and approvalprocedures for health related products. Pre-marketing approval cosmetics.Available at: http://www.chinafdc-law.com/ orhttp://www.sda.gov.cn/WS01/CL0055/40731.html .Munro, I.C., Ford, R.A., Kennepohl, E., Sprenger, J.G., 1996. Correlation of structural class
with no-observed-effect levels: a proposal for establishing a threshold of concern.Food Chem. Toxicol. 34 (9), 829 –867.Munro, I.C., Kennepohl, E., 2001. Comparison of estimated daily per capita intakes ofﬂavouring substances with no-observed-effect levels from animal studies. FoodChem. Toxicol. 39, 331 –354.Munro, I.C., Danielewska-Nikiel, B., 2006. Comparison of estimated daily intakes ofﬂavouring substances with no-observed-effect levels. Food Chem. Toxicol. 44,758–809.Munro, I.C., Renwick, A.G., Danielewska-Nikiel, B., 2008. The Threshold of ToxicologicalConcern (TTC) in risk assessment. Toxicol. Lett. 180, 151 –156.Neal, R.A., Doull, J., 1995. The discipline of toxicology. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 24, 151 –153.Nohynek, G.J., Schaefer, H., 2001. Risk and bene ﬁt of organic ultraviolet ﬁlters. Reg.Toxicol. Pharmacol. 33, 285 –299.Nohynek, G.J., Fautz, R., Benech-Kiefer, F., Toutain, H., 2004a. Safety and human healthrisk of hair dyes. Food Chem. Toxicol. 42, 517 –543.
Toxicol. Pharmacol. 33, 285 –299.Nohynek, G.J., Fautz, R., Benech-Kiefer, F., Toutain, H., 2004a. Safety and human healthrisk of hair dyes. Food Chem. Toxicol. 42, 517 –543.Nohynek, G.J., Skare, J.A., Meuling, W.JA., Hein, D.W., deBie, A.T.H.J., Toutain, H., 2004b.Urinary acetylated metabolites and N-acetyltransferase-2 genotype in humansubjects treated with a para-phenylenediamine-containing oxidative hair dye.Food Chem. Toxicol. 42, 1885 –1891.Nohynek, G.J., Kirkland, D., Marzin, D., Toutain, H., Leclerc-Ribaud, C., Jinnai, H., 2004c.An assessment of the genotoxicity and human health risk of topical use of kojic acid[5-hydroxy-2-(hydroxymethyl)-4H-pyran-4-one]. Food Chem. Toxicol. 42,93–105.Nohynek, G.J., Duche, D., Garrigue, A., Meunier, P.A., Toutain, H., Leclaire, J., 2005. Underthe skin: biotransformation of para-aminophenol and para-phenylenediaminein reconstructed human skin and human hepatocytes. Toxicol. Lett. 158,196–212.
196–212.Nohynek, G.J., Meuling, W.J.A., Vaes, W.J.H., Lawrence, R.S., Shapiro, S., Schulte, S.,Steiling, W., Bausch, J., Gerber, E, Sasa, H., Nau, H., 2006. Repeated topical treatment,in contrast to single oral doses, with vitamin A-containing preparations does notaffect plasma concentrations of retinol, retinyl esters or retinoic acids in femalevolunteers of child-bearing age. Toxicol. Lett. 63, 65 –76.Nohynek, G.J., Lademann, J., Ribaud, C., Roberts, M.S., 2007. Grey goo on the skin?Nanotechnology, cosmetic and sunscreen safety. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 37, 251 –277.Nohynek, G.J., Dufour, E.K., Roberts, M.S., 2008. Nanotechnology, cosmetics and theskin: is there a health risk. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 21, 136 –149.Nortier, J.L., Muniz Martinez, M.-C., Schmeiser, H.H., Arlt, V.M., Bieler, C.A., Petein, M.,Depierreux, M.F., De Paw, L., Abramowicz, D., Vereerstraeten, P., Vanherwegheim, J.L.,2000. Urothelial carcinoma associated with the use of a Chinese herb ( Aristolochia
fanghi ). New Eng. J. Med. 342 (23), 1686 –1692.NTP (1978). US National Toxicology Program. Bioassay of 2,4-Diaminoanisole Sulfatefor Possible Carcinogenicity, NTP Report TR-84.NTP (2008). National Toxicology Program. Aristolochic acids. Reports on carcinogens.Fed. Register Vol. 73, 84, April 30, 2008.OECD, 2007. Guidance on Grouping of Chemicals (no. 80). ENV/JM/MONO(2007)28.PAP (2005). 1-Hydroxy-4-aminobenzen e. Published and unpublished studiescontained in the industry submission IV to the EU SCCNFP. Reviewed in the EUSCCP Opinion of 15 March, 2005. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/04_sccp/ .Pauwels, M., Rogiers, V., 2004. Safety evaluation of cosmetics in the EU: reality andchallenges for the toxicologist. Toxicol. Lett. 151 (1), 7–17.Pauwels, M., Dejaegher, B., Heyden, Y.V., Rogiers, V., 2009. Critical analysis of theSCCNFP/SCCP safety assessment of cosmetic ingredients (2000 –2006). Food Chem.Toxicol. 47, 898 –905.
Toxicol. 47, 898 –905.Pauwels, M., Rogiers, V., 2010. Human health safety evaluation of cosmetics in the EY:a legally imposed challenge to science. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 243 (2), 256 –269.Pepelko, W.E., Withey, J.R., 1985. Methods for route-to-route extrapolation of dose.Toxicol. Ind. Health 1 (4), 153 –170.Pinheiro, T., Allon, J., Alves, L.C., Filipe, P., Silva, J.N., 2007. The in ﬂuence of corneocytestructure on the interpretation of permeation pro ﬁles of nanoparticles across theskin. Nuclear Instrum Methods Phys. Res. B 260, 119 –123.Prentice, D. (2002). Preclinical Safety Consultants, Ettingen, Switzerland, personalcommunication, April 2002.Preston, R.J., Skare, J.A., Aardema, M.J. (2009). A review of biomonitoring studiesmeasuring genotoxicity in humans exposed to hair dyes. Mutagenesis Elelectr.advance access: doi: 10.1093/mutage/gep044.Prusakiewic, J.J., Ackermann, C., Vorrman, R., 2006. Comparison of skin esterase
activities from different species. Pharm. Res. 23 (7), 1517 –1524.
advance access: doi: 10.1093/mutage/gep044.Prusakiewic, J.J., Ackermann, C., Vorrman, R., 2006. Comparison of skin esteraseactivities from different species. Pharm. Res. 23 (7), 1517 –1524.Rojanapo, W., Kupradinum, P., Tepsuwan, A., Chutimataewin, S., Tanyakaset, M., 1986.Carcinogenicity of an oxidation product of p-phenylenediamine. Carcinogenesis 7(12), 1997 –2002.Re, T.A., Mooney, D., Antignac, E., Dufour, E., Bark, I, Srinivasan, V., Nohynek, G., 2009.Application of the threshold of toxicological concern approach for the safetyevaluation of calendula ﬂower ( Calendula of ﬁcinalis ) petals and extracts used incosmetic and personal care products. Food Chem. Toxicol. 47, 1246 –1254.Renwick, A.G., 2004. Toxicology databases and the concept of thresholds oftoxicological concern as used by the JECFA for the safety evaluation of ﬂavouringagents. Toxicol. Lett. 149, 223 –234.Redlick, F., DeKoven, J., 2007. Allergic contact dermatitis to parapàhenylenediamine in
hair dye after sensitization from black henna tattoos: a report of 6 cases. J. Can.Med. Assoc. 176 (4), 445 –446.Rhen, L., 1895. Blasengeschwülste bei Anilinarbeitern. Archiv für klinische Chirurgie 50,588–600.Rollison, D.E., Helzlsouer, K.J., Pinney, S.M., 2005. Personal hair dye use and cancer: asystematic literature review and evaluation of exposure assessment in studiespublished since 1992. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health B Crit. Rev. 9 (5), 413 –439.Ross, J.H., Dong, M.H., Krieger, R.I., 2000. Conservatism in pesticide exposureassessment. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 31, 53 –88.Rousseaux, C.G., Schachter, H., 2003. Regulatory issues concerning the safety, ef ﬁcacyand quality of herbal remedies. Birth Defects Res. (Part B) 68, 505 –510.Rutkowski, J.V., Ferm, V.H., 1982. Comparison of the teratogenic effects of the isomericforms of aminophenol in the Syrian golden hamster. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 63,204–269.
204–269.Rylander, L., Axmon, A., Toren, K., Albin, M., 2002. Reproductive outcome among femalehairdressers. J. Occup. Environm. Med. 59, 517 –522.Sardas, S., Aygün, N., Karakaya, A.E., 1997. Genotoxicity studies on professional haircolorists exposed to oxidation hair dyes. Mutation Res. 394, 153 –161.Sasaki, Y.F., Fujikawa, K., Ishida, K., Kawamura, N., Nishikawa, Y., Ohra, S., Satoh, M.,Madarame, H., Ueno, S., Susa, S., Matsusaka, N., Tsuda, S., 1999. The alkaline singlecell gel electrophoresis assay with mouse multiple organs: results with 30 aromaticamines evaluated by IARC and US NTP. Mutation Res. 440, 1 –18.SCC, 1991. Opinion of the EU Scientiﬁc Committee of Cosmetology concerning 1,4-diaminobenzene, Colipa No. A 7, 4 October 1991.SCCNFP, 2002. The Scienti ﬁc Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non-Food ProductsIntended for Consumers: Opinion concerning p-Phenylenediamine (Colipa A 7)adopted by the SCCNFP during the 19th plenary meeting, 27 February 2002.
Available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sccp/outcome_en.html .SCCNFP, 2003. The Scienti ﬁc Committee on Cosmetic Products and Non-Food ProductsIntended for Consumers. Opinion on Basioc Criteria for the In Vitri Assessment ofDermal Absorption of Cosmetic Ingredients. Adopted by the SCCNFP, 20 October,2003. Available at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sccp/outcome_en.html/ .SCCP, 2006. The SCCP's notes of guidance for the testing of cosmetic ingredients andtheir safety evaluation. 6th Revision. 19 December 2006. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees .SCCP, 2006a. Scienti ﬁc Committee on Consumer Products. Opinion on p-Phenylene-diamine, COLIPA No. A7. 10 October, 2006. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/ .SCCP, 2009. Position statement on genotoxicity/mutagenicity testing of cosmeticingredients without animal experiments. 21 Jnauary 2009. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/ .
europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/ .SCF, Scienti ﬁc Committee for Food, 1997. Opinion on The Assessment of Novel Foods:
europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/ .SCF, Scienti ﬁc Committee for Food, 1997. Opinion on The Assessment of Novel Foods:Food Science and Techniques: Reports of The Scienti ﬁc Committee for Food(fortieth series). Directorate-General Industry, European Commission. Available at:http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/ .Schaefer, H., Redelmayer, T.E. (1996). Skin Barrier. Principles of PercutaneousAbsorption. 118-128 and 191-193. Eds. Schaefer H and Redelmayer TE. KargerAG, Basel, Switerland.Schauer, U.M.D., Völkel, W., Heusener, A., Colnot, T., Broschard, T.H., von Landenberg, F.,Dekant, W., 2006. Kinetics of 3-(4-methylbenzilidene)camphor in rats and humansafter dermal application. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 216, 339 –346.258 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
Schilter, B., Andersson, C., Anton, R., Constable, A., Kleiner, J., O'Brien, J., Renwick, A.G.,Korver, O., Smit, F., Walker, R., 2003. Guidance for the safety assesment ofbotanicals and botanical preparations for use in food and food supplements. FoodChem. Toxicol. 41, 1625 –1649.Schnuch, A., Geier, J., Uter, P.J., 1997. National rates and regional differences insensitisation to allergens of the standard series. Contact Dermatitis 37,200–209.Schnuch, A., Lessmann, H., Frosch, P.J., Uter, W, 2008. Para-phenylenediamine: theproﬁle of an important contact allergen. Brit. J. Dermatol. 159 (2), 379 –386.Schnuch, A. (2009). Data presented during a recent BfR symposium on the safetyof hair dyes. BfR (Federal Institute for Risk Assessment) Berlin Germany, 15October, 2009. Summary published at the BfR web site: http://www.bfr.bund.de/cd/31861 .Selkirk, J.K., Soward, S.M., 1993. Abstracts from long-term cancer studies reported by
the National Toxicology Program of the National Institute of EnvironmentalHealth Sciences from 1976 to 1982. Environm. Health Perspect. 101 (Suppl. 1)295 pp. April 1993.Shelley, W.B., Hurley, H., 1958. The allergic origin of zirconium deodorant granulomas.Brit. J. Dermatol. 70 (3), 75 –101.Skare, J.A., Nohynek, G.J., Powrie, R., Goebel, C., Pfuhler, S., Goebel, C, Duche, D., Zeller, A.,Aardema, M., Hu, T., Meuling, W.J.A., 2007. Metabolism of oxidative hair dyes: anoverview of in vivo ,in vitro and clinical studies. Toxicol. Lett. 172S, S31.Skare, J.A., Hewitt, N.J., Doyle, E., Powrie, R., Elcombe, C. (2009). Metabolite screening ofaromatic amine hair dyes using in vitro hepatic models. Xenobiotica, in print.Smith, R.L., Adams, T.B., Cohen, S.M., Doull, J., Feron, V.J., Goodman, J.I., Hall, R.L.,Marnett, L.J., Portoghese, P.S., Waddell, W.J., Wagner, B.M., 2004. Safety evaluationof natural ﬂavour complexes. Toxicol Lett. 149 (1-3), 197 –207.
Smith, R.L., Cohen, S.M., Doull, J., Feron, V.J., Goodman, J.I., Marnett, L.J., Portoghese, P.S.,Waddell, W.J., Wagner, B.M., Hall, R.L., Higley, N.A., Lucas-Gavin, C., Adams, T.B.,2005. A procedure for the safety evaluation of natural ﬂavor complexes used asingredients in food: essential oils. Food Chem. Toxicol. 43 (3), 345 –363.Spengler, J, Bracher, M., 1990. Toxicological tests and health risk assessment ofoxidative hair dye mixtures. Cosmetics and Toiletries 105 (2), 67 –76.Stanley, L.A., Skare, J.A., Doyle, E., Powrie, R., D'Angelo, D.D., Elcombe, C.R., 2005. Lack ofevidence for metabolism of p-phenylenediamine by human hepatic cytochromeP450 enzymes. Toxicology 210, 147 –157.Stern, S.T., McNeil, S.E., 2008. Nanotechnology safety concerns revisited. Toxicol. Sci.101 (1), 4 –21.Takkouche, B., Etminan, M., Montes-Martinez, A., 2005. Personal use of hair dyes andrisk of cancer. A meta-analysis. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 293 (20), 2516 –2525.
TGA (2009). Therapeutic Goods Administration, Department of Health and Ageing,Australia. A review of the scienti ﬁc literature on the safety of nanoparticulatetitanium dioxide and zinc oxide. July 2009. Available at: http://tga.gov.au/ .Theogaraj, E., Riley, S., Hughes, L., Maier, M, Kirkland, D., 2007. An investigation of thephoto-clastogenic potential of ultra ﬁne titanium dioxide. Mut. Res. 634 (1-2),205–219.Tregar, R.T., Dirnhuber, P., 1962. The mass of keratin removed from the stratumcorneum by stripping with adhesive tape. J. Invest. Dermatol. 38, 375 –381.US FDA (2007). US Food and Drug Administration. Center for Food Safety and AppliedNutrition. Cosmetics. FDA Policy and Authority. Available at: http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/cos-pol.html .Uter, W., Lessmann, H., Geier, J, Schnuch, A., 2007. Contact allergy to hairdressingallergens in female hairdressers and clients —current data from the IVDK 2003-2006. J. Dtsch. Dermatol. Ges. 5 (11), 993 –1001.
2006. J. Dtsch. Dermatol. Ges. 5 (11), 993 –1001.Verdier-Sevrain, S., Bonte, F., 2007. Skin hydration: a review of its molecularmechanism. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 6 (2), 75 –82.
2006. J. Dtsch. Dermatol. Ges. 5 (11), 993 –1001.Verdier-Sevrain, S., Bonte, F., 2007. Skin hydration: a review of its molecularmechanism. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 6 (2), 75 –82.Völkel, W., Colnot, T., Schauer, U.M.D., Broschard, T.H., Dekant, W., 2006. Toxicokineticsand biotransformation of 3-(4-methylbenzilidene)camphor in rats after oraladministration. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 216, 331 –338.WHO, 1987. Principles for the safety assessment of food additives and contaminants infood. No. 70. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.WHO, 1995. Application of the principles of substantial equivalence to the safetyevaluation of foods or food componen ts from plants derived by modernbiotechnology. Report of a WHO Workshop. World Health Organisation, Geneva,Switzerland.Wilkes, M.F., Woollen, B.H., Marsh, J.R., Batten, P.L., Chester, G., 1993. Biologicalmonitoring for pesticide exposure —the role of human volunteer studies. Int. Arch.Occup. Environ. Health 65 (Suppl. 1), S189 –192.
Occup. Environ. Health 65 (Suppl. 1), S189 –192.Wilkinson, JD, Shaw, S., 2005. Skin tests, In: Bouillon, C. (Ed.), 2nd edition. The Scienceof Hair Care. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York and Basel.Zeiger, E., 1998. Identi ﬁcation of rodent carcinogens and non-carcinogens using genetictoxicity tests: premises, promises and performance. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 28,85–95.Zviak, C., Millequant, J., 2005. Hair coloring , In: Bouillon, C., Wilkinson, J. (Eds.),2nd ed. The Science of Hair Care. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, US,pp. 251 –313.259 G.J. Nohynek et al. / Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 243 (2010) 239 –259
