Nutrition and aging skin: sugar and glycationF. William Danby, MD⁎Department of Medicine, Section of Dermatology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03104, USAAbstract The effect of sugars on aging skin is governed by the simple act of covalently cross-linking twocollagen fibers, which renders both of them incapable of easy repair. Glucose and fructose link the aminoacids present in the collagen and elastin that support the dermis, producing advanced glycation end productsor“AGEs. ”This process is accelerated in all body tissues when sugar is elevated and is further stimulatedby ultraviolet light in the skin. The effect on vascular, renal, retinal, coronary, and cutaneous tissues is beingdefined, as are methods of reducing the glycation load through careful diet and use of supplements.© 2010 Published by Elsevier Inc.IntroductionThe processes that support life require nutrients. Appro-priate amounts of carbohydrate, fat, and protein, plus
vitamins and minerals, are essential. Despite present guide-lines, there remain doubts about the amounts of each thatought to be input to achieve the optimal effects upon theorganism. The important side of the equation deals withoutput, or clinically, the outcome, whether dealing withclinical dermatology, surgery, or cosmetics.Outcome analysis is a swiftly evolving field, and much ofwhat is known about outcome from diet and dietarymanipulation is inadequate, inaccurate, outdated, or rapidlybeing rethought. Consider the swiftly evolving recommen-dations for vitamin D3dosing that have ramped up from 400IU to more than 5000 IU in less than 2 years.1Fortunately, publications continue to appear that addresssubjects that arise daily in office practice. The subject wasrecently reviewed by Logan, Rubin, and Levy,2to whom Iowe a debt of gratitude for putting their spotlight on the effectof sugars on aging skin, a presently evolving area of concern.Glycation: the concept
The most important concept in understanding therelationship of sugars to aging is that the simple act ofcross-linking two collagen fibers will render both of themincapable of being repaired through the usual process ofremodeling. The more cross-linking that occurs, fromwhatever cause, the greater the limit on the potential forrepair and maintenance. Because the appearance of youthdepends on maintenance of youthful, flexible, and repairablecollagen fibers, cross-linking should be avoided wheneverpossible. It is not just external appearance that suffers fromcross-linking, however, which is why all of us should beaware of the overall affect of sugar on our lifespans as well ason our aging skins.The problem derives from a process called glycation. Thisis a covalent bonding process that links, using glucose andfructose, the amino acids present in the collagen and elastinthat support the dermis. Whereas collagen and elastin are
normally linked in a pattern and a manner that allows them tobe repaired, glycation adds cross-links that interfere with therepair mechanism.Elevated amounts of sugar in the North American dietwere noted as early as 1942. Urbach and Lentz in 1945showed a correlation between a diet high in sugar andelevated levels of sugar in the blood and skin, and also⁎Tel.: +1 603 494 5181; fax: +1 603 647 0017.E-mail address: fwdljm@tds.net .0738-081X/$ –see front matter © 2010 Published by Elsevier Inc.doi:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.03.018Clinics in Dermatology (2010) 28, 409–411
illustrated that a low-sugar diet lowered the sugar levelwithin the skin.3More importantly, they discovered that alarge percentage of the sugar was protein-bound. It is thisprotein-bound sugar that is involved in glycation, the resultbeing a complex referred to as an advanced glycation endproduct or an AGE.Glycation: the scienceThe process of glycation likely starts quite early in lifeand is well established by our late 20s. Glycated collagenaccumulates at a rate of 3.7% yearly,4a percentage that willvary according to diet. Ultraviolet exposure also increasescross-linking in the skin,5,6and cross-links of the proteins ofantioxidant enzymes further decrease our natural defensesagainst free radicals.The model for the damage done to dermis is, notunexpectedly, diabetes. The development of glycatedcollagen is accelerated in diabetes, but tight glycemic controlcan drop glycated collagen formation by 25% in 4 months.Because it is almost impossible to repair glycated collagen
cross-links, prevention is the prime defense, and the earlierpreventive activity is begun, the better. The problem is thatdiet is the major source not only of sugars such as glucoseand fructose7but also of pre-formed AGEs, such as thoseproduced by heat. The golden brown on a crust of bread andthe skin on the Thanksgiving turkey contain AGEs, whichtend to be formed at high temperatures in the absence ofwater. Grilling, frying, deep-fat frying, or roasting producehigh levels of AGEs, whereas cooking processes involvingwater produce orders of less magnitude ( Table 1 ).8Preformed dietary AGEs are now known to be absorbedand capable of entering the circulation where they may reactwith cellular and extracellular components, thereby increas-ing the AGE burden of aging. Food-derived AGEs caninduce protein cross-linking, inflammation, and intracellularoxidative stress, just as surely as the damaging reactionsbrought on by excess dietary sugar.
For a clinical illustration, one has only to look at thesmooth skin of an elderly Japanese person and consider thatthis represents 70 to 80 years of eating poached, boiled,stewed, and steamed food, prepared using these predomi-nantly water-based Asian cooking practices.9Glycation: the impactConsider that the long-term results obtained withcosmetic procedures are likely to be much better if healingis not compromised by a diet high in preformed AGEs anddietary sugar. This is something to suggest when advisingpatients of their responsibility for postoperative care, acomplementary adjunct to the admonition to use trulyeffective broadspectrum sunscreens.In addition to their effect on collagen, enzymes, and otherproteins, AGEs also interfere with the normal human intestinalmicroflora.10Glycated food components in the gut cantranslate, it is believed, into lower levels of the “good bacteria ”in the gut.11This, in turn, leads to compromised absorption of
nutrients and phytochemicals that have AGE-inhibitingproperties. Further, lowering AGEs in the diet can help byreducing systemic oxidative stress and inflammation.12The other side of the question looks at diet as prevention ofAGE-induced problems13(Table 1 ). So far, nothing dietary hasbeen found to break up, extract, unhitch, or eliminate the AGE-induced adducts.14Some compounds, however, can actuallyinhibit the production of AGE; in particular, cinnamon, cloves,oregano, and allspice help protect against fructose-inducedAGE formation. Ginger, garlic, α-lipoic acid, carnitine, taurine,carnosine, some flavonoids, and benfotiamine have also madethe list, each working through one or more of several differentmechanisms.15,16Expect to see these compounds marketed assupplements and topical cosmeceuticals with a view towardsenhancing and maintaining the benefits of cosmetic proceduresor preventing (or just slowing) the effects of AGEs on ouraging skin, and that of our patients.
Glycation: at depth
enhancing and maintaining the benefits of cosmetic proceduresor preventing (or just slowing) the effects of AGEs on ouraging skin, and that of our patients.Glycation: at depthOne last consideration is that glycation does not affect justthe superficial areas of the body (ie, the skin). In a series ofreports during the past several years, a team from theNetherlands has outlined the threat posed by increased levelsof glycation to patients with diabetic polyneuropathy,17renalfailure,18,19atherosclerotic heart disease,20macular degen-eration of the retina, and lupus erythematosus.They have shown that relative risks of future adverseevents can be estimated by measuring the AGEs in the skin.This can be quantified by measuring the fluorescence inducedfrom the AGEs in the skin in response to a single pulse of lightof a known wavelength.21This completely noninvasivetechnique22works on Fitzpatrick I to IV skin types and showspromise of being integrated into clinical medicine.
Where from here?Epidemic obesity, diabetes, acne, hidradenitis suppur-ativa, and the numerous cutaneous abnormalities associatedTable 1 Low vs high glycation end-products (AGE) cookingFood Low AGEcookingValue High AGE cooking ValueRice Boiled 1 Crispy rice cereal 220Potato Boiled 1 Fast food fries 87Egg Boiled 1 Fried 62Fish Salmonsushi1 Fried and breaded Atlanticwhiting16BakedgoodsToastedbagel1 Biscotti 30410 F.W. Danby
with cardiometabolic syndrome X —all are sugar andinsulin-resistance related. They are also rooted, quite often,in low-grade systemic inflammation and oxidative stress. Byreducing inflammation and the burden of oxidative stress, thepotential collateral health benefits of a diet low in simplesugars and dietary AGEs are many; therefore, dietary adviceneeds to be part of our everyday discussion with our patients,whether medical, surgical, or cosmetic.References1. Holick MF, Chen TC, Lu Z, Sauter E. Vitamin D and skin physiology: aD-lightful story. J Bone Miner Res 2007;22(suppl 2):V28-V33.2. Logan AC, Rubin MG, Levy P. Your skin, younger. Naperville, IL:Sourcebooks Inc.; 2010.3. Urbach E, Lentz JW. Carbohydrate metabolism and the skin. ArchDermatol Syphilol 1945;52:301-16.4. Corstjens H, Dicanio D, Muizzuddin N, et al. Glycation associatedskin autofluorescence and skin elasticity are related to chronological
age and body mass index of healthy subjects. Exp Gerontol 2008;43:663-7.5. Yamauchi M, Prisayanh P, Haque Z, Woodley DT. Collagen cross-linking in sun-exposed and unexposed sites of aged human skin. JInvest Dermatol 1991;97:938-41.6. Berge U, Behrens J, Rattan SI. Sugar-induced premature aging andaltered differentiation in human epidermal keratinocytes. Ann N YAcad Sci 2007;1100:524-9.7. Duffey KJ, Popkin BM. High-fructose corn syrup: is this what's fordinner? Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1722S-32S.8. O'Brien J, Morrissey PA. Nutritional and toxicological aspects of theMaillard browning reaction in foods. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 1989;28:211-48.9. Tsukahara K, Sugata K, Osanai O, et al. Comparison of age-relatedchanges in facial wrinkles and sagging in the skin of Japanese, Chineseand Thai women. J Dermatol Sci 2007;47:19-28.10. Tuohy KM, Hinton DJ, Davies SJ, Crabbe MJ, Gibson GR, Ames JM.
Metabolism of Maillard reaction products by the human gut microbiota—implications for health. Mol Nutr Food Res 2006;50:847-57.11. Mills DJ, Tuohy KM, Booth J, et al. Dietary glycated protein modulatesthe colonic microbiota towards a more detrimental composition inulcerative colitis patients and non-ulcerative colitis subjects. J ApplMicrobiol 2008;105:706-14.12. Peppa M, Uribarri J, Vlassara H. Aging and glycoxidant stress.Hormones (Athens) 2008;7:123-32.13. Saraswat M, Reddy PY, Muthenna P, Reddy GB. Prevention of non-enzymic glycation of proteins by dietary agents: prospects foralleviating diabetic complications. Br J Nutr 2009;101:1714-21.14. Furber JD. Extracellular glycation crosslinks: prospects for removal.Rejuvenation Res 2006;9:274-8.15. Thirunavukkarasu V, Nandhini AT, Anuradha CV. Fructose diet-induced skin collagen abnormalities are prevented by lipoic acid. ExpDiabetes Res 2004;5:237-44.16. Dearlove RP, Greenspan P, Hartle DK, Swanson RB, Hargrove JL.
Inhibition of protein glycation by extracts of culinary herbs and spices. JMed Food 2008;11:275-81.17. Meerwaldt R, Hartog JW, Graaff R, et al. Skin autofluorescence, ameasure of cumulative metabolic stress and advanced glycation endproducts, predicts mortality in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol2005;16:3687-93.18. Uribarri J, Tuttle KR. Advanced glycation end products andnephrotoxicity of high-protein diets. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2006;1:1293-9.19. Koschinsky T, He CJ, Mitsuhashi T, et al. Orally absorbed reactiveglycation products (glycotoxins): an environmental risk factor indiabetic nephropathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:6474-9.20. Mulder DJ, van Haelst PL, Graaff R, Gans RO, Zijlstra F, Smit AJ. Skinautofluorescence is elevated in acute myocardial infarction and isassociated with the one-year incidence of major adverse cardiac events.Neth Heart J 2009;17:162-8.21. Stirban A, Nandrean S, Negrean M, Koschinsky T, Tschoepe D. Skin
autofluorescence increases postprandially in human subjects. DiabetesTechnol Ther 2008;10:200-5.22. Odetti PR, Borgoglio A, Rolandi R. Age-related increase of collagen
autofluorescence increases postprandially in human subjects. DiabetesTechnol Ther 2008;10:200-5.22. Odetti PR, Borgoglio A, Rolandi R. Age-related increase of collagenfluorescence in human subcutaneous tissue. Metabolism 1992;41:655-8.411 Nutrition and aging skin
