Review on Labisia pumila (Kacip Fatimah): Bioactivephytochemicals and skin collagen synthesis promoting herb ☆Lee Suan Chua ⁎, Sze Yean Lee, Norhanisah Abdullah, Mohamad Roji SarmidiMetabolites Pro ﬁling Laboratory, Institute of Bioproduct Development, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysiaarticle info abstractAvailable online 10 April 2012 Labisia pumila is a traditional herb widely used as post-partum medication for centuries. Recently,extensive researches have been carried out on the phytochemical identification, biological andtoxicological studies for the herb. Phytochemicals found in the herbal extract showed highantioxidant properties, which were essential for various pharmacological activities. The sig-nificant findings are anti-estrogenic deficiency and -immunodeficiency diseases. Another findingthat has considerable impact on natural product research is the contribution of L. pumila in
promoting skin collagen synthesis. The performance of the herb as anti-aging agent due to naturalaging process and accelerated by UV radiation was reviewed critically.© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Keywords:Labisia pumilaPhytochemicalCollagen synthesisPhotoagingContents1. Introduction to Labisia pumila .............................................. 13212. Phytochemicals and pharmacological properties of L. pumila ................................ 13232.1. Phenolic compounds and antioxidant activities .................................. 13232.2. Saponin and antimicrobial activity ........................................ 13242.3. Phytoestrogen and anti-estrogenic de ﬁciency diseases ............................... 13253. Toxicological studies on L. pumila ............................................ 13274. Rationale of L. pumila as collagen synthesis promoting herb ................................ 1328
4.1. Common active ingredients for skin care ..................................... 13294.2. Relationship between photoaging and skin collagen ................................ 13294.3. L. pumila as collagen synthesis promoter ..................................... 13304.4. Photoaging mechanism by UV radiation ...................................... 13315. Future perspectives of L. pumila ............................................. 13326. Conclusion ....................................................... 1332References ......................................................... 13321. Introduction to Labisia pumilaLabisia pumila , locally known as Kacip Fatimah, is thequeen of the herbs in Malaysia. It is a genus of small woodyand leafy plants of the Myrsinaceae family that can widelyFitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335☆The manuscript is a contribution for the special issue on the 70th birthdayof Prof. Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman.
of Prof. Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman.⁎Corresponding author. Tel.: +60 197214378; fax: +60 75569706.E-mail address: lschua@ibd.utm.my (L.S. Chua).13241324132513261328132913301330133113321333133313330367-326X/$ –see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j. ﬁtote.2012.04.002Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirectFitoterapiajournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fitote
be found in the tropical forest of South East Asian countries.Fig. 1 is the photo of the mature plant taken from thegarden of Institute of Bioproduct Development, UniversitiTeknologi Malaysia. To the natives, this plant is also knownas Selusuh Fatimah, Rumput Siti Fatimah, Akar Fatimah,Kachit Fatimah, Kachip Patimah, Pokok Pinggang, RumputPalis, Tadah Matahari, Mata Pelandok Rimba, Bunga BelangkasHutan and many more.According to Sunarno [1], there are eight varieties ofL. pumila distributed in Malaysia. Of the varieties, L. pumilavar. pumila , var. alata and var. lanceolata are widely foundand studied so far. These varieties can be differentiated fromeach other by their petiole and leaf characteristics. L. pumila var.alata has a winged petiole and red veins, while var. pumila has amarginate petiole and ovate leaf blade shape, and var. lanceolatahas a long and non-winged petiole. The var. alata is widely
used in traditional medicine preparation because it is the mostcommonly encountered variety in Malaysia [2].L. pumila is traditionally used by generations of Malaywomen by decoction. It is believed that the decoction drinkcan induce and facilitate childbirth, as well as being a postpartum medication to help contract the birth channel, to tonethe abdominal muscles and to regain body strength [3,4] .Till now, it is taken by local people to maintain a healthyfemale reproductive system, to treat menstrual irregularities,as well as to enhance sexual function. Although L. pumila iscommonly used by female, male from several ethnic groupsin Sarawak, Malaysia consumed it to maintain and increasestamina [5]. Other traditional uses of the plant include treat-ment for dysentery, rheumatism, gonorrhea and excessivegas elimination from the body [3,6] . It was also reported that
plants from the same genus (Myrsinaceae) are being used totreat respiratory tract infections and menstrual disorders [3].Owing to the high demand and relatively slow growth rateof the plant, several researchers have studied new propagationtechniques to grow the plant in larger scale and in shorter time.In vitro seed germination and shoot proliferation investigatedby Hartinie and Jualang [7]were able to grow a large numberof seedlings in a relatively short time (5 weeks). The presence of6-benzylaminopurine (BAP), sucrose and cytokinin in Murashigeand Skoogs (MS) media are the key elements affecting thegrowth rate. However, the in vitro plantlets were facedwith the difficulty in growing under the external harshconditions, especially by microbial infection. Jaafar et al. [8]reported that this herb was very sensitive to the microclimateconditions, namely sunlight, temperature and relative humid-ity. The growing profile of the herb was monitored under both
greenhouse and open field conditions. In open field, mostplants were expected to receive more sunlight than theyneeded for photosynthesis. Hence, the high amount of sunlighttriggered the production of NADPH and ATP higher thanrequired. Consequently, the accumulation of redox energydecreased the plastoquinone pool and inhibited the watersplitting complex, which led to the inactivation of Photosys-tem, PSII. This phenomenon is known as photoinhibition.Plants grown in greenhouse encountered less photoinhibitionthan plants in open field condition. It was found that L. pumilavar. alata and var. pumila have better acclimatization than var.lanceolata under both growing conditions [9].A sa n o t h e ralternative, Rozihawati et al. [1 0]reported the significantlysatisfying result in cultivating the herb in sand, sawdust andmixture of sand and sawdust media, with and without thesupply of hormone treatment by using the cut leaf, petiole orstem from the plant.
stem from the plant.The aim of this article is to provide a comprehensivereview on L. pumila , which covers from the herbal traditional
supply of hormone treatment by using the cut leaf, petiole orstem from the plant.The aim of this article is to provide a comprehensivereview on L. pumila , which covers from the herbal traditionalusage, phytochemicals that have been identified till to date,and their pharmacological applications. The discussion has alsoextended to the topical application, which has been provenfor its effectiveness practically and in cell based assays. How-ever, the availability of the scientific information regardingthis herb is very limited and not in proper documentation forreference. Therefore, this review is likely to provide a platformfor those who are interested to further study the herb, eitherFig. 1. Photo of Labisia pumila var. alata .1323 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
for phytochemical profiling, for pharmacological investigationor for anti-aging purpose. This platform is crucial as a guidelinesince many positive results have been reported on the herb,which might be beneficial for a new drug discovery in the nearfuture.2. Phytochemicals and pharmacological propertiesofL. pumilaRecently, the exploitation of the herbal plant for com-mercial demand is gradually increasing. Its popularity can beseen from the availability of commercial products derivedfrom the herbs, either in the form of capsules or canneddrinks in the market, especially in Malaysia and Indonesia.The increasing trend is most probably due to the awarenessof public to use natural product as foods, nutraceuticals orfunctional foods to maintain body health and treat illness.The preference of natural product derived products is gettingto be significant because of the negative side effects causedby chemically synthetic drugs. Therefore, numerous scientific
researches on L. pumila are carrying out, especially for theidentification of bioactive phytochemicals that contribute tothe pharmacological properties. Table 1 lists the identifiedphytochemicals and reported biological activities for the herbtill to date. The chemical structures of the phytochemicals arepresented in Fig. 2 .2.1. Phenolic compounds and antioxidant activitiesTo our knowledge, a few phytochemicals have been iden-tified from the extract of L. pumila . Most of them are phenoliccompounds, including phenolic acids and flavonoids as reportedby Chua et al. [11],K a r i m ie ta l . [12,13] and Norhaiza et al.[14]. These phenolic compounds include flavonoids (quercetin,myricetin, kaempferol and catechin) and other detected constit-uents (ascorbic acids, tocopherols, β-carotene and carotenoids)have been proven spectrophotometrically for high antioxidantproperties by measuring their free radical scavenging, ferric
reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) and β-carotene bleachingactivities. Different parts of the plant had been used for theantioxidant assays by Karimi et al. [13]. They found that theleaves of the plant from all the varieties showed higher anti-oxidant activities compared to the roots and stems. It is note-worthy that the antioxidant properties of flavonoids have beenreported to be higher than vitamin C and E [15].The presence of the phenolic compounds might also con-tribute to the anticarcinogenic activity of L. pumila [16].T h eexhibition of the anticarcinogenic property might be due to therole of phenolic compounds participating in the antioxidantmechanisms such as radical scavenging, reducing or bleachingmechanisms. Although Pihie et al. [17]did not report the activecompound responsible for the anticarcinogenic activities, theyfound that the ethanolic extract of L. pumila at the dosage of100 mg/kg body weight of mice could have almost equipotentTable 1
Table 1The identified phytochemicals and reported biological activities of L. pumila extracts.Author/year Chemical classi ﬁcation Phytochemical identi ﬁed Biological activitiesChua et al. [11] Favonols Quercetin, myricetin and kaempferol Antioxidant (free radicalscavenging activity) Favonols Catechin and epigallocatechinPhenolic acids (benzoic acidand cinnamic acid)Salicylic acid, syringic acid, vanillic acid,protocatechin acid, gallic acid, coumaric acid,caffeic acid, chlorogenic acidKarimi et al. [12] Phenolics Gallic acid, caffeic acid and pyrogallol Antibacterial (Gram positiveand Gram negative bacteria)and antifungal(Fusarium sp.,Candida sp. andMucor sp.)Flavonoids Kaempferol, myricetin, naringin,quercetin and rutinSaponinsKarimi et al. [13] Phenolics Gallic acid, pyrogallol and caffeic acid Antioxidant (free radicalscavenging and ferric reducingantioxidant potential activities)Flavonoids Apigenin, kaempferol, myricetin, naringin,quercetin and rutin
quercetin and rutinIsoflavonoids Daidzein and genisteinHydrocarbons See[13]
scavenging and ferric reducingantioxidant potential activities)Flavonoids Apigenin, kaempferol, myricetin, naringin,quercetin and rutinIsoflavonoids Daidzein and genisteinHydrocarbons See[13]Norhaiza et al. [14] Phenolics Ascorbic acid and β-carotene Antioxidant (free radicalscavenging, ferric reducingantioxidant potential andβ-carotene bleaching activities)Flavonoids AnthocyaninsAvula et al. [18] Saponins (triterpene) Ardisiacrispin A, ardisicrenoside B,ardisimamilloside H, 3-O- α-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1→2)-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 →4)-α-L-arabinopynanosyl cyclamiretin AnaAlkenated phenolics Irisresorcinol, belamcandol B anddemethylbelamcandaquinone BAli and Khan [19] Dialkenated benzoquinone-phenolconjugateDemethylbelamcandaquinone B Antibacterial and antifungalDialkenated dibenzofuran FatimaholDexyloprimulanin 13,28-epoxy-oleanane glycosideJamia et al. [90] Alkenyl resorcinols (Z)-5-(pentadec-4 ′enyl)-resorcinol, (Z)-5-(pentadec-8 ′-enyl)-resorcinol and (Z)-5-
(pentadec-8 ′-enyl)-resorcinol and (Z)-5-(pentadec-10 ′-enyl)-resorcinolnaHoughton et al., 1999 [110] Benzoquinoid na nana: not available.1324 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
effects in terms of reducing both tumor incidence and tumorburden with curcumin (10 mg/kg body weight of mice). Be-sides showing intact basement membrane in the histopatho-logical examination, the 7,12-dimethylbenz( α)anthracene andcroton oil induced mice treated with the ethanolic extract alsosuppressed the progression of benign tumors to malignant stage.2.2. Saponin and antimicrobial activityBesides the antioxidant properties, the other pharmaco-logical activities such as hemolytic and anti-microbial havebeen reported due to the saponin content exhibited in thevarious parts of the plant extracts, namely the leaves, stemsand roots. A newly published article by Avula et al. [18]reported four triterpene saponins detected from the plant.The work of Ali and Khan [19]also reported dexyloprimulanin(13,28-epoxyoleanane glycoside) from the methanolic ex-tract. Somehow, the total saponin content was found to bein the highest concentration in the leaves of all varieties of
L. pumila , compared to the roots and stems [12]. The crudemethanolic extracts of the plant exhibited antibacterialactivities against both Gram positive and Gram negativepathogens. However, the antibacterial activities were rela-tively low compared to kanamycin, which was used ascontrol. While, the antifungal activity contributed by themethanolic extracts was moderate to appreciable comparedto streptomycin. As a comparison, most saponins weredetected from the widely used medicinal herb, ginseng. It isalso interesting to note that ginseng contains a series oftetracyclic triterpenoid saponins, which make up the activeingredients [20]. Ginseng saponins have been shown toexhibit a wide range of biological properties which includeFig. 2. Chemical structures of phytochemicals indentified from L. pumila extracts.1325 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
aphrodisiac and adaptogenic activities, and which have beenreviewed by Nocerino et al. [21].2.3. Phytoestrogen and anti-estrogenic de ﬁciency diseasesBased on the traditional practice, L. pumila is used aswoman post partum medicine. It is believed that the plantcontains phytoestrogen, which acts as the primary femalesexual hormone, namely estrogen. Phytoestrogens are essen-tial to protect body against hormonal dependent cancerssuch as breast, uterine and prostate. Theoretically, it acts asanti-estrogenic agents by blocking the estrogen receptors andexerting weaker estrogenic effect compared to hormones. It waslikely to be estrogen receptor modulators by displacing 17 β-estradiol binding to antibodies raised against estradiol, makingit similar to other estrogens such as esterone and estradiol(estrogen-like compounds) [22]. Moreover, the aqueous extracthas been found to produce a dose– response effect on thereproductive hormones of female rats, notably on the estradiol
and free testosterone levels. In vitro study conducted by Jamalet al. [2]on human endometrial adenocarcinoma cells of theIshikawa-var 1 line showed that the ethanolic extract of theroots of L. pumila var. alata exhibited significant oestrogeniceffect on the cells, resulting in an enhanced secretion of alkalinephosphatase.Estrogen deficiency is a very common health phenomenonin post-menopausal women. This phenomenon would causeweight gain and increase adiposity by hypertropic growth(adipose tissue increase in size) and consequently by hyper-plastic growth (adipocytes increase in number). It is a naturalresponse of the body because adipose tissue is not only usedfor energy storage, it is also an important endocrine organ forsex steroid metabolism [23]. The increase of adipocyte mem-brane in thickness was observed in ovariectomized rats byusing transmission electron microscopy [24]. It was found thatthe administrated L. pumila extract (17.5 mg/kg/day) to the
ovariectomized rats for 3 months could break the membraneof adipocytes. The breakage of adipose membrane had beenshown by the fragmentation of collagen fibers that hold theadipocytes together. Hence, this plant might pose a potentialrole in modulating post-menopausal adiposity through theinitiation of lipolysis process in adipocytes.The increase in adipocity is always associated with car-diovascular risks, including aortic stiffness. Aorta stiffensnaturally with age and worsens the arterial function, whichwill associate with cardiovascular risks, particularly aftermenopause. Statistical data showed that more than 30% of thefemale population in Malaysia who are at risk for coronaryartery disease was accounted for post-menopausal women[25]. As a result, the same group of researchers studied theeffect of L. pumila extract on the elasticity of aortae in theovariectomized rats in the following year. Water extract ofL. pumila has subsequently been reported for its capability
in maintaining the elastic lamellae architecture of theFig. 2 (continued ).1326 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
ovariectomized rat aortae in a manner comparable to that ofthe normal rats [26]. Furthermore, the positive responsesfrom the use of phytochemicals in pharmacology studies arequite encouraging recently. For instance, soy isoflavones werefound to be used for the improvement of endothelial-dependent vascular reactivity [27] and arterial elasticity [28],obesity and lipid metabolism [29], as well as aortic stiffness inpost-menopausal women [30]. Results indicated that L. pumilaextract might be able to modulate postmenopausal cardiovas-cular risks, although no inverse relationship between phytoes-trogen intake and cardiovascular disease risk had been reportedin Western women [31].The estrogenic properties of L. pumila var. alata have beenproven in uterotropic effects and body weight regulation[32]. The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) rats treated withL. pumila extracts appeared to have no significant effect onbody weight and composition, but have better lipid profiles
such as reduced levels of total cholesterols and triglycerides[33]. The increase of plasma resistin levels in PCOS ratstreated with L. pumila extracts was in contradiction withthe results reported in the ovariectomized rats treated withestrogen and the plant extracts [32,34] . The divergent resultscould be explained by the difference in resistin expressionat different adipose depots and cell types [35]. This can beproven by the difference in the circulating level of leptin andleptin mRNA expression in mesenteric adipose tissue.The previously reported reduction in resistin might in-crease insulin sensitivity without affecting body weight [32].The explanation was based on the observation of high cir-culating level of adiponectin after plant extract treatment inthe PCOS rat model. However, adiponectin mRNA expressionlevels in mesenteric adipose tissue were not significantlyaffected by the plant treatment. Adiponectin is an adipocyte-
derived plasma protein and its concentration is closely asso-ciated with metabolic abnormalities such as insulin sensitiv-ity and obesity [36].The phytoestrogenic effects have extended the herbalusage to the treatment of post-menopausal osteoporosis.L. pumila has the potential to be used as an alternative agentfor estrogen replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is usually usedfor post-menopausal osteoporosis treatment nowadays, butmost of the therapies cause several side effects in the laterFig. 2 (continued ).1327 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
days. The most common side effects include breast cancer,uterine cancer and thromboembolic problems. Ahmad et al.[37] reported that the administration of L. pumila extracts(17.5 mg/kg) was able to increase osteocalcin and lowerthe C-terminal telopeptide of type 1 collagen levels in theovariectomized rats, as are th e results shown in ERT groups.However, the ovariectomized rats treated with L. pumila extracthave lower bone calcium level than in ERT groups. Therefore,L. pumila could prevent the changes in bone biochemicalmarkers, but could not prevent the loss of bone calcium inducedby ovariectomy.Another beneficial phytoestrogenic potential of the plantis its capability against uropathogenic Escherichia coli infectionby inducing programmed cell death and reducing bacterialinvasion of the uroepithelium [38]. However, the plant extractdid not exhibit any direct inhibitory activity against uropatho-gens such as E. coli, proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Staphylococcus saprophyticus and Candida albicans .I ti sag r e a ttherapeutic activity found from the plant because the preva-lence and risk of recurrent urinary tract infection are thehighest among women, especially after menopause.The rejuvenating effect of L. pumila had also been provento have the immunomodulatory potential in T helper1 up-regulating activity [39]. This kind of therapeutic activity is usefulfor the treatment of immunodeficiency diseases. The ethylacetate fraction from the ethanolic extract showed significantexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necro-sis factor alpha (TNF- α), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-12(IL-12). IL-12 is an important reg ulatory cytokine secreted bystimulated helper T cells (CD4+) to initiate and regulatecellular immune responses. It al so stimulates the synthesis ofinterferon-gamma (IFN- γ) by T cells.Similar to Eurycoma longifolia (the king of herbs), a bio-
active peptide (4.3 kDa) was also detected in L. pumila waterextract [40,41] . This peptide has been proven as an aphrodi-siac marker for the treatment of male infertility and sexualdysfunction by increasing testosterone synthesis.3. Toxicological studies on L. pumilaApart from the pharmacological effects, there is still verylittle information on the safety and efficacy of L. pumila forhuman consumption and medical application. Investigatorsfrom the Institute for Medical Research, Malaysia have testedthe cytogenetic toxicology of L. pumila extract in bone marrowcells obtained from Sprague –Dawley rats using micronucleusassay [42]. Micronucleus frequencies have been considered tobe a reliable index for detecting chromosome breakages andFig. 2 (continued ).1328 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
loss in vivo, recommended by international regulatoryagencies for product safety assessment [43]. There was nosignificant increase in micronucleated polychromatic eryth-rocytes (MNPCEs) at administrated dose level (100, 700 and2000 mg/kg of body weight rat) and harvest time (24, 48 and72 h). Somehow, the study did not report on the dose –effectrelationship. The dose dependent effect is of high concern tousers because it is closely related to the safety issue for longterm consumption of L. pumila .The teratogenic and reproductive toxicities of the herbhave been evaluated by investigators from the UniversitiSains Malaysia on pregnant Sprague –Dawley rats from days 6to 16 of pregnancy and which were sacrificed on day 21 [44].The study has been conducted to investigate the possibility ofoffspring being born with structural and functional abnor-malities as a result of the herbal extract consumption. Theembryonic development was studied in order to establish the
herbal safety profile, since L. pumila extract is usually given topregnant women, starting from one or two months beforechildbirth till after delivery to regain body strength ofmothers. Results indicated that aqueous extracts of L. pumilavar. alata up to 1000 mg/kg/day did not show significantteratogenic effects, including gravid uterine weight, numberof corpora lutea, number of implantation sites, percentage offetal resorptions, and number of life fetuses, fetal weight andfetal sex ratio. In contrast, the maternal body weight wasslightly higher in animals receiving low dose of the herbalextract (2 mg/kg/day) as compared to all groups of animals.However, the body weight gain in the low dose extracttreated rats was not statistically significant.In the following year, the toxicity level of L. pumila wasalso tested on the estrous cycle, reproductive performance,post-natal growth and offspring survival of rats [3]. Again,
water extract of L. pumila var. alata has been proven notto pose any significant reproductive toxicity in pregnancy,delivery and early pup growth in rats. The mean durationof pregnancy was 21 days in animals, which received theherbal extract at a dose of 20 –800 mg/kg/day. The herb wasreported to be non-toxic because none of the rats exhibitedsignificant amounts of fetal resorption. However, petroleumether extract of the plant has been reported to cause sinu-soidal degeneration of liver [45]. The degeneration was dueto the inflammation of the renal tubules during days 1 –7post-partum in female Wistar rats. Somehow, the investiga-tors did not mention the phytochemical that was causing theinflammation from the petroleum ether extract.Subsequently, a 28-day sub-acute toxicity of the aqueousextract to Wistar rats was carried out by researchers fromIndia [46]. This method is widely accepted for health hazard
assessment, particularly on herbal supplement. No treatmentrelated mortality of animals was reported at the dosages of50, 250, 500 and 1000 mg/kg body weight. At higher doses(>50 mg/kg), there were some pathological effects in thehistological profiles of liver, lung and kidney in the treatedrats, but not in a dose response related manner. The macro-scopic examination of vital organs such as brain, heart, spleen,stomach, small intestine and ovary/testes did not show anypathology after the herbal treatment. The analysis results ofurine, hematology and serum withdrawn from the treated ratswere comparable to the results obtained from the controlanimals.4. Rationale of L. pumila as collagen synthesispromoting herbIndeed, natural products have long been exploited inmedical and skin care since the beginning of civilization. Forinstance, the Egyptian queen, Cleopatra used to bathe in sourmilk containing lactic acid for skin exfoliation. Athletes in
ancient Greece used to bathe in olive oil to modulate bodytemperature and scattered fine sand on their skin to make it
milk containing lactic acid for skin exfoliation. Athletes inancient Greece used to bathe in olive oil to modulate bodytemperature and scattered fine sand on their skin to make itmore resistant to the sun rays. For the Romans, they usedscented oil to clean and lather the skin for beauty purpose.Europeanwomen often bathe in wine to obtain smooth andsilky skin. Since the Qin Dynasty (221 to 205 BC), Angelicadahurica (Bai Zhi) has been used in Chinese medicines inwhitening facial creams.Nowadays, the number of natural products that has beenused for the development of skin care products is in theincreasing trend. Mostly, these natural products have beenproven to exhibit significant antioxidant [47], emollient [48]and UV –B protection [49]properties, which are crucial for skincare product formulation. The properties are most probablydue to the presence of particular phytochemicals in the naturalproducts as active compounds. Moreover, natural ingredients
are easier to be absorbed by the superficial layers of the skinand lower skin allergy problems.In most circumstances, the production of ROS in excessiveamounts is triggered by external stimuli such as explorationof UVB light. The production of ROS in dermal fibroblastwould accelerate the damage to the cellular componentssuch as lipid membranes, mitochondria and DNA. Under sucha stress condition, cytokine, namely transforming growthfactor- β(TGF- β) that promotes collagen production wouldbe affected and then contribute to the formation of wrinkles[50]. The anti-stress property of L. pumila aqueous extract hasbeen tested on animals under different stressful experimen-tal conditions [51]. Although none of the stressful conditionsin the study was due to the UVB light exploration, gallic acidfrom the plant extract might be the main marker contribut-ing to the anti-stress property. The animal models treatedwith the plant extract would reverse the stress reactions
behaviorally, biochemically and immunologically to restorehomeostasis. In fact, plant based anti-stress drugs such asdibazol (2-benzylbenzimidazol) have been reported earlierby Lazarev [52]. These anti-stress drugs are likely to inducethe non-specifically increased resistance in stressful animalsas well as emotional stress in humans.In addition to the phytochemicals, vitamins such as A, C andE are the commonly used chemical compounds in skin careproduct formulation. The preference of vitamins as additivein the product formulation is likely to enhance the value ofthe product, especially modulating the effects of UV-inducedROS damage [53]. Owing to the high demand and costlyvitamin extraction from plants, most of the cosmetic productsuse chemically synthesized vitamins. However, plant basedcosmetic products are still preferable because of the negativeside effects of chemical derivatives, which might cause skinirritation, inflammation and allergy. Hence, natural skin care
products continue to gain favor in modern era till to date. To afurther extent, not only natural resources, but also people startfocusing on the amount of active ingredients present in thenatural resources.1329 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
4.1. Common active ingredients for skin careRetinols and carotenoids are the two main forms of vitaminA found in nature. Though vitamin A cannot be found as anindividual compound in plants, many plants with yellowpigments contains β-carotene [54], which serves as a potentprecursor of vitamin A [55]. It was reported that 10% or less ofretinaldehyde formed from β-carotene cleavage would then beoxidized to retinoic acid (tretinoin) [56]. Tretinoin is the firstretinoid developed for acne and photo-aging treatment.Retinoic acid has been proven for its capability to removewrinkles and revitalize the photo-damaged cells via restorativemechanism. It is widely used to limit the progression ofdamage by stimulating the proliferation of fibroblasts and toenhance the production of collagen in the dermis [57].T h estimulated skin cells for collagen synthesis could partly reversethe skin aging process. Type I collagen formation was found to
be 56% less in the papillary dermis of photo-damaged skin thanin the skin protected from the sun [57]. The tretinoin treatmentfor photo-damaged skin has increased the formation of 80%type I collagen [57]. Retinoic acid is also believed to have theability to induce the keratinocyte proliferation, resulting insmoother skin-surface structure. Apart from that, retinoic acidinhibits the UV-induced pigmentation and blocks the UVinduction of the matrix metalloproteinases. Therefore, retinoicor retinol is widely used as key ingredient in cosmetic productformulation. However, special care must be taken because itmight cause irritation and promote skin sensitivity to sunlight.The skin thinning effect of tretinoin might increase the risk ofsunburn, redness, scaling and itching. Because of the side effect,retinoic acid is usually available as prescription products. Theinstability of retinoic acid, especially in the presence of oxygen
also requires special delivery system in product formulation.Vitamin C is commonly known as ascorbic acids. Thiscompound is an important regulator for collagen biosynthesis(collagenase-digestible protein) and as one of the cofactors inproline and lysine hydroxylations. The hydroxylation pro-duces collagen with higher thermal stability, which is theessential characteristic required for photo-damaged skin [58].The stimulation of ascorbic acid on cell proliferation andcollagen expression in dermal fibroblast appeared to be ageindependent [59]. The relationship was inversely related toage in the absence of ascorbic acid. The cell proliferation andcollagen expression were reflected by the coordinate increases insteady-state pro α1(I) and pro α1(II) collagen mRNAs, suggestinga pretranslational mechanism. Several researchers reported thatthe gene expression of collagen was increased when fibroblastswere stimulated by ascorbic acid in vitro [60,61] . It has been
shown to upregulate types I and II collagen syntheses in humandermal fibroblasts [59].Vitamin E is a mixture of organic compounds includingα-,β-,γ-,δ-tocopherols and α-,β-,γ-,δ-tocotrienols [62].I thas been used for more than 50 years in experimental andclinical dermatologies [63]. It is one of the essential lipophilicnutrients found in a variety of natural sources such as nuts,vegetable oils and green leafy vegetables. Recently, it isgaining increasing attention in the skin care industry becauseof the antioxidant properties [63,64] , as well as photo-protective and skin barrier stabilizing properties [63]. Nev-ertheless, there is still a lack of controlled clinical studies onthe dosage of vitamin E application either topically or orally.It has the potential to slow down the collagen breakdownrate by protecting membranes against lipid peroxidationand to maintain the integrity of membranes [63]. In vitroexperiments with skin fibroblasts showed that α-tocopherol
was able to diminish the age dependent collagenase gene(MMP-1) transcription via protein kinase C (PKC) activity
experiments with skin fibroblasts showed that α-tocopherolwas able to diminish the age dependent collagenase gene(MMP-1) transcription via protein kinase C (PKC) activityinhibition [65]. In vivo murine experiments showed that thetopical application of vitamin E (5% tocopherol) before UVB-exposure was found to be 75% of wrinkle reduction from skinsurface and considerabe reduction in skin tumor formation.This suggests that vitamin E could be a skin aging protectiveagent against the damaging effects of UV irradiation [65,66] .According to the antioxidant network theory, the combina-tion of co-antioxidants such as vitamin C may help to enhancethe antioxidant effects as well as the stability of vitamin E[63].Apart from vitamins, Co-enzyme Q10(CoQ 10)i su s u a l l ypresent in foods and taken as a dietary supplement, which mayserve as an antioxidant to protect cellular membranes andplasma lipoproteins from free radical induced damage. CoQ 10
is a lipid soluble and endogenous hydroxybenzoquinone com-pound containing 10 isoprenoid units in the side chain [67],which is well known as en essential electron carrier in themitochondrial respiratory chain [67,68] . The three main func-tions of CoQ10in quenching ROS includes transfer of reducingequivalents in the electron transport chain, generation ofsuperoxide anion radical, O 2−and quenching of free radicals.Besides animal sources, it is widely isolated from plants such astobacco [69] and rapeseed oil [67] forhalal market. The otherwell known compound in cosmetics industry is alpha-hydroxylacids (AHA). AHA based cosmetic products are often claimedfor their efficiency in reducing wrinkles or the signs of aging.The only drawback is AHA requires low pH condition to beactive. Too acidic cosmetic products might have higher pos-sibility to cause skin irritation or even inflammation.4.2. Relationship between photoaging and skin collagen
It is interesting to note that aging can be slowed down, oreven stopped for a while and sometimes it can be reversed[70]. By definition, aging is a time-dependent series ofcumulative, progressive, intrinsic, and deleterious functionaland structural changes that usually begin to manifest atreproductive maturity and eventually culminate in death[71]. In fact, aging is a natural biological process, which canbe classified into intrinsic and extrinsic aging. The former isdue to the chronological genetic changes in the body wherecell renewal process is slowing down [72]. The endocrinesystem of an organism will be gradually altered and degradedreflecting endogenous aging. Human body has to cope withendogenous generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS),which are continuously produced during physiological cellularmetabolism. The latter is caused by environmental factors suchas climate, pollution, emotional stress and sickness [73].O ft h e
environmental factors, the ultraviolet irradiation is the mainfactor contributing to premature skin aging due to photoagingor what is known as the exogenous aging factor. Excessiveexposure to ultraviolet irradiation is of high concern to thosestaying in the tropic region.One of the most well known methods to delay or slowdown the process of skin aging is by enhancing the condition1330 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
of collagen in the skin layer. Collagen is a type of proteinthat is formed ubiquitously in multi-cellular animals as theprimary component for intracellular gum. It is the majorstructural component of extracellular matrix in skin, coveringmore than 50% [59,74] . It is produced by fibroblasts in thedermis layer of the skin. The other extracellular matrices inthe dermis are elastin, proteoglycans and fibronectin. Type Iand type III collagens comprise 85 –90% and 8 –11% of the totalcollagen synthesized, respectively. Both types of collagen areclosely associated in a well organized fibrillar structure [75,76] .The fibril-forming collagen is likely to be one of the moststudied types of collagen with about 90% of the total collagen[73].The flexional stability and tensile strength of collagencontribute to the integrity of tissues. The connective tissuessuch as collagen fibrils are mainly to provide skin resilienceand flexibility to prevent tissues from overstretching or
tearing. Collagen also work together with elastin to provideflexibility, structure and firmness to body tissues, bones,tendons, cartilage, lung tissue and skin. As the body aged,these connective tissues will slowly deteriorate, resulting inloss of collagen and less firmness to body tissues. Thus, anti-aging effort is focused on the reduction of collagen degrada-tion and the increase of collagen synthesis.The deteriorating conditions of the earth ecosystems dueto excessive development and pollutions are believed toaccelerate the aging process. The aging process becomesobvious and noticed, once the symptom physically appears.Since skin is the largest and outermost organ in the humanbody, the aged skin is easy to be detected in the transforma-tion of skin conditions. Approximately, the skin starts to ageat about 25 years old [73]. The transformation will affect
the three layers of the skin, namely epidermis, dermis andhypodermis by changing the skin's biochemical profile. Bio-chemical studies have revealed that the levels of types I andIII collagen precursors and crosslinks are reduced, whereaselastin levels are increased in the photo-aged skin [77,78] .The mitochondrial activity is affected and the skin suffersfrom progressive morphologic and physiologic decrements.The skin surface will become coarse and irregular providingthe evidence that aging process has been taking place. Theother significant symptoms for skin aging include skin dryness,dark spots and wrinkles on the skin surface.The deleterious effects of photoaging caused by solarradiation on type I and III collagens showed that there is atransient decrease in type I procollagen mRNA (30 –70%), butthere is no effect on type III procollagen mRNA at the steadystate levels [79]. However, the matrix metalloproteinases such
as interstitial collagens (MMP-1) and stromelysin (MMP-3)as degrading enzymes were increased 2 to 5 folds after solarradiation in a dose-dependent manner. An age dependentdecrease in gene expression coding for type I and III collagenshas also been reported [80,81] . The collagen IV content in thebasement membrane showed a progressive decline in relationto age [82]. It was suggested that the decline of collagen IVmight be due to the reduction of the protein content resultingfrom degrading process, and also due to the decrease incollagen synthesis. The shift in the relative proportions ofcollagen types are both tissue and age-dependent [83].Collagen fibrils in photo-aged skin are disorganized andabnormal elastin-containing materials are accumulated [84].The alterations either in number or structure of dermal con-nective tissues are thought to be responsible for wrinkleformation. The collagen bundles start to disperse and granulate
in aged skin, compared to dense and compact collagen bundlesin young skin. The degradation of collagen due to the irreversiblecross-linkage in aged skin is likely to reduce the collagenase
in aged skin, compared to dense and compact collagen bundlesin young skin. The degradation of collagen due to the irreversiblecross-linkage in aged skin is likely to reduce the collagenaseactivity and to slow down the synthesis of new collagen, whichwill affect the firm and youthful appearance of skin.4.3. L. pumila as collagen synthesis promoterSince skin appearance directly relates to the health conditionand image of an individual, people start taking precaution toreduce the aging rate, or even to stop the aging process usingvarious approaches. The common approaches include takingsupplements, therapies or combination of both methods. A largeamount of money has been spent regardless the price, purposelyto make them look younger and more beautiful.Following the demand and concern from the public, recentlyresearchers have found another a lt ernative from plant derivedingredients for skin care. Previous study on L. pumila extract
clearly showed the potential of this herbal extract to be used asa photo protective agent against extrinsic aging [85]. The resultsexplained the capability of this herbal extract to stimulategrowth of human skin fibroblast cells in vitro after exposureto ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Apart from that, L. pumila couldalso up-regulate the synthesis of collagen in human dermalfibroblast cells, which is responsible for the integrity, andmechanical strength of the human skin [85]. The herbal extractalso has the ability to protect the human skin from the ROSattacks generated by critical UVB exposure. This is mainly dueto the presence of bioflavonoids and phenolic acids in theplant extract [11]. Of the polyphenols, quercetin is one ofthe flavonoids detected from the herb. Chondrogianni et al.[86] reported that quercetin and its derivative, namely querce-tin caprylate were likely to be proteasome activator havingcytoprotective property against oxidative stress. These com-
pounds possessed rejuvenating effect on the cell proliferationand morphology, as well as oxidation related diseases includingaging. The rejuvenating effect was also reported on tyrosinasereduction, which would provide the whitening effect on skincells.The presence of these highly antioxidative phytochemi-cals is likely to promote L. pumila extract as great potentialingredient for cosmeceutical formulation. Plant antioxidantsare believed to play an essential role in delaying the agingprocess and disease protection against ROS. Aging is definedas a natural process that is closely related to the oxidativestress, which leads to the imbalance between free radicalsand antioxidant defense in skin [85]. Researchers from theDongguk University, Korea and Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,Malaysia have reported the capability of L. pumila extractin restoring skin pro-collagen that has been destroyed byultraviolet irradiation in vitro using human dermal fibroblast
and immortalize human keratinocytes. In addition to that,L. pumila extract was likely to reduce the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which are usually associated withvarious skin diseases and the progression of photo-damagedskin. The photo-protective effects and dermatological bene-fits of L. pumila have surpassed the purpose of cosmetic tofurther extend into an area of cosmeceuticals. Consequently,1331 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
a research team from the Institute of Bioproduct Develop-ment (formerly known as Chemical Engineering Pilot Plant),Universiti Teknologi Malaysia in Johor Bahru has formulateda series of cosmeceutical products from L. pumila , includingmoisturizer and anti-aging serum. Based on the end userfeedbacks, the effect of the cosmeceutical products is verypromising and encouraging (personal communication). Kimet al. [87] reported that phenolic acids were also easilyabsorbed in human systems and subsequently offered a serialof anti-aging benefits. Of the benefits, the cell structurebecomes stronger, with higher decay resistance and preventsthe growth of abnormal cells. Meta-analysis conducted byKöpcke and Krutmann [88] revealed that β-carotene supple-ment could protect human skin from sunburn effect effi-ciently. β-carotene might provide nutritional protection againstskin damage from sunlight.Nevertheless, a well established extraction process must be
developed, so that only the phenolic compounds are extractedfrom the plant. This is because the plant has been reported tocontain alkyl and alkenyl resorcinol, which might cause skinirritation, inflammation and blistering [89]. The alkenyl resor-cinol derivatives detected in L. pumila were (z)-5-(pentadec-4 ′-enyl)-resorcinol, (z)-5-(pentadec-8 ′-enyl)-resorcinol and (z)-5-(pentadec-10 ′-enyl)-resorcinol [90].The type and quantity of flavonoids used in the productformulation must be well characterized, because Stipcevic et al.[91]reported different results exhibited by different flavonoidsat the particular concentration on the synthesis of collagen inhuman dermal fibroblasts. At the concentration of 80 μg/ml,flavonoids such as quercetin-3,3 ′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavone,3-methyl quercetin, and 7-hydroxyflavone decreased the totalprotein concentration significantly, which might be due to thecytotoxicity effect. However, naringenin exhibited no effect
on the total collagen and total protein concentrations at thatconcentration.4.4. Photoaging mechanism by UV radiationBiosynthesis of collagens is a complex process. Since type Icollagen predominates in human dermis, most studies arefocused on type I collagen synthesis by monitoring the for-mation of procollagen I within dermal fibroblasts [57].I tb e g i n swith the transcription of genes within the nucleus and endswith the conglomeration of collagen heterotrimers into largefibrils. The transcriptional activities are initiated in the nucleus,generating different types of mRNA according to its functionthereafter. For example, a short form of type IX collagen mRNAis generated in the cornea and vitreous body [92], while alonger form of type II collagen mRNA can be found in chondro-progenitor cells [93]. This pro-alpha chain will then betranslated to rough endoplasmic reticulum and attached tothe site for further protein synthesis. The soluble pro-collagen is
a larger precursor protein that possesses a central triple helicaldomain and non-collagenous pro-peptide domain at both theirN- and C-terminal ends. This pro-collagen molecule willundergo multiple post-translational modification steps, whichtake place in the Golgi compartment of endoplasmic reticulum.The first modification is hydroxylation of proline and lysine toproduce hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine. These reactions arecatalyzed by hydroxylase enzymes, with ascorbate (vitamin C)and ferrous ion as the cofactors. Without the hydroxyproline, thecollagen molecules will not be able to form a proper helicalstructure, causing it to lose its thermal stability and be easilydestroyed. This is portrayed in a poor wound healing of theskin[94]. On the other hand, the hydroxylysine is responsible toform stable inter-molecular cross linking of collagen moleculesin fibrils. It reacts with the carbohydrates to form glycosidic
hydroxylysines with the addition of galactose and glucose. Thisgl
form stable inter-molecular cross linking of collagen moleculesin fibrils. It reacts with the carbohydrates to form glycosidichydroxylysines with the addition of galactose and glucose. Thisglycosylation step is catalyzed b ye n z y m e ss u c ha sg a l a c t o s y la n dglucosyl transferases in the presence of trace mineral manganese(Mn2+). The glycosylation enzyme sa r ef o u n dt ob ev e r ya c t i v eat a young age and to slow down as they aged [95].T h ep r o -collagen peptides will then be secreted to the extracellularspace through specialized structures known as microtubules.After the pro-collagen is secreted, it will then be converted intocollagen by a specific enzymic cleavage of terminal propeptidesby the pro-collagen metalloproteinases [96]. The portions of thedigested end pieces are assumed to re-enter the cell via a feed-back mechanism and regulate the quantity of collagen synthesis.In the extracellular space, these t riple helical collagen molecules
will begin to form fibrils and then fibers. This is a crosslinkingprocess within the molecule (intramolecules) and betweenthe molecules (inter-molecules). The biosynthesis pathway ofcollagen in human cells is outlined in Fig. 3 .Over the years, substantial progress has been made inelucidating the underlying molecular mechanisms in photo-Fig. 3. The biosynthesis of collagens: (1) transcription of gene in nucleus; (2) attachment to site of actual protein synthesis; (3) post-translational modification;(4) pro-collagen registration and hydroxylation; (5) cleavage of N- and C-terminal pro sequences; (6) covalent cross-linking of collagen fibers; and (7) extensionpeptides feedback mechanism.1332 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
aging. Numerous studies have been carried out to investigatethe effects of aging on the chemical constitution and phys-ical transformation of human skin. Over exposure of skinto UV radiation (UV) might result in skin modification in-cluding erythema, tanning, immune-modulation and possi-bly cancerogenesis [97]. These clinical responses are dosedependent and the modifications are not necessarily linked toeach other by direct cause –effect relationship. The modifica-tion might be contributed by the consequence of pleitropicbehavior of UV radiation [98–100] . However, the clear mech-anism of photoaging caused by UV radiation in collagensynthesis is not yet known. It is only clear that both UVB(290 –320 nm) and UVA (320– 400 nm) radiations contributeto photoaging, as well as the induction of metalloproteinases(MMPs) in the pathogenesis. The failure in the recovery of thedamaged collagen resulted from MMP induction that has
contributed to photoaging. Skin collagen content was foundto decrease with age [101] , approximately at a rate of 1% ayear through adult life [102] . UVA is 10 –100 times moreabundant in sunlight than UVB, depending on the season andtime of the day. UVA radiation could penetrate far deeperinto the skin, and hence it exerts direct effect on both theepidermal and the dermal compartments. UVA radiation couldtrigger the generation of ROS, particularly singlet oxygen whichcan subsequently exert several effects such as lipid peroxida-tion, activation of transcription factors, and generation of DNAstrand breaks [103] . Although UVA photons are less biologicallyactive than UVB photons, the pathogenesis of UVA irradiatedphotoaging is comparable to UVB [104] .I nc o n t r a s t ,U V Bw a sfound to act preferentially at the epidermis by causing thedamage to keratinocytes and melanocytes, followed by theproduction of proteolytic enzymes at the dermis layer. UVB
radiation not only induces the production of MMP, but also thegeneration of ROS [104 –107], which have a direct interactionwith DNA and cause DNA damage. The UV induced alterationsat the dermis layer appeared to be largely responsible for thephenotype of photo-aged skin. The topical pre-treatment withtretinoin was found to inhibit the induction and activity ofMMPs in the UVB-irradiated skin from the activation of AP-1. Inchronically photo-damaged skin, collagen synthesis is downregulated as compared to sun protected skin [108] . However,recent study has reported that fibroblasts in severely photo-damaged skin have less interaction with intact collagen, andthus are exposed to less mechanical tension, which might leadto decreased collagen synthesis [109] .5. Future perspectives of L. pumilaBased on the review of this article, L. pumila is likely to havemany beneficial effects in vario us fields of applications, par-
ticularly in the medical and cosmeceutical applications. Eachapplication might be due to the presence of specific functionalgroup of phytoconstituents in the plant. Therefore, it is of greatimportance to know about the application before preparing theplant extract. This is because the choice of solvents and theoperating conditions of extraction will directly affect the type ofactive compounds to be extracted from the plant. Furthermore,the preparation of the plant extract with known biologicalactivity could avoid undesirable side effects from the othergroup of phytochemicals.Even though L. pumila is widely used as traditional medicinein the Malay community, its significant beneficial effects areattractive enough to draw the a ttention of researchers fromother regions such as America [18,19],S w e d e n [33,38] ,A u s t r a l i a[38],Ug a n d a [38], India [39,46] and Korea [85]. It is foreseenthat the usage of L. pumila would be increasingly accepted with
the support of scientific data. In t he near future, the acceptabilityof the plant extract in pharmacological and cosmeceutical
that the usage of L. pumila would be increasingly accepted withthe support of scientific data. In t he near future, the acceptabilityof the plant extract in pharmacological and cosmeceuticalapplications would be in the increasing trend.Due to the great demand for herbal products from globalconsumers, scientific studies have been extensively carriedout worldwide. Most of the studies are focusing on biologicalactivities of plant extracts, toxicology based on dosage andactive compound identification. The demand is not only focusedon quantity basis, but also on the herbal quality basis. The herbalquality is very much dependent on the content of bioactivemarker, besides nutritional composition.With the advancement of herbal processing technologyas well as analytical equipments nowadays, the standardizationofL. pumila and products derived from the plant extract ispossible to be implemented even in a larger scale. Standardiza-
tion is very important for herbal processing industries because itensures the consistency in the quality of herbal products. It isbelieved that herbal products with known quality, in terms ofphytochemical profile and biological property will increase thevalue of the particular herbal product significantly. Previously,the herbal quality consistency is a major issue, mainly becauseof the great variation in plant physical and chemical properties.The variation is solely dependent on the botanical, seasonal andprocessing factors.6. ConclusionThis article reviews the current studies and futureprospect of L. pumila , especially in cosmeceutical application.Many phytochemicals have been identified to date and mostof them have been reported to exhibit beneficial propertiessuch as antioxidant, antimicrobial and anti-estrogenic dis-eases, which are in line with the traditional uses of the herb aspost-partum medication, to maintain the female reproductive
system, as well as to enhance sexual function. The herbalextracts have also been proven for its efficiency in dealingwith growth promotion in human skin fibroblasts andkeratinocytes. The promoting effects can be seen from thesignificant contribution of the herbal extracts in collagensynthesis and reducing matrix metalloproteinase production,supported by the outstanding antioxidative activity com-pared to synthetic vitamins. Therefore, L. pumila extracts havehigh potential to be the key ingredient in cosmeceuticalindustries in order to maintain skin physiology and integrity.The efficacy of the plant extracts in cosmeceuticals is believedto be comparable with the existing active ingredients found incosmetic products nowadays.References[1] Sunarno B. Revision of the genus Labisia (Myrsinaceae). Blumea 2005;50:579–97.[2] Jamal JA, Houghton PJ, Milligan SR, Jantan I. The oestrogenic andcytotoxic effects of the extracts of Labisia pumila var. alata and Labisia
pumila var. pumila in vitro. Sains Kesihatan 2003;1:53 –60.1333 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
[3] Wan Ezumi MF, Siti Amrah S, Suhaimi AWM, Mohsin SSJ. Evaluation ofthe female reproductive toxicity of aqueous extract of Labisia pumilavar. alata in rats. Indian J Pharmacol 2007;39:30 –2.[4] I.H. Burkill, A dictionary of the economic products of the Malay Peninsula,Ministry of Agriculture Malaysia (Ed.), Crown Agents for the Colonies,London, 1935.[5] Runi SP. Studies on medicinal plant in Sarawak. In: Chang YS, editor.Towards bridging science and herbal industryProc. sem. medicinal aromaticplants, Forest Research Institute Malaysia, Kepong; 2000. p. 112 –9.[6] Burkill IH. A dictionary of the economic product of the MalayPeninsula. Vol. II (I –Z) Government of Malaysia and Singapore by theMinistry of Agriculture and Cooperative, Kuala Lumpur; 1966.[7] Hartinie M, Jualang GA. In vitro germination and plantlet establish-ment of Labisia pumila (B1.) F. Vill. Sci Hortic 2007;115:91 –7.[8] Jaafar HZE, Ibrahim MH, Philip E. Leaf gas exchange properties of three
varieties of Labisia pumila Benth. under green house conditions. J TropPlant Physiol 2009;3:16 –24.[9] Ibrahim MH, Jaafar HZE. Photosynthetic capacity, photochemicalefficiency and chlorophyll content of three varieties of Labisia pumilaBenth. exposed to open field and greenhouse growing conditions. ActaPhysiol Plant 2011;33:2179 –85.[10] Rohizawati Z, Aminah H, Lokman N. Preliminary trial on rooting abilityofLabisia pumila cuttings. Malaysian sci. technol. congress, agriculturesci., Kuala Lumpur; 2003.[11] Chua LS, Abdul Latiff N, Lee SY, Lee CT, Sarmidi MR, Abdul Aziz R.Flavonoids and phenolic acids from Labisia pumila (Kacip Fatimah).Food Chem 2011;127:1186 –92.[12] Karimi E, Jaafar HZE, Ahmad S. Phytochemical analysis and antimicrobialactivities of methanolic extracts of leaf, stem and root from differentvarieties of Labisa pumila Benth. Molecules 2011;16:4438 –50.[13] Karimi E, Jaafar HZE. HPLC and GC –MS determination of bioactive
compounds in microwave obtained extracts of three varieties ofLabisia pumila Benth. Molecules 2011;16:6791 –805.[14] Norhaiza M, Maziah M, Hakiman M. Antioxidative properties of leafextracts of a popular Malaysian herb, Labisia pumila . J Med Plant Res2009;3:217 –23.[15] Bagchi M, Mark M, Casey W, Jaya B, Xumei Y, Sidney S, et al. Acute andchronic stress-induced oxidative gastrointestinal injury in rats and theprotective ability of a novel grape seed proanthocyanidin extract. NutrRes 1999;19:1189 –99.[16] Pandey G, Madhuri S. Some medicinal plants as natural anticanceragents. Pharmacogn Rev 2009;3:259 –63.[17] Pihie AHL, Othman F, Zakaria ZA. Anticarcinogenic activity of Labisia pumilaagainst 7,12-dimethylbenz( α)anthracene (DMBA)/croton oil-inducedmouse skin carcinogenesis. Afr J Pharm Pharmacol 2011;5:823 –32.[18] Avula B, Wang YH, Ali Z, Smillie TJ, Khan IA. Quantitative determinationof triterpene saponins and alkenated-phenolics from Labisia pumila
using an LC –UV/ELSD method and confirmation by LC –ESI-TOF. PlantaMed2011;77:1742 –8.[19] Ali Z, Khan IA. Alkyl phenols and saponins from the roots of Labisiapumila (Kacip Fatimah). Phytochem 2011;72:2075 –80.[20] Sparg SG, Light ME, van Staden J. Biological activities and distributionof plant saponins. J Ethnopharmacol 2004;94:219 –43.[21] Nocerino E, Amato M, Izzo AA. The aphrodisiac and adaptogenicproperties of ginseng. Fitoterapia 2000;71:S1 –5.[22] Institute for Medical Research, estrogenic and androgenic activities ofKacip Fatimah ( Labisia pumila ). Malaysian Herbal Medicine ResearchCenter. Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of Health Malaysia; 2002. p. 8.[23] Kershaw EE, Flier JS. Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ. J ClinEndocrinol Metab 2004;89:2548 –56.[24] Al-Wahaibi A, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Farihah HS, Azian AL. Effect ofovariectomy, Labisia pumila var. alata treatment and estrogen replace-
ment therapy on the morphology of adipose tissue in ovariectomizedSprague Dawley rats. J Med 2007;1:1 –7.
ovariectomy, Labisia pumila var. alata treatment and estrogen replace-ment therapy on the morphology of adipose tissue in ovariectomizedSprague Dawley rats. J Med 2007;1:1 –7.[25] Ariyo AA, Villablanca AC. Estrogens and lipids: can HRT designerestrogens, and phytoestrogen reduce cardiovascular risk markers aftermenopause? Postgrad Med 2002;111:23 –30.[26] Al-Wahaibi A, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Norsyam WN, Farihah HS, Azian AL.Effect of water extract of Labisia pumila varalata on aorta of ovariecto-mized Sprague Dawley rats, Pakistan. J Nutr 2008;7:208– 13.[27] Teede HJ, Dalais FS, Kotsopoulos D, Liang YL, Davis S, McGrath BP.Dietary soy has both beneficial and potentially adverse cardiovasculareffects: a placebo-controlled study in men and postmenopausalwomen. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:3053 –60.[28] Nestel PJ, Yamashita T, Sasahara T, Pomeroy S, Dart A, Komesaroff P,et al. Soy isoflavones improve systemic arterial compliance but not
plasma lipids in menopausal and perimenopausal women. ArteriosclerThromb Vasc Biol 1997;17:3392 –8.[29] Bhathena SJ, Velasquez MT. Beneficial role of dietary phytoestrogensin obesity and diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;76:1191 –201.[30] van der Schouw YT, Pijpe A, Lebrun CEI, Bots ML, Peeters PHM, vanStaveren WA, et al. Higher usual dietary intake of phytoestrogens isassociated with lower aortic stiffness in postmenopausal women.Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2002;22:1316 –22.[31] van der Schouw YT, Kreijkamp-Kaspers S, Peeters PHM, Keinan-BokerL, Rimm EB, Grobbee DE. Prospective study on usual dietaryphytoestrogen intake and cardiovascular disease risk in westernwomen. Circ 2005;111:465 –71.[32] Fazliana M, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Gu HF, Ostenson CG. Labisia pumilaextract regulates body weight and adipokines in ovariectomized rats.Maturitas 2009;62:91 –7.[33] Manneras L, Fazliana M, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Lonn M, Gu HF,
Ostenson CG, et al. Beneficial metabolic effects of the Malaysian herbLabisia pumila var. alata in a rat model of polycystic ovary syndrome.J Ethnopharmacol 2010;127:346 –51.[34] Huang SW, Seow KM, Ho LT, Chien Y, Chung DY, Chang CL, et al.Resistin mRNA levels are downregulated by estrogen in vivo and invitro. FEBS Lett 2005;579:449 –54.[35] Steppan CM, Lazar MA. The current biology of resistin. J Intern Med2004;255:439 –47.[36] Weyer C, Funahashi T, Tanaka S, Hotta K, Matsuzawa Y, Pratley RE, et al.Hypoadiponectinemia in obesity and type 2 diabetes: close associationwithinsulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab2001;86:1930 –5.[37] Ahmad NS, Leong LL, Norliza M, Norazlina M, Ima NS. The effects ofLabisia pumila var. alata on bone markers and bone calcium in a ratmodel of post-menopausal osteoporosis. J Ethnopharmacol 2011;133:538–42.[38] Fazliana M, Ramos NL, Luthje P, Sekikubo M, Holma A, Wan
Nazaimoon WM, et al. Labisia pumila var. alata reduces bacterial loadby inducing uroepithelial cell apoptosis. J Ethnopharmacol 2011;136:111–6.[39] Pandey A, Bani S, Sangwan P, Koul S. Selective Th1 upregulation byethyl acetate fraction of Labisia pumila . J Ethnopharmacol 2010;132:309–15.[40] Sambandan TG, Ong BK, Norhaniza A, Mohd Puad A, Rha CK. Quantitativemeasurement of chemical or bioactive constituents of Eurycoma Longifolia(Tongkat Ali ). Herbal Asia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 25 –28 March 2004;2004.[41] Asiah O, Nurhanan MY, Mohd Ilham A. Determination of bioactivepeptide (4.3 kDa) as an aphrodisiac marker in six Malaysian plants.J Trop For Sci 2007;19:61 –3.[42] Shahrim Z, Baharuddin PJNM, Yahya NA, Muhammad H, Bakar RA,Ismail Z. The in vivo rodent micronucleus assay of Kacip Fatimah(Labisia pumila ) extract. Trop Biomed 2006;23:214 –9.[43] Krishna G, Hyashi M. In vivo rodent micronucleus assay: protocol,
conduct and data interpretation. Mutat Res 2000;455:155 –66.[44] Mohd Fuad WE, Sulaiman SA, Islam MN, Abdul Wahab MS, JamalullailSMS. Evaluation of the teratogenicity of aqueous extract of Labisia
conduct and data interpretation. Mutat Res 2000;455:155 –66.[44] Mohd Fuad WE, Sulaiman SA, Islam MN, Abdul Wahab MS, JamalullailSMS. Evaluation of the teratogenicity of aqueous extract of Labisiapumila var. alata in rats. Malaysian J Med Sci 2005;12:13 –21.[45] Effendy AWM, Siti-Nurtahirah J, Hussin ZM. The side effects of KacipFatimah extract on liver and kidney of white rats. J Sustainable SciManage 2006;1:40 –6.[46] Singh GD, Ganjoo M, Youssouf MS, Koul A, Sharma R, Singh S, et al.Sub-acute toxicity evaluation of an aqueous extract of Labisia pumila ,aMalaysian herb. Food Chem Toxicol 2009;47:2661 –5.[47] Saravi MSSSS. The chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties ofSambucus ebulus : a review. J Med Plant Res 2010;4:96 –103.[48] María Elena Cartea MF, Soengas P, Velasco P. Phenolic compounds inbrassica vegetables. Molecules 2011;16:251 –80.[49] Perona JS, Cabello-Moruno R, Ruiz-Gutierrez V. The role of virgin olive oil
components in the modulation of endothelial function. J Nutr Biochem2006;17:429 –45.[50] Mukherjee PK, Maity N, Nema NK, Sarkar BK. Bioactive compounds fromnatural resources against skin aging. Phytomedicine 2011;19:64 –73.[51] Kour K, Sharma N, Chandan BK, Koul S, Sangwan PL, Bani S. Protectiveeffect of Labisia pumila on stress-induced behavioral, biochemical, andimmunological alterations. Planta Med 2010;76:1497 –505.[52]Lazarev NV. Actual problems of the studies of the action of adaptogens,particularly preparations of Eleuterococcus , symposium on ginseng andEleuterococcus . XX meeting on investigations of ginseng and othermedicinal plants of Far East. Vladivostok: DVFSO; 1962. p. 7 –14.[53] Wenstrup RJ, Pinnell MS, Ehler-Danlos SR. Syndrome type IV: clinicalmanifestation of collagen lysyl hydroxylase deficiency. J Pediatr 1989;115:405– 9.[54] Moore T. Relation of carotin to vitamin A. Lancet 1929;2:380 –1.
[55] Madani KA. Retinoic acid: a general overview. Nutr Res 1986;6:107 –23.[56] Hegsted MD, Chichester CO, Darby WJ, McNutt KW, Stalvey RM, StotzEH. Present knowledge in nutrition. fourth ed. New York: NutritionFoundation; 1976. p. 64 –72.1334 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
[57] Griffiths CE, Russman AN, Majmudar G, Singer RS, Hamilton TA,Voorhees JJ. Restoration of collagen formation in photodamagedhuman skin by tretinoin (retinoic acid). N Engl J Med 1993;329:530 –5.[58] Breg RA, Prockop DJ. The thermal transition of a non-hydroxylated formof collagen: evidence for the role of hydroproline in stabilizing the triplehelix of collagen. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1973;52:115 –20.[59] Phillips CL, Combs SB, Pinnell SR. Effects of ascorbic acid on proliferationand collagen synthesis in relation to the donor age of human dermalfibroblasts. J Invest Dermatol 1994;103:228 –32.[60] Hata RL, Senoo H.L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate stimulates collagenaccumulation, cell proliferation, and formation of a three-dimensionaltissue-like substance by skin fibroblasts. J Cell Physiol 1989;138:8 –16.[61] Hering TM, Kollar J, Huynh TD, Varelas JB, Sandell LJ. Modulation of
extracellular matrix gene expression in bovine high-density chondrocytecultures by ascorbic acid and enzymatic resuspension. Arch BiochemBiophys 1994;314:90 –8.[62] Richelle M, Steiling H, Castiel I. In: Blair R, Tabor A, editors. Bioavailabilityand skin bioefficacy of vitamin C and E in nutritional cosmetics: beautyfrom within. New York: William Andrew (Elsevier); 2009. p. 113 –38.[63] Thiele JJ, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S. Vitamin E in human skin:organ-specific physiology and considerations for its use in dermatology.Mol Aspects Med 2007;28:646 –67.[64] Zussman J, Ahdout J, Kim J. Vitamins and photoaging: do scientific datasupport their use? J Am Acad Dermatol 2010;63:507 –25.[65] Ricciarelli R, Maroni P, Ozer N, Zingg J, Azzi A. Age-dependent increaseof collagenase expression can be reduced by α-tocopherol via proteinkinase C inhibition. Free Radic Biol Med 1999;27:729 –37.[66] Bissett DL, Chatterjee R, Hannon DP. Photoprotective effect of
superoxide-scavenging ant ioxidants against ultraviolet radiation-inducedchronic skin damage in the hairless mouse. Photodermatol PhotoimmunolPhotomed 1990;7:56– 62.[67] Mattila P, Kumpulainen J. Coenzymes Q9and Q 10: contents in foodsand dietary intake. J Food Compos Anal 2001;14:409 –17.[68] Crane LF. Discovery of ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) and an overview offunction. Mitochondrion 2007;7:S2 –7.[69] Tian Y, Yue T, Yuan Y, Soma PK, Williams PD, Machado PA, et al. Tobaccobiomass hydrolysate enhances coenzyme Q10 production using photo-synthetic Rhodospirillum rubrum . Bioresour Technol 2010;101:7877 –81.[70] Kyriazis DM, editor. The anti aging plan: stay young longer. ElementBooks Limited; 2000. p. 1 –30.[71] Arking R. The biology of aging: observations and principles. third ed.Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 3 –25.[72] Cernasov D. Design and development of anti-aging formulations. Skin
aging handbook: an integrated approach to biochemistry and productdevelopment. New Jersey: William Andrew Inc.; 2008. p. 291 –325.[73] Jenkins G. Molecular mechanisms of skin ageing. Mech Ageing Dev2002;123:801 –10.[74] Nair R, Sevukarajan M, Ashok Kumar TMCK. Collagen based drugdelivery systems: a review. J Innovative Trends Pharm Sci 2010;1:288–304.[75] Weber L, Kirsch E, Muller P, Krieg T. Collagen type distribution andmacromolecular organization of connective tissue in different layersof human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1984;82:156 –60.[76] Fleischmajer R, Perlish JS, Burgeson RE, Shaikh-Bahai F, Timpl R. Type Iand type III collagen interactions during fibrillogenesis. Ann N Y AcadSci 1990;580:161 –75.[77] Braverman M, Fonferko E. Studies in cutaneous aging: I. The elasticfibre network. J Invest Dermatol 1982;78:434 –43.[78] Talwar HS, Griffioth CEM, Fisher GJ, Hamilton TA, Voorhees JJ. Reduced
type I and type III procollagens in photodamaged adult human skin.J Invest Dermatol 1995;105:285 –90.[79] Pascual-Le Tallec L, Korwin-Zmijowska C, Adolphe M. Effects of simulatedsolar radiation on type I and type III collagens, collagenase (MMP-1) and
[79] Pascual-Le Tallec L, Korwin-Zmijowska C, Adolphe M. Effects of simulatedsolar radiation on type I and type III collagens, collagenase (MMP-1) andstromelysin (MMP-3) gene expression in human dermal fibroblastscultured in collagen gels. J Photochem Photobiol B 1998;42:226 –32.[80] Dumas M, Chaudagne C, Bonte F, Meybeck A. In vitro biosynthesis oftype I and III collagens by human dermal fibroblasts from donors ofincreasing age. Mech Ageing Dev 1994;73:179 –87.[81] Takeda K, Gosiewska A, Peterkofsky B. Similar, but not identical,modulation of expression of extracellular matrix components duringin vitro and in vivo aging of human skin fibroblasts. J Cell Physiol1992;153:450 –9.[82] Vazquez F, Palacios S, Aleman N, Guerrero F. Changes of the basementmembrane and type IV collagen in human skin during aging. Maturitas1996;25:209 –15.[83] Mays PK, Bishop JE, Laurent GJ. Age-related changes in the proportion
of types I and III collagen. Mech Ageing Dev 1988;45:203 –12.[84] Smith JG, Davidson EA, Sams WM, Clark RD. Alterations in humandermal connective tissue with age and chronic sun damage. J InvestDermatol 1962;39:347 –50.[85] Choi H, Kim D, Kim JW, Ngadiran S, Sarmidi MR. Labisia pumila extractprotects skin cells from photoaging caused by UVB irradiation. J BiosciBioeng 2010;109:291 –6.[86] Chondrogianni N, Kapeta S, Chinou L, Vassilatou K, Papassideri I, GonosES. Anti-ageing and rejuvenating effects of quercetin. Exp Gerontol2010;45:763 –71.[87] Kim DO, Jeong SW, Lee CY. Antioxidant capacity of phenolic phytochem-icals from various cultivars of plum. Food Chem 2003;81:321 –6.[88]Köpcke W, Krutmann J. Protection from sunburn with beta-carotene: ameta-analysis. Photochem Photobiol 2008;84:284 –8.[89] Ibrahim MH, Jaafar HZE, Rahmat A, Abdul Rahman Z. The relationship
between phenolics and flavonoids production with total non structuralcarbohydrate and photosynthetic rate in Labisia pumila Benth. underhigh CO2and nitrogen fertilization. Molecules 2011;16:162 –74.[90] Jamia AJ, Houghton PJ. Alkenyl resinols from Labisia pumila var. alata .Natural products research in Malaysia. Pulau Pinang: Universiti SainsMalaysia; 1999. p. 45 –6.[91] Stipcevic T, Piljac J, Vanden Berghe D. Effect of different flavonoids oncollagen synthesis in human fibroblasts. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 2006;61:29–34.[92] von der Mark K. Structure, biosynthesis and gene regulation of collagensin cartilage and bones. In: Seibel MJ, Robins SP, Bilezikian JP, editors.Dynamics of bone and cartilage metabolism. Orlando: Academic Press;1999. p. 3 –29.[93] Ryan MC, Sandell LJ. Differential expression of a cysteine-rich domainin the amino-terminal propeptide of type II (cartilage) procollagen byalternative splicing of mRNA. J Biol Chem 1990;265:10334 –9.
[94] Diegelmann RF, Evans MC. Wound healing: an overview of acute,fibrotic and delayed healing. Front Biosci 2004;9:283 –9.[95] Leoni S, Marino M, Devirgiliis LC, Spagnuolo S, Beninati S, Mangiantini MT.Age-related changes of glycosylation pattern in isolated rat hepatocytes.Mech Ageing Dev 1990;56:169 –78.[96] Kadler KE, Holmes DF, Trotter JA, Chapman JA. Collagen fibril formation.Biochem J 1996;316:1 –11.[97] Straface E, Falchi M, Giacomoni PU, Malorni W. Cytotoxicity andmorphological endpoints of exposure to UV: cultured cells as a modelsystem. In: Giacomoni PU, editor. Comprehensive series in photo-sciences, 3. Elsevier Science; 2001. p. 321– 36.[98] Berneburg M, Krutmann J. Photoimmunology, DNA repair andphotocarcinogenesis. J Photochem Photobiol B 2000;B54:87 –93.[99] Krutmann J. Ultraviolet a radiation-induced biological effects in humanskin: relevance for photoaging and photodermatosis. J Dermatol Sci2000;23:22 –6.
[100] Duthie MS, Kimber I, Norval M. The effects of ultraviolet radiation onthe human immune system. Br J Dermatol 1999;140:995 –1009.[101] Hall DA, Reed FB, Nuki G, Vince JD. The relative effects of age and
the human immune system. Br J Dermatol 1999;140:995 –1009.[101] Hall DA, Reed FB, Nuki G, Vince JD. The relative effects of age andcorticosteroid therapy on the collagen profile of subjects from dermiswith rheumatoid arthritis. Age Ageing 1974;3:15 –22.[102] Shuster S, Black MM, MacVitie E. The influence of age and sex on skinthickness, skin collagen and density. Br J Dermatol 1975;93:639 –43.[103] Fisher GJ, Talwar HS, Lin J, Lin P, McPhillips F, Wang Z, et al. Retinoicacid inhibits induction of c-Jun protein by ultraviolet radiation thatoccurs subsequent to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinasepathways in human skin in vivo. J Clin Invest 1998;101:1432 –40.[104] Berneburg M, Plettenberg H, Krutmann J. Photoaging of human skin.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2000;16:239 –44.[105] Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, Herrmann G, Ma W,Kuhr L, et al. Photoaging of the skin: from phenotype to mechanisms.Exp Gerontol 2000;35:307– 16.
[106] Wenk J, Brenneisen P, Meewes C, Wlaschek M, Peters T, Blaudschun R,et al. UV induced oxidative stress and photoaging. Curr Probl Dermatol2001;29:83 –94.[107] Dong KK, Damaghi N, Picart SD, Markova NG, Obayashi K, Okano Y,et al. UV-induced DNA damage initiates release of MMP-1 in humanskin. Exp Dermatol 2008;17:1037 –44.[108] Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, Voorhees JJ. Pathophys-iology of premature skin aging induced by ultraviolet light. N Engl J Med1997;337:1419 –28.[109] Fisher GJ, Datta S, Wang ZQ, Li XY, Quan T, Chung JH, et al. c-Jundependent inhibition of cutaneous procollagen transcription follow-ing ultraviolet irradiation is reversed by all- trans retinoid acid. J ClinInvest 2000;106:663 –70.[110] Houghton PJ, Jamal JA, Milligan SR. Studies on Labisia pumila herb andits commercial products. J Pharm Pharmacol (Suppl) 1999;51:236.1335 L.S. Chua et al. / Fitoterapia 83 (2012) 1322 –1335
