Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155Beauty in a smile: the role of medial orbitofrontal cortexin facial attractivenessJ. O’Dohertya,∗, J. Winstona, H. Critchleya, D. Perrettb, D.M. Burtb, R.J. Dolana,caWellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, 12 Queen Square, London WC1 3BG, UKbSchool of Psychology, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews KY16 9JU, UKcRoyal Free Hospital School of Medicine, London NW3 2PF, UKAbstractTheattractivenessofafaceisahighlysalientsocialsignal,inﬂuencingmatechoiceandothersocialjudgements.Inthisstudy,weused
event-relatedfunctionalmagneticresonanceimaging(fMRI)toinvestigatebrainregionsthatrespondtoattractivefaceswhichmanifestedeitheraneutralormildlyhappyfaceexpression.Attractivefacesproducedactivationofmedialorbitofrontalcortex(OFC),aregioninvolvedin representing stimulus-reward value. Responses in this region were further enhanced by a smiling facial expression, suggesting that thereward value of an attractive face as indexed by medial OFC activity is modulated by a perceiver directed smile.© 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.Keywords: Facial attractiveness; Face expression; Reward; Orbitofrontal cortex; fMRI1. IntroductionNeuropsychological and functional neuroimaging inves-tigations frequently use face expressions to probe brainregions involved in affect, highlighting regions such as theamygdala,insulaandorbitofrontalcortex(OFC) [2,7,30,43] .
One feature of a face that can elicit a strong affectiveresponse in an observer is its attractiveness or beauty. At-tractiveness impacts not only on mating success, but also onkinship opportunities, evaluations of personality and per-formance, as well as employment prospects [12,13,27,54] .Indeed a sociobiological perspective on attractiveness sug-gests it has an evolutionary basis that provides a markerof reproductive ﬁtness [53,54]. Consistent with this is theﬁnding that ratings of facial attractiveness have a high de-gree of consistency between cultures [40]. Furthermore,preference for attractive faces is found in infants indicatingthat this phenomenon emerges early in development [28].Facial attributes that contribute to attractiveness includefacial symmetry and the extent to which an individual faceconforms to an average prototype [23,29,37] . Sexually di-
morphic features, which in males corresponds to thick browridges and a large jaw structure, and in females correspondsto a small lower face, high cheekbones and thick lips, alsocontribute to facial attractiveness [39].∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-207-8337483;fax:+44-207-8131420.E-mail address: j.odoherty@ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk (J. O’Doherty).Little is known about how the human brain represents fa-cial attractiveness. An early PET study reported activity ofinferior prefrontal cortex during the assessment of facial at-tractiveness [31]. A recent study has reported an interactionbetween facial attractiveness and eye-gaze in ventral thala-mus extending into striatum, wherein eye-gaze directed attheobserverproducedenhancedactivationinthisregionrel-ative to the response elicited by faces with eye-gaze averted[25]. This study failed to identify brain regions sensitive to
the main effect of attractiveness perhaps reﬂecting the lim-ited number of face stimuli which were also not optimisedto measure responses to attractiveness per se.The approach taken in the present study is to assumethat an attractive face functions as a reward. Evidence fromsingle-cell neurophysiology studies in non-human primatesand from neuroimaging studies in humans suggests that onebrain region in particular is involved in representing the re-wardvalueofstimuliindiversemodalities:theorbitofrontalcortex[45].OFCisinvolvedinrepresentingtherewardvalueof gustatory, olfactory, auditory and somatosensory stimuli[8,11,19,34,47] . This region is also sensitive to abstract re-inforcers such as winning or losing money, or positive andnegative verbal feedback [9,16,17,33] . OFC is also known
inforcers such as winning or losing money, or positive andnegative verbal feedback [9,16,17,33] . OFC is also knownto be involved in processing at least some facial emotionalexpressions [7,24].Consistent with this approach, Aharon et al. [3]exploredthe hypothesis that attractive faces act as a reward andshowed that male subjects were prepared to exert effort bymeans of key presses in order to gain access to attractive0028-3932/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.PII:S0028-3932(02)00145-8
148 J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155Fig. 1. Examples of face stimuli used in the study. The stimulus set consisted of 12 male and 12 female faces rated as high in attractiveness, and 12male and 12 female faces rated as low in attractiveness on the basis of prior behavioural ratings. Faces are equated for luminance, eye-gaze is directe dtowards the observer and the stimuli are approximately balanced across conditions with neutral to mildly happy face expressions. Examples of facesrated by subjects as displaying a happy face expression, are shown on the left of the ﬁgure, whereas faces rated by subjects as displaying a neutral faceexpression are shown on the right. The degree of happiness of faces in the happy condition is quite subtle in comparison to a canonical happy faceexpression such as that used in the Ekman and Friesen series [14].female faces indicating that they were prepared to work to
obtainviewsofsuchfaces.Inafollowupblockdesignfunc-tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, Aharonet al. reported activity in the nucleus accumbens in a smallgroup of male subjects to the presentation of attractive fe-male faces, as well as in other brain regions such as OFC ina post-hoc analysis. The use of a block design means thatit is not possible to determine whether responses observedwere due to the presentation of the attractive faces or toan expectation of reward encompassed within the period inwhichattractivefaceswereexpectedandactuallypresented.In the present study, we used an event-related functionalmagnetic resonance imaging design to measure neural re-sponses while subjects were presented with both male andfemale faces that were either high or low in attractiveness(seeFig.1).Theuseofevent-relatedfMRIenabledustode-
termine responses directly related to the presentation of theattractivefacestimuluswithoutanyconfoundofexpectancyas the order of presentation of faces from each conditionwas fully randomised.We postulated that facial attractiveness as a reward inthe visual modality would evoke event-related responsesin orbitofrontal cortex. We also considered a priori thatresponses to attractive faces could occur in two other brainregions implicated in reward processing, namely the ventralstriatum and amygdala [6,18,50]. Given the salience of fa-cialattractiveness,wehypothesisedthattheattractivenessofa face would be processed automatically irrespective of thetask performed by the subject, as has already been shownfor emotional face expressions [30]. Consequently, the task
was for subjects to determine the gender of each face pre-sented in the scanner in the absence of explicit instructionsas to the nature of the experimental question until after thescanning was completed. At this point we asked subjectsto provide attractiveness ratings for each face. In order toinvestigate gender-speciﬁc responses, we scanned a total of25subjectsofwhich12werefemale,allowingacomparisonbetween genders at the random effects level. Furthermore,thefactthatfacesinthestimulussetdisplayedeitherneutralor mildy happy face expressions (expressed as a smile) en-abled us to address the issue of the extent to which positiveface expression modulates attractiveness responses.2. Methods2.1. SubjectsA total of 25 healthy right-handed normal subjects wereincluded in the experiment of which 13 were male. Twenty-foursubjectswereCaucasian.Themeanageofthemalesub-jects was 24 .5±5.1 (S.D.), and of the female subjects was23.1±3.4(S.D.).Therewerenosigniﬁcantdifferencesinthe
ages of the subject groups. The subjects were pre-assessedto exclude those with a prior history of neurological or psy-chiatric illness. All subjects gave informed consent and thestudy was approved by the local research ethics committee.2.2. Stimulus setForty-eight face stimuli were selected from a larger pool
2.2. Stimulus setForty-eight face stimuli were selected from a larger poolof 138 Caucasian faces (depicting healthy normal adultsaged between 20 and 35 years) that had been rated bya separate group of subjects ( n=64 of which 31 werefemale) for attractiveness in behavioural pilot studies con-ducted outside the scanner. Attractiveness was rated usinga scale from 1 to 7, where 1: ‘not attractive’ and 7: ‘highlyattractive’. Twenty-four faces (of which 12 were female)were selected to form the high attractiveness condition and24faces(ofwhich12werefemale)wereselectedtoformthe
J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155 149low attractiveness condition by choosing faces at the highand low ends of the distribution of attractiveness ratings.In addition to attractiveness criteria, faces were chosen tohave the following characteristics: eye-gaze forward, headposition forwards, and to be approximately balanced acrossconditions with neutral to mildly happy face expressions.The face images were masked to remove hair and wereadjusted to be of approximately equal size and luminance.The faces were centred in a 450 ×450 pixel grey back-ground and presented at a screen resolution of 1024 ×768pixels. Examples from the stimulus set are shown in Fig. 1.2.3. Experimental paradigmSubjects were scanned while being presented with four
repetitionsofeachofthe48facesinrandomorder,makingatotalof192facepresentations.Oneachtrial,afacewaspre-sented for 1100ms followed by a ﬁxation cross for a further2000ms. Randomly interspersed with the face presentationtrials were 96 null event trials in which a ﬁxation cross waspresented for 3100ms. Following the presentation of eachface subjects were instructed to press one of two buttons ona response key-pad with their right hand to indicate whetherthe face was of male or female gender. Prior to scanning,subjects were informed that the study was concerned withinvestigating face processing but no reference was made tothe experimental aims. After the scanning task was com-plete, subjects took part in a self-paced task in which theyrated each face for attractiveness and in a separate task us-ing a forced choice procedure, chose from a list of sevenemotion categories (neutral, happy, angry, disgust, fear, sad,surprise) which emotion they perceived in each face stimu-lus (seeSection 3 ).
perceived in each face stimu-lus (seeSection 3 ). To assist them in the latter task, subjects
were provided with a printed sheet depicting each of theseven emotions from the Ekman and Friesen series [14].2.4. Imaging procedureThe functional imaging was conducted by usin ga2TeslaSiemens Vision MRI scanner to acquire gradient echo T2∗weighted echo-planar images (EPI) images with blood oxy-genation level dependent (BOLD) contrast. Each volumecomprised 33 axial slices of 3.3mm thickness and 3mmin-planeresolution.Volumeswereacquiredcontinuouslyev-ery 2.5s. These speciﬁc parameters produced EPI imagesin which signal dropout from susceptibility artefact was re-stricted to far caudal OFC leaving the remaining sectors ofOFC intact (see Fig. 3c). Subjects were placed in a lighthead restraint within the scanner to limit head movementduringacquisition.AT1-weightedstructuralimagewasalsoacquired for each subject.2.5. Imaging analysisThe images were analysed using SPM99 (Wellcome De-
partment of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK). In orderto correct for subject motion, the images were realigned tothe ﬁrst volume [20]. The images were then spatially nor-malized to a standard T2∗template with a resampled voxelsize of 3mm3[20], and spatial smoothing was applied us-
the ﬁrst volume [20]. The images were then spatially nor-malized to a standard T2∗template with a resampled voxelsize of 3mm3[20], and spatial smoothing was applied us-
ing a gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum(FWHM) of 10mm. Intensity normalisation, high pass tem-poral ﬁltering (using a ﬁlter width of twice the minimuminter-trial interval) were also applied to the data. Followingpre-processing, statistical analysis was carried out using thegeneral linear model, in which each single event was mod-elled as a delta function convolved with the haemodynamicresponse function (HRF) and its temporal derivative. Wereport here three separate analyses of the data. In the ﬁrstcanonical analysis, the following four events were modelledseparately: male high attractive, male low attractive, femalehigh attractive and female low attractive. This enabled themain effects of attractiveness, interactions between-subjectgender and attractiveness, and between face gender andattractiveness to be tested by applying linear contrasts ofparameter estimates. In the second analysis, subjects’ ownattractivenessratingsweremodelledbycreatingtworegres-sors of interest:
of interest: female and male faces, in which the heightoftheHRFforeachstimuluswasmodulatedasafunctionoftheattractivenessratingaccordedtothatfacestimulus.Inthethird analysis, faces categorised in the happy, intermediateandneutralfaceexpressioncategoriesofhighandlowattrac-tiveness were modelled separately in a canonical analysisto determine the main effect of attractiveness, of happinessand the interaction between attractiveness and happiness. Ineach of the above analyses, residual effects of head motionwere corrected for by including the six estimated motionparameters for each subject as regressors of no interest.
The results from each subject for each of the above anal-yses were then taken to the random effects level (separatelyfor each analysis) by applying t-tests between contrast im-ages to produce group statistical parametric maps. We re-portresultsinaprioriregionsofinterest(OFC,striatumandamygdala) at P<0.001 uncorrected for multiple compar-isons,andindicateifsuchactivationssurvivecorrectionsformultiplecomparisonswithinasmallvolumedeﬁnedaroundthe region of interest using the theory of gaussian randomﬁelds[21]. Activations in other brain regions are reportedas signiﬁcant at P<0.05 corrected for whole brain. Fordescriptive purposes, we also report activations outside re-gions of interest at P<0.001 uncorrected but it should benotedthatnostatisticalinferenceisdrawnaboutsuchresultswhich clearly require subsequent replication.3. Results3.1. Behavioural ratings of attractivenessGiven the possible effect of subjects’ sexual orientation
on the imaging results, we asked subjects following scan-ning to rate their sexual orientation on a 7-point scale from
150 J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–1551 (exclusively homosexual) to 7 (exclusively heterosexual).Twenty-four subjects rated their orientation as being either6 or 7 indicating that they had predominantly heterosexualpreferences. Subjects also rated the facial attractiveness ofeach face using a 7-point scale, where 7 =very attractive,1=not attractive. Faces in the high attractiveness categorywere rated as being signiﬁcantly more attractive than thefaces in the low attractiveness category as shown by a re-peatedmeasuresanalysisofvariancewithtwowithin-subjectfactors: attractiveness and face stimulus gender and onebetween-subjects factor: subject gender (main effect attrac-tiveness: F(1,22)=327.121; P<0.001). A signiﬁcantinteraction was found between-subject gender and attrac-tiveness ( F(1,22)=7.768; P<0.05), but no signiﬁcant
three-wayinteractionwasfoundbetweenattractiveness,facestimulus gender and subject gender (across the 24 out of 25subjectsthatexpressedheterosexualpreferences).Ascanbeseen from Fig. 2a, the average attractiveness ratings for theface stimuli in the high attractiveness condition do not over-lapwiththeratingsforthefacestimuliinthelowattractive-ness condition. Average attractiveness ratings are shown formale and female subjects separately in Fig. 2b.3.2. Neuroimaging results3.2.1. High–low attractive facesA linear contrast between the high attractiveness and lowattractivenessconditionsattherandomeffectslevelrevealedsigniﬁcant effects in medial OFC ( −3, 36,−18,z=4.57;signiﬁcant at P<0.05 corrected for small volume using a60cm3binary mask deﬁned over the anatomical boundariesof OFC). Signiﬁcant effects were also observed in bilateralposteriorcingulatecortices(left:9, −48,33, z=5.85;right:−6,−45,42, z=4.84signiﬁcantat P<0.05correctedfor
−6,−45,42, z=4.84signiﬁcantat P<0.05correctedforwhole brain volume). Signiﬁcant effects were also observedinbilateralmedialprefrontalcortex( P<0.001,uncorrectedfor multiple comparisons; left: −6, 63, 0, z=4.44; right:3, 42,−12,z=4.39). These results are shown in detail inFig. 3a.3.2.2. Low–high attractive facesThe opposite contrast was also performed to detect areaswithgreaterresponsestolowattractivefacesrelativetohighattractive faces. Signiﬁcant effects ( P<0.05, corrected formultiple comparisons) were evident in bilateral insula (left:−33, 21, −3,z=5.61; right: 45, 30, 9, z=5.59), inferiorfrontal gyrus (45, 30, 9, z=5.59) and dorsal para-cingulatecortex ( −6, 24, 48, z=5.62). Effects were also found inright ventrolateral prefrontal cortex bordering OFC at P<0.001 uncorrected (45, 45, −9,z=3.26).3.2.3. Interaction between face gender andattractivenessIn order to determine whether responses to attractive
faces were modulated by the gender of the face (oppositesex or same sex), a contrast corresponding to the interactionFig. 2. (a) Average attractiveness ratings for each of the face stimuliused shown separately for the gender of each face and for the high andlow attractiveness conditions. As can be seen, there is no overlap inthe attractiveness ratings for stimuli in the high and low attractivenessconditions. (b) Mean attractiveness ratings of the male and female facesin the high and low attractiveness conditions. The ratings for the maleand female subjects are shown in separate histograms.between face gender and attractiveness was performed. Noeffects were present in regions of interest at P<0.001uncorrected, or in other brain regions at P<0.05 correctedfor whole brain. Descriptively, we report the sole area inwhich a signiﬁcant interaction between face gender andattractiveness was found at P<0.001 uncorrected: the
anterior ventral bank of the superior temporal sulcus (66,−30,−9,z=3.59;P<0.001 uncorrected).3.2.4. Gender differences in responses to attractive facesTo test for gender differences in brain regions responding
3.2.4. Gender differences in responses to attractive facesTo test for gender differences in brain regions respondingto facial attractiveness a direct comparison was conductedbetween the linear contrasts of the main effect of attrac-tiveness for each gender at the random effects level. No
J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155 151Fig. 3. (a) Main effect of attractiveness. Responses in medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and posterior cingulate cortexin the main effect of attractiveness shown on coronal and sagittal views, superimposed on a SPM canonical T1 image. The threshold is set at P<0.001uncorrected for illustration. (b) Plot of parameter estimates (beta values) of the effect of attractiveness for a peak voxel in the OFC to the presenta tionof faces of the opposite or same sex. The averaged beta values are shown separately for male and female subjects. (c) Medial OFC activation shown ona transverse slice superimposed on the averaged EPI image across subjects. This shows that with the imaging parameters used, the region of OFC proneto signal dropout owing to susceptibility artefact is caudal to the area in which activation is reported (see Section 2 ).signiﬁcant gender differences in the responses to the main
effect of attractiveness were observed in regions of interestatP<0.001 uncorrected or in other brain regions at P<0.05 corrected. To determine whether any gender-speciﬁcresponses occur to faces of the opposite sex, a gender com-parison was performed for the effect of attractive faces ofthe opposite sex. A region of medial prefrontal cortex wasfound to show signiﬁcantly greater responses to attractivefaces of the opposite sex in male subjects than in femalesubjects (18, 42, 0, z=4.98;P<0.05 corrected for wholebrain). Descriptively, we report regions responding morein female subjects than in male subjects to attractive facesof the opposite sex at P<0.001 uncorrected which were:right inferior temporal gyrus (48, −60,−27,z=3.61) andanatomically related posterior visual areas (including leftmiddle occipital gyrus: −51,−75, 0, z=4.5).3.2.5. Parametric analysis of attractiveness responsesusing the subject’s own ratingsIn addition to the canonical analysis, we used the attrac-
tiveness ratings provided by each subject as a parametriccovariate and tested for areas in which the magnitude of theevent-related response followed the proﬁle of the subjects’own attractiveness ratings. The results were similar to thoseofthecanonicalanalysisofthemaineffectofattractiveness,with parametric responses in medial orbitofrontal, medialprefrontalandposteriorcingulatecorticeswereallpositivelycorrelated with attractiveness ratings ( P<0.001, uncor-rected).Thecontrasttodetermineareasthatwerenegativelycorrelated with the subjects own ratings revealed similar re-sults to the analogous canonical analysis, except that in thiscase effects were more clearly evident in lateral OFC (48,42,−15,z=3.67;P<0.001 uncorrected), as well as inadjacentventrolateralPFC.Asinthecanonicalanalysis,sig-niﬁcant effects were observed in insula, para-cingulate cor-tex and inferior frontal gyrus ( P<0.05, corrected). Theseresults are illustrated in Fig. 4.3.2.6. Effects of face expression
3.2.6. Effects of face expressionAfter scanning, subjects were asked to decide whichemotional face expression was displayed by each face via aseven-way forced choice procedure (using the categories ofangry, sad, fearful, happy, surprised, disgusted or neutral).The mean number of faces rated as neutral across subjectswas: 22 (out of 48) and as happy: 17 (out of 48). Threeor less faces were rated in each of the other categories offearful, disgusted, sad, angry or surprised, indicating thatsubjects did not rate these emotions as being prominentlyrepresented in the stimulus set (all faces in the stimulus setwere selected to have neutral to mildly happy face expres-sions). However, 10 faces on average (across subjects) wererated as happy in the high attractiveness conditions and 7stimuli were rated as happy in the low attractiveness condi-tions, a difference between the conditions in the number offaces rated as happy that was signiﬁcant (at P<0.001).
Given the signiﬁcant difference in the number of expres-
Given the signiﬁcant difference in the number of expres-sionsratedashappybetweenthehighandlowattractivenessconditions, a further analysis was performed to determinethe degree to which a positive face expression modulatedattractiveness responses. To achieve this, faces in each con-dition were categorised by the proportion of subjects whodescribed a particular face as being happy. If over 66% of
152 J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155Fig. 4. Results of parametric analysis, in which the subject’s own attractiveness ratings were used as regressors. (a) Group random effects result in dicatingareas positively correlated with the subject’s own attractiveness ratings. Responses are illustrated in medial OFC, medial PFC and posterior cingu latecortex and in a fusiform region at a threshold of P<0.001 uncorrected for display. (b) A plot of peri-stimulus time (PST) against the parametricresponses from a peak voxel in OFC is shown for a single subject. (c) Areas negatively correlated with the subject’s own attractiveness ratings (i.e.which demonstrate increased responses to faces that are rated as low in attractiveness). Responses are illustrated in bilateral insula, right later al OFC andlateral prefrontal cortex.the subjects rated a face as happy then it was deemed to be
happy,andiflessthan33%ofsubjectsratedafaceashappyitwasdeemedtobeneutral,withallotherfacesbeingplacedin an intermediate category. The mean number of subjectsrating a face as happy in the happy condition was 19.5 (outFig. 5. (a) Results of main effect of attractiveness in 2 ×2 factorial model with degree of happy face expression as the other factor (as determined bythe proportion of subjects rating a face as happy). (b) Plot of the effect of attractiveness for a peak voxel in the OFC. The values shown corresponds tothe mean effect size (parameter estimates of high–low attractive faces) partioned according to the proportion of subjects rating a face as happy. A fa cewas included in the happy condition if >66% rated the face as happy, and in the neutral condition if <33% rated the face as happy. (c) Results of theinteraction between attractiveness and happiness shown for a sagittal and coronal view through medial OFC illustrating that this region responds mo re
to attractive faces that are happy than to attractive faces that are not happy.of a total of 25), whereas the mean number of subjectsrating a face as happy in the neutral condition was 1.3. Itshouldbeemphasisedthatgiventhestimulussetused,facesin the happy condition display a mild degree of happinesswhen contrasted with a canonical happy expression as used
J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155 153byEkmanandFriesen [14](seeFig.1).Aone-wayanalysisof variance test between the mean attractiveness ratings inthe three face expression conditions (happy, intermediateand neutral) did not reveal any signiﬁcant differences inattractiveness ratings between the conditions indicating thathappy faces were not rated on average as more attractive.A factorial model was ﬁtted to the data at the ﬁrst level inwhich happy, intermediate and neutral faces in the high andlow attractiveness conditions were modelled separately sothat the main effect of attractiveness could be tested whiletaking into account the effects of happiness. At the randomeffects level, the main effect of attractiveness still yieldedsigniﬁcant effects in medial orbitofrontal cortex (as well asmedial prefrontal cortex) at P<0.05 corrected for smallvolume and at P<0.001 uncorrected, respectively ( Fig.5a). The opposite contrast to determine regions responding
moretolowthanhighattractivenessfacesonceagainyieldedsigniﬁcant responses in lateral OFC, lateral PFC, insula andpara-cingulate cortex. The main effect of happiness did notproduceanysigniﬁcanteffectsinOFC(asassessedbyacon-trast between happy and neutral faces). A plot of the effectof attractiveness shown separately for faces from the happy,intermediate and neutral expression conditions is shown fora peak OFC voxel in Fig. 5b. This plot reveals that the maineffect of attractiveness in OFC is modulated by the extentto which subjects judged a face to be displaying a happyface expression. This effect was tested for more formally bythe interaction between happiness and attractiveness, whichrevealed signiﬁcant effects in medial OFC at P<0.001uncorrected ( −6, 36,−27,z=3.8; seeFig. 5c).4. DiscussionThe main ﬁnding in this paper is that human medial or-
bitofrontal cortex, a region known to be involved in rep-resenting stimulus-reward value, responds to attractivenessor beauty in a face. Furthermore, this region is engagedautomatically by attractive faces, even when subjects areperforming an unrelated face processing task that does notexplicitly assess facial attractiveness. Attractive faces canbe considered a rewarding stimulus, and as such engagesa brain region known to be involved in processing otherkinds of natural rewards such as food, odours or tastes aswell as abstract rewards, such as pleasant music or mone-tary gain [8,11,33,47] . Moreover, the degree of activation in
orbitofrontalcortextoattractivefaceswasmodulatedbytheextent to which subjects perceived the presence of a mildlypositivefaceexpression,manifestasasmile.Attractivefacesthatweremoreconsistentlyratedbysubjectsasdisplayingahappyexpression,producedstrongerresponsesintheregioncomparedtofacesthatweredisplayinganeutralexpression,as shown by the signiﬁcant interaction between attractive-ness and happiness ( Fig. 5b and c ).It should be noted that the effect we demonstrate cannotbe ascribed to a difference in attractiveness ratings betweenhappy and non-happy faces as there was no signiﬁcant dif-ference in attractiveness ratings between these categories inthepresentstudy.However,suchaneffecthasbeenreportedin a previous behavioural study which found that smilingfaces were evaluated as more attractive than neutral facesin a large cohort of subjects ( n=330)[36]. Given that
medial orbitofrontal cortex is associated with representingstimulus-reward value, it may be that the reward value of aface is much enhanced when that face is smiling at the ob-server(evenifsubtlyasisthecasewiththestimulussetusedhere). The presence of a smile may provide an importantsignal that a reward is or is not attainable. On a behaviourallevel, this increase in reward value may not be reﬂectedsolely in attractiveness ratings which might capture moreinvariant aspects of facial aesthetics. Rather, this change inreward value may be reﬂected by changes in other affec-tive ratings such as the perceived pleasantness of the face.In future studies, it will be important to measure a range ofdifferent affective judgements in addition to attractivenessin order to address this possibility.It should be noted that face expression is not the only cuethat can modulate neuronal responses to facial attractive-ness.Othercues,suchaseye-gazemayalsoplayarole [25].
Further, the context in which the faces are presented mightalsoimpactonattractivenessresponses.Inthepresentstudy,subjectsperformedanimplicittaskinwhichtheymadegen-der judgements during scanning. It is an open question asto whether explicit judgements of attractiveness would pro-duce a similar or different pattern of neural responses toattractive faces.In contrast to the block design of Aharon et al. [3],w edidnotobserveresponsesinnucleusaccumbenstoattractivefaces. A likely explanation for the different results observedin the two studies is that the nucleus accumbens activity ob-servedbyAharonetal.wasduetorewardexpectationratherthan being driven by presentation of attractive faces per se.There is now considerable evidence to suggest that ventralstriatum including nucleus accumbens is involved in incen-tive motivation or reward expectation, rather than being in-volved in affective responses to reward itself [6,26,32,50] .
OFC on the other hand is known to be involved in repre-senting stimulus affective value as well as being involvedin reward expectation [45,49,51] . Thus, OFC responses inthe present study can be attributed to the affective value ofthe attractive faces themselves and it is likely that responseswere not observed in nucleus accumbens as there was noconfound of reward expectation.WenoteddifferentialmedialandlateralOFCactivity,withmedial OFC responding more to high attractive faces thanlowattractivefaces,andlateralOFC(intheparametricanal-ysis)aswellaslateralPFCrespondingmoretolowattractivefacesthanhighattractivefaces.Thiseffectisconsistentwithprevious evidence of a dissociation between medial and lat-eralOFCresponsestoadifferenttypeofreinforcer:abstractmonetary reward and punishment [33]. These ﬁndings sug-gest that for at least these two different types of reinforcer,
154 J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155rewardsandpunishmentsarerepresentedseparatelyinOFC,with rewards being represented in medial OFC and punish-ments being represented in lateral OFC. This dissociationmay not apply for all types of reward, as pleasant gusta-tory stimuli have been found to activate lateral OFC [32].However, dissociable responses have been reported in theseregions over time as food was eaten to satiety in a meal inwhichthefoodchangedfrombeingpleasanttoaversive [52].Itisknownthatlesionsofhumanorbitofrontalcortexpro-duceimpairmentsatgamblingandreversallearningtasksinwhichpatientsmustchoosefromasetofstimuliandﬂexiblyalter their choice of stimulus on the basis of the rewardingand punishing feedback [5,46]. These ﬁndings suggest that
one function of reward and punishment representations inorbitofrontal cortex is to guide behavioural choice. Indeed,it is possible that medial and lateral orbitofrontal and pre-frontalcorticesplaydifferentrolesinthisfunction,suchthatmedial orbitofrontal cortex may be involved in signallingthatbehaviourtowardagivenstimulusshouldbemaintainedfollowing rewarding feedback, whereas lateral orbitofrontalcortex may be concerned with signalling that behaviour to-wardagivenstimulusshouldbealteredfollowingpunishingfeedback [15,33,52] .We also tested for areas of the brain that respondedmore to faces of the opposite sex than to faces of the samesex in those subjects that expressed heterosexual prefer-ences. The only region in which a signiﬁcant face gender ×attractiveness interaction was evident was in the anteriorventral bank of the superior temporal sulcus (STS). Thisregion has been suggested to be part of a network of brainregions involved in social cognition [1,4,10]. Neurons in
STS are sensitive to face stimuli particularly in respondingto social signals conveyed by eye-gaze or head direction[38,41,42] . The enhanced activity in this region to attractivefaces of the opposite sex may reﬂect the increased socialsalience of opposite sex attractive faces. An importantcaveat is that responses in this region did not survive cor-rection for multiple comparisons and further replication isnecessary before ﬁrm conclusions can be drawn. Althoughmedial OFC did not show a signiﬁcant interaction, it canbe seen from Fig. 3athat there is a non-signiﬁcant trend inthat the size of the response to opposite sex faces is largerthan for same sex faces.We also tested for gender differences in the responses to
attractivefaces,andmorespeciﬁcallytooppositesexattrac-tive faces. Although no gender differences were found inresponses to attractive faces in general, a signiﬁcant genderdifference was observed in the responses to opposite sexattractive faces in right ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Thisregion showed signiﬁcantly greater responses to oppositesex attractive faces in males than in females. Although thefunctions of this brain region is poorly understood, damageto this region and adjacent OFC has been found to produceimpairments in affective decision making [5]. In humanneuroimaging studies this region has been found to respondto monetary reward or during pleasant affective states suchashumour [22,33].Itisofinteresttonotethatinnon-humanprimates this region has strong efferent connections withthe hypothalamus, an area involved in sexual behaviourthat has been implicated in gender-speciﬁc responses to sexpheromones in humans [35,44,48] .
To conclude, we present evidence that attractive faces
To conclude, we present evidence that attractive facesproduce activation in human orbitofrontal cortex, whensubjects are not explicitly assessing faces for attractiveness.The ﬁnding of responses in orbitofrontal cortex, a regionknown to be involved in representing stimulus-reward valueis consistent with the hypothesis that attractive faces canbe considered to be a type of reward. Responses in theseregions are modulated by the extent to which subjects per-ceive the presence of a positive face expression, indicatingthat the reward value of an attractive face is enhanced ifthat face is smiling at the observer.AcknowledgementsThis work is supported by a programme grant to RJDfrom the Wellcome Trust.References[1] Adolphs R. The neurobiology of social cognition. Current Opinionin Neurobiology 2001;11:231–9.[2] Adolphs R, Tranel D, Damasio H, Damasio A. Impaired recognitionof emotion in facial expressions following bilateral damage to thehuman amygdala. Nature 1994;372:662–9.
[3] Aharon I, Etcoff N, Ariely D, Chabris CF, O’Connor E, BreiterHC. Beautiful faces have variable reward value. fMRI behavioralevidence. Neuron 2001;32:537–51.[4] Allison T, Puce A, McCarthy G. Social perception from visual cues:role of the STS region. Trends in Cognitive Science 2000;4:267–78.[5] Bechara A, Damasio AR, Damasio H, Anderson SW. Insensitivity tofuture consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex.Cognition 1994;50:7–15.[6] Berridge KC. Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking.Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 1996;20:1–25.[7] Blair RJ, Morris JS, Frith CD, Perrett DI, Dolan RJ. Dissociableneural responses to facial expressions of sadness and anger. Brain1999;122:883–93.[8] Blood AJ, Zatorre RJ, Bermudez P, Evans AC. Emotional responsesto pleasant and unpleasant music correlate with activity in paralimbicbrain regions. Nature Neuroscience 1999;2:382–7.[9] Breiter HC, Aharon I, Kahneman D, Dale A, Shizgal P. Functional
imaging of neural responses to expectancy and experience ofmonetary gains and losses. Neuron 2001;30:619–39.[10] Brothers L. The social brain: a project for integrating primatebehaviour and neurophysiology in a new domain. ConceptsNeuroscience 1990;1:27–51.[11] Critchley HD, Rolls ET. Hunger and satiety modify the responsesof olfactory and visual neurons in the primate orbitofrontal cortex.Journal of Neurophysiology 1996;75:1673–86.[12] Dion K, Berscheid E, Walster E. What is beautiful is good. Journalof Personality and Social Psychology 1972;24:285–90.[13] Dipboye RL, Arvey RD, Terpstra DE. Sex and physical attractivenessof raters and applicants as determinants of resume evaluations.Journal of Applied Psychology 1977;4:288–94.[14] Ekman P, Friesen WV. Unmasking the face. New Jerssey:Prenctice-Hall; 1975.
J. O’Doherty et al./Neuropsychologia 41 (2003) 147–155 155[15] Elliott R, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. Dissociable functions in the medialand lateral orbitofrontal cortex: evidence from human neuroimagingstudies. Cerebral Cortex 2000;10:308–17.[16] Elliott R, Friston KJ, Dolan RJ. Dissociable neural responsesin human reward systems. Journal of Neuroscience 2000;20:6159–65.[17] Elliott R, Frith CD, Dolan RJ. Differential neural response topositive and negative feedback in planning and guessing tasks.Neuropsychologia 1997;35:1395–404.[18] Everitt BJ, Parkinson JA, Olmstead MC, Arroyo M, Robledo P,Robbins TW. Associative processes in addiction and reward. The roleof amygdala-ventral striatal subsystems. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences 1999;877:412–38.[19] Francis S, Rolls ET, Bowtell R, McGlone F, O’Doherty J, BrowningA, et al. The representation of the pleasantness of touch in the humanbrain, and its relation to taste and olfactory areas. NeuroReport1999;10:453–9.
[20] FristonKJ,AshburnerJ,PolineJB,FrithCD,HeatherJD,FrackowiakRS. Spatial registration and normalisation of images. Human BrainMapping 1995;2:165–89.[21] Friston KJ, Worsley KJ, Frackowiak RS, Mazziotta JC, Evans AC.Assessing the signiﬁcance of focal activations using their spatialextent. Human Brain Mapping 1994;1:214–20.[22] Goel V, Dolan RJ. The functional anatomy of humor: segregatingcognitive and affective components. Nature Neuroscience 2001;4:237–8.[23] Grammer K, Thornhill R. Human (Homo sapiens) facial attrac-tiveness and sexual selection: the role of symmetry and averageness.Journal of Comparative Psychology 1994;108:233–42.[24] Hornak J, Rolls ET, Wade D. Face and voice expression identiﬁcationin patients with emotional and behavioural changes following ventralfrontal lobe damage. Neuropsychologia 1996;34:247–61.[25] Kampe KK, Frith CD, Dolan RJ, Frith U. Reward value ofattractiveness and gaze. Nature 2001;413:589.
attractiveness and gaze. Nature 2001;413:589.[26] Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM, Varner JL, Hommer D.Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome with event-relatedfMRI. NeuroReport 2001;12:3683–7.[27] Landy D, Sigall H. Task evaluation as a function of the performer’sphysical attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology1974;4:299–304.[28] Langlois JH, Ritter JM, Roggmann LA, Vaughn LS. Facial diversityandinfantpreferencesforattractivefaces.DevelopmentalPsychology1991;27:79–84.[29] Langlois JH, Roggmann LA. Attractive faces are only average.Psychological Science 1990;1:115–21.[30] Morris JS, Frith CD, Perrett DI, Rowland D, Young AW,Calder AJ, et al. A differential neural response in the humanamygdala to fearful and happy facial expressions. Nature 1996;383:812–5.[31] Nakamura K, Kawashima R, Nagumo S, Ito K, Sugiura M, KatoT, et al. Neuroanatomical correlates of the assessment of facialattractiveness. NeuroReport 1998;9:753–7.
[32] O’Doherty J, Deichmann R, Crtichley HD, Dolan RJ. Neuralresponses during anticipation of a primary taste reward. Neuron2002;33:815–26.[33] O’Doherty J, Kringelbach ML, Rolls ET, Hornak J, AndrewsC. Abstract reward and punishment representations in the humanorbitofrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience 2001;4:95–102.[34] O’Doherty J, Rolls ET, Francis S, Bowtell R, McGlone F, KobalG, et al. Sensory-speciﬁc satiety related olfactory activation of thehuman orbitofrontal cortex. NeuroReport 2000;11:399–402.[35] Oomura Y, Aou S, Koyama Y, Fujita I, Yoshimatsu H. Central controlof sexual behavior. Brain Research Bulletin 1988;20:863–70.[36] Otta E, Folladore AF, Hoshino RL. Reading a smiling face: messagesconveyed by various forms of smiling. Perceptual and Motor Skills1996;82:1111–21.[37] Penton-Voak IS, Jones BC, Little AC, Baker S, Tiddeman B, Burt
DM, et al. Symmetry, sexual dimorphism in facial proportions andmale facial attractiveness. Proceedings of the Royal Society ofLondon B 2001;268:1617–23.[38] Perrett DI, Hietanen JK, Oram MW, Benson PJ. Organization
[38] Perrett DI, Hietanen JK, Oram MW, Benson PJ. Organizationand functions of cells responsive to faces in the temporalcortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London1992;335:23–30.[39] Perrett DI, Lee KJ, Penton-Voak I, Rowland D, Yoshikawa S, BurtDM, et al. Effects of sexual dimorphism on facial attractiveness.Nature 1998;394:884–7.[40] Perrett DI, May KA, Yoshikawa S. Facial shape and judgements offemale attractiveness. Nature 1994;368:239–42.[41] Perrett DI, Rolls ET, Caan W. Visual neurones responsive tofaces in the monkey temporal cortex. Experimental Brain Research1982;47:329–42.[42] Perrett DI, Smith PA, Potter DD, Mistlin AJ, Head AS, MilnerAD, et al. Visual cells in the temporal cortex sensitive to face viewand gaze direction. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B1985;223:293–317.[43] Phillips ML, Young AW, Senior C, Brammer M, Andrew C, Calder
AJ, et al. A speciﬁc neural substrate for perceiving facial expressionsof disgust. Nature 1997;389:495–8.[44] Rempel Clower NL, Barbas H. Topographic organization ofconnections between the hypothalamus and prefrontal cortex in therhesus monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology 1998;398:393–419.[45] Rolls ET. The orbitofrontal cortex and reward. Cerebral Cortex2000;10:284–94.[46] Rolls ET, Hornak J, Wade D, McGrath J. Emotion-related learningin patients with social and emotional changes associated with frontallobe damage. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry1994;57:1518–24.[47] Rolls ET, Sienkiewicz ZJ, Yaxley S. Hunger modulates the responsesto gustatory stimuli of single neurons in the caudolateral orbitofrontalcortex of the macaque monkey. European Journal of Neuroscience1989;1:53–60.[48] Savic I, Berglund H, Gulyas B, Roland P. Smelling of odoroussex hormone-like compounds causes sex-differentiated hypothalamicactivations in humans. Neuron 2001;31:661–8.
[49] Schoenbaum G, Chiba AA, Gallagher M. Orbitofrontal cortex andbasolateral amygdala encode expected outcomes during learning.Nature Neuroscience 1998;1:155–9.[50] Schultz W, Apicella P, Scarnati E, Ljungberg T. Neuronal activity inmonkey ventral striatum related to the expectation of reward. Journalof Neuroscience 1992;12:4595–610.[51] Schultz W, Tremblay L, Hollerman JR. Reward processing in primateorbitofrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Cerebral Cortex 2000;10:272–84.[52] Small DM, Zatorre RJ, Dagher A, Evans AC, Jones-Gotman M.Changes in brain activity related to eating chocolate: from pleasureto aversion. Brain 2001;124:1720–33.[53] Symons D. The evolution of human sexuality. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press; 1979.[54] ThornhillR,GangestadSW.Facialattractiveness.TrendsinCognitiveScience 1999;3:452–60.
