Research review paperPlant adaptation to dynamically changing environment:The shade avoidance responseI. Rubertia,⁎, G. Sessaa, A. Ciol ﬁa, M. Possentib, M. Carabellia, G. MorellibaInstitute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, National Research Council, P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, ItalybNational Research Institute on Food and Nutrition, Via Ardeatina 546, 00178 Rome, Italyabstract article infoAvailable online 24 August 2011Keywords:Low R/FR lightPhytochromePIF proteinsHD-Zip transcription factorsPolar auxin transportHormone signalingHFR1/SICS1Multiple signal integrationShade avoidance modulationCrop yieldThe success of competitive interactions between plants determines the chance of survival of individuals andeventually of whole plant species. Shade-tolerant plants have adapted their photosynthesis to function opti-
mally under low-light conditions. These plants are therefore capable of long-term survival under a canopyshade. In contrast, shade-avoiding plants adapt their growth to perceive maximum sunlight and thereforerapidly dominate gaps in a canopy. Daylight contains roughly equal proportions of red and far-red light,but within vegetation that ratio is lowered as a result of red absorption by photosynthetic pigments. Thislight quality change is perceived through the phytochrome system as an unambiguous signal of the proximityof neighbors resulting in a suite of developmental responses (termed the shade avoidance response) that,when successful, result in the overgrowth of those neighbors. Shoot elongation induced by low red/far-redlight may confer high relative ﬁtness in natural dense communities. However, since elongation is oftenachieved at the expense of leaf and root growth, shade avoidance may lead to reduction in crop plant produc-
tivity. Over the past decade, major progresses have been achieved in the understanding of the molecular basisof shade avoidance. However, uncovering the mechanisms underpinning plant response and adaptation tochanges in the ratio of red to far-red light is key to design new strategies to precise modulate shade avoidancein time and space without impairing the overall crop ability to compete for light.© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Contents1. Introduction —shade avoidance response ................................................ 10482. Perception and early response to light quality changes ......................................... 10482.1. Phytochromes ......................................................... 10482.2. PIF proteins .......................................................... 10492.3. HD-Zip II transcription factors .................................................. 1049
2.4. Auxin biosynthesis, transport and signaling ........................................... 10503. Plant adaptation to low R/FR environment ............................................... 10514. Integration of light signals with other environmental cues ........................................ 10524.1. Interplay between phytochrome and temperature signaling pathways ................................ 1 0 5 24.2. Neighbor detection and herbivore response ........................................... 1053Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058Abbreviations: ACT2, ACTIN2; ATHB, Arabidopsis Thaliana Homeobox; AXR1, Auxin Resistant 1; bHLH, Basic Helix-Loop-Helix; BL, Blue Light; BR, Brassinosteroids; b Zip, Basic-LeucineZipper; CKX5, Cytokinin Oxidase/Dehydrogenase 5; CKX6, Cytokinin Oxidase/Dehydrogenase 6; COR15a, Cold-Regulated 15a; COP/DET/FUS, Constitut ive Photomorphogenic/De-Etiola-
ted/FUSCA; CRT/DRE, C-Repeat/Dehydration-Responsive Element; DELLAs, DELLA proteins; EBL, Epibrassinolide; ELF3, Early Flowering 3; FIN219, F ar-Red-Insensitive 219; GA, Gibberel-lin; GAI, Gibberellin Insensitive; G-box, DNA motif, CACGTG; GID1, Ga-Insensitive Dwarf 1; GUS, beta-glucuronidase; H, Hours; HAT, Homeobox Arabi dopsis Thaliana; HD-Zip,
lin; GAI, Gibberellin Insensitive; G-box, DNA motif, CACGTG; GID1, Ga-Insensitive Dwarf 1; GUS, beta-glucuronidase; H, Hours; HAT, Homeobox Arabi dopsis Thaliana; HD-Zip,Homeodomain-Leucine Zipper; HFR1/SICS1, Long Hypocotyl In Far-Red/Slender In Canopy Shade; HLH, Helix-Loop-Helix; HY5, Long Hypocotyl 5; IAA, In dole Acetic Acid; JA, JasmonicAcid; JAR1, Jasmonate Resistant 1; JAZ, Jasmonate Zim-Domain; JIN1, Jasmonate Insensitive 1; L/D, Light/Dark; NPA, Napthylphthalamic Acid; qRT-P CR, Quantitative ReverseTranscription-Polymerase Chain Reaction; PAR, Phy Rapidly Regulated; Pfr, Far-Red absorbing form of Phytochrome; PHY, Phytochrome encoding gene; Phy, Phytochrome; pifq,pif1pif3 pif4 pif5 quadruple mutant; PIFs, Phytochrome Interacting Factors; PIL1, PIF3-like 1; PIN, PIN-formed; Pr, Red Absorbing form of Phytochrome; R/FR, Red/Far -Red; RGA, Repressor
of Ga 1; RGL1, RGA LIKE-1; RGL2, RGA Like-2; RGL3, RGA Like-3; SA, Salicylic Acid; SCF, SKP1/CUL1/F-BOX; SD, Standard Deviation; SLY1, SLEEPY 1; SPA, S uppressor of PhyA-105;TAA1, Tryptophan Amino-Transferase of Arabidopsis 1; TIR1, Transport Inhibitor Response 1.⁎Corresponding author at: Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, National Research Council, c/o Department of Biology and Biotechnology “C. Darwin ”, Sapienza Univer-sity of Rome, P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. Tel.: +39 06 4991 2211; fax: +39 06 4991 2500.E-mail address: ida.ruberti@uniroma1.it (I. Ruberti).0734-9750/$ –see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2011.08.014Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirectBiotechnology Advancesjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biotechadv
5. From Arabidopsis to crops ...................................................... 10546. Conclusions ............................................................. 1055Acknowledgments ............................................................ 1055References ................................................................ 10551. Introduction —shade avoidance responseAs sessile organisms, plants have evolved sophisticated mechanismsto perceive, and respond to, the presence of neighbors. Within a vegeta-tion, the ratio of R to FR light is lowered by the absorption of red light byphotosynthetic pigments. Plants have evolved two opposing strategiesin response to competition for light: shade tolerance and shade avoid-ance. Angiosperms have an impressive capacity to avoid shade. Theyperceive the reduction in the R/FR ratio as an early signal of neighborproximity through the phytochrome photoreceptors which, in turn,
trigger a suite of developmental responses (termed the shade avoid-ance response) that, when successful, result in the overgrowth ofthose neighbors. The most dramatic shade avoidance response is thestimulation of elongation growth. This response is remarkably rapid,with a lag phase of a few minutes, and it is reversible. Many plantsreact within 5 to 10 min of exposure to low R/FR light by acceleratingextension up to 3- or 4-fold. Conversely, returning plants to high R/FRlight results in an equally rapid deceleration of extension. Elongation re-sponses are most easily observed in internodes, but hypocotyl and pet-ioles also show strong responses. In dicotyledonous plants, elongationgrowth induced by low R/FR is often associated with a reduction ofleaf development. Root growth is also often impaired in low R/FR lightenvironments. In the long term, low R/FR exposure leads to early ﬂow-ering with a reduced seed set, which is considered an escape mecha-
nism because it shortens generation time. All of these responses areobservable both in natural dense communities and in shade simulations(low R/FR). Furthermore, similar responses are induced by exposingplants to horizontal FR radiation with white light from above. This isconsistent with the notion that shade-avoiding plants are able to per-ceive light re ﬂected by neighboring plants as partially depleted of thered wavelengths, and to avoid shade they respond morphologicallyeven before canopy closure and actual shading occurs ( Ballaré, 1999;Morelli and Ruberti, 2000; Smith and Whitelam, 1997 ).At high canopy density multiple light signals control shade avoid-ance response ( Ballaré, 1999 ). Recent work demonstrated that bothlow R/FR and reduced BL, caused by absorption of visible wavelengthsby photosynthetic pigments, are required for full expression of shadeavoidance in plant canopies. Interestingly, the BL responses seem to
be mediated through pathways that showed only limited overlap withthose activated by low R/FR ( Keller et al., 2011; Keuskamp et al., 2011 ).The shade avoidance response is a strategy of major adaptivesigniﬁcance in plants. Shoot elongation induced by light qualitychanges may confer high relative ﬁtness in natural dense commu-nities ( Schmitt, 1997 ). However, it may lead to reduction in cropplant productivity. Precise temporal and/or spatial modulation ofphotoreceptor signal perception or transduction or transcriptionalregulatory circuits involved in plant responses to neighbors may suc-ceed in attenuating shade avoidance in a stage- and/or organ-speci ﬁcmanner. A major challenge is therefore to expand our knowledgeof the mechanisms of response and adaptation to changes in lightquality operating in the plant on the whole and at the level of singleorgans to design new strategies aimed at improving crop yield inhigh-density plantings.
high-density plantings.2. Perception and early response to light quality changes2.1. PhytochromesPlants perceive R and FR light through the phytochrome photore-
high-density plantings.2. Perception and early response to light quality changes2.1. PhytochromesPlants perceive R and FR light through the phytochrome photore-ception system. Phytochromes are photochromic biliproteins thatexist in two photo-convertible isoforms: Pr, a R-light-absorbingform, and Pfr, a FR-light-absorbing form. They exist as dimers witheach monomer consisting of an apoprotein covalently attached to atetrapyrrole chromophore, phytochromobilin. Phytochromes aresynthesized in the dark in their inactive Pr form. Upon absorptionof red light, Pr is converted into the biological active Pfr formwhich can absorb far-red light and switch back to Pr, resulting in adynamic photoequilibrium between the two forms of phytochrome.Following conversion to the Pfr form, phytochromes translocate tothe nucleus ( Bae and Choi, 2008 ). Once in the nucleus, they physical-ly interact with a subfamily of bHLH transcription factors, the PIFs,
controlling several aspects of photomorphogenesis ( Castillon et al.,2007; Jiao et al., 2007; Leivar and Quail, 2011 ). This interaction inturn leads to PIF's phosphorylation, ubiquitination and degradationvia the 26S proteasome, providing an elegant mechanism for rapidregulation of gene expression in response to changes in the lightenvironment ( Al-Sady et al., 2006; Bauer et al., 2004; Nozue et al.,2007; Park et al., 2004; Shen et al., 2005, 2007 ).Phytochromes are encoded by a small gene family in most plantspecies. Three phytochrome encoding genes,PHYA ,PHYB and PHYCare conserved in angiosperms ( Mathews, 2006 ). Additional PHYgenes are found in dicots, perhaps the products of more recent dupli-cations within the PHYB lineage ( Mathews and Sharrock, 1997 ). InArabidopsis, the phytochrome apoproteins are encoded by ﬁvegenes, PHYA -PHYE. PHYE is thought to have originated from a dupli-cation within the PHYB lineage early on in the evolution of dicots.
PHYD , which encodes a protein that shares approximately 80%amino acid sequence identity with PHYB, apparently arose from arelatively recent gene duplication within the Brassicaceae (Mathewsand Sharrock, 1997 ).PHYC is thought to have originated from a du-plication within the PHYA lineage ( Mathews and Sharrock, 1997 ).However, phyA is the only phytochrome that is rapidly degraded inits Pfr form. It is the predominant phytochrome in etiolated seed-lings, and it plays a major role in the rapid promotion of deetiolationupon emergence from the soil. All the other phytochromes are rela-tively stable in the Pfr form, and they control several aspects ofplant growth and development ( Bae and Choi, 2008; Franklin andQuail, 2010 ).A major function of phytochromes in photoautotrophic seedlingsand in adult plants involves the perception of changes in the R/FRratio. Among the light-stable phytochromes, phyB plays a key role
in shade avoidance. Arabidopsis phyB mutants constitutively displayshade avoidance traits such as elongated hypocotyl, stem, petiolesand leaves, acceleration of ﬂowering and higher apical dominanceunder high R/FR light ( Reed et al., 1993 ). However, phyB mutantsalso show typical shade avoidance responses under low R/FR light, in-dicating that other phytochromes also play a role in mediating theseresponses ( Franklin and Quail, 2010; Smith and Whitelam, 1997 ).phyD and phyE single mutants are essentially indistinguishable fromwild-type plants. However, phyB phyE , and, to a lesser extent, phyBphyD double mutants had longer petioles and ﬂower earlier thanphyB mutants in high R/FR light. This led to the proposal that in con-junction with phyB, phyD and phyE function in the regulation ofshade avoidance responses ( Aukerman et al., 1997; Devlin et al.,1998, 1999 ). The redundant activities of phyB, phyD and phyE in me-
diating shade avoidance were con ﬁrmed by analysis of triple phyBphyD phyE mutants which showed no response to low R/FR light
1998, 1999 ). The redundant activities of phyB, phyD and phyE in me-diating shade avoidance were con ﬁrmed by analysis of triple phyBphyD phyE mutants which showed no response to low R/FR light(Franklin et al., 2003 ). On the other hand, phyA seems to attenuatethe elongation response induced by low R/FR light ( Devlin et al.,2003; Johnson et al., 1994).1048 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
2.2. PIF proteinsDepending on the light environment, angiosperms undergo twodistinct developmental programs. In the dark, a seedling develops along hypocotyl, an apical hook and closed cotyledons (skotomorpho-genesis). The seedling utilizes its energy resources to rapidly emergefrom the soil and reach light. Under daylight, a seedling developsshort hypocotyl, opened cotyledons, and rapidly establishes itself asa photoautothrophic organism (photomorphogenesis). Light signalsperceived through R/FR and blue photoreceptors converge on theCOP/DET/FUS proteins, which are central repressors of photomorpho-genesis ( Sullivan et al., 2003 ). In the dark, COP/DET/FUS proteinsfunction in concert to target the bZip HY5 transcription factor andother positive regulators of photomorphogenesis for degradationthrough the 26S proteasome, thus preventing deetiolation. In day-light, the activity of COP/DET/FUS proteins is reduced resulting in
the accumulation of HY5 and other transcription factors required forphotomorphogenesis. COP1, one of the COP/DET/FUS proteins, is anE3 ligase that interacts with HY5 and other photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription factors, and promotes their ubiquitinationtogether with the SPA proteins ( Lau and Deng, 2010 ).Recently, PIF transcription factors have been shown to be essen-tial for the repression of photomorphogenesis in darkness. A pif1pif3 pif4 pif5 quadruple mutant displays a cop-like phenotype, dem-onstrating that the PIF transcription factors are active in the dark inrepressing photomorphogenesis ( Leivar et al., 2008a ). Genome-wideexpression pro ﬁling of wild-type etiolated seedlings brie ﬂy exposedto light and dark-grown pifqmutants identi ﬁed a set of genes thatare potential direct targets of these PIFs. Among them both inducedand repressed genes, suggesting that PIFs may function as transcrip-
tional activators or repressors depending on promoter context. Presentdata, however, are consistent with PIFs acting as activators, and thecurrent model proposes that, in the dark, these transcription factorsbind to G-box-containing regions of the promoters of target genes andpromote their expression. Upon light exposure, PIF target gene expres-sion rapidly declines due to phytochrome-dependent degradation ofPIFs by the proteasome ( Leivar and Quail, 2011 ). Interestingly, the sta-bility of PIF3 is dependent on COP1 and SPA proteins, suggesting thatthese molecules, besides targeting photomorphogenesis-promotingtranscription factors for degradation, may positively affect PIF proteinlevels in the dark ( Bauer et al., 2004; Leivar et al., 2008a ).The rapid, light-induced degradation of PIF transcription factorsdoes not lead to their disappearance, but rather it results in a lowersteady-state level of these proteins in daylight ( Leivar and Quail,
2011 ). Several studies have shown that pifsingle and multiple mu-tants display shorter hypocotyls and larger cotyledons than wildtype at the seedling stage whereas PIF overexpressors exhibit oppo-site phenotypes, and established an inverse relationship between PIFa n dp h y Bl e v e l s( Al-Sady et al., 2008; Khanna et al., 2007; Leivar andQuail, 2011; Leivar et al., 2008b ). Recently, Jang et al. (2010) haveuncovered the mechanism by which PIFs negatively regulate phyBlevels. phyB is stable in darkness, but in R light, a fraction of phyBtranslocates to the nucleus and becomes degraded by proteasome.Nuclear phyB degradation is mediated by COP1, which preferentiallyinteracts with the phyB N-terminal region (phyB-N). PhyB-N ubiqui-tination by COP1 in vitro is enhanced by different PIF proteins thatpromote COP1/phyB interaction. Jang et al. (2010) have identi ﬁedCOP1 as the E3 ligase also for phyC, phyD and phyE, and, based on
the high degree of homology between phyB and phyD, suggestedthat phyD may be negatively regulated by PIFs through the samemechanism.
the high degree of homology between phyB and phyD, suggestedthat phyD may be negatively regulated by PIFs through the samemechanism.PIF4 and PIF5 have been shown to directly contribute to shadeavoidance. Their abundance increases rapidly in photoautothrophicseedlings upon exposure to low R/FR light, and pif4,pif5 andpif4pif5 mutants display reduced hypocotyl elongation relative to wildtype. Conversely, PIF4 and PIF5 overexpressing seedlings haveconstitutively long hypocotyls and petioles ( Lorrain et al., 2008 ).Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis indicates thatPIF5 binds in vivo to the G-box-containing regions of the promotersof several genes early induced by low R/FR ( Hornitschek et al.,2009 ). Higher levels of phyB in pif4and pif5mutants may also con-tribute to the reduced elongation growth observed in these mutantsupon exposure to low R/FR ( Leivar and Quail, 2011 ).Recent evidence indicates that PIFs integrate multiple signals to
control plant morphogenesis. For example, PIF4 and PIF5 are also con-trolled, at the transcriptional level, by the circadian clock ( Nozueet al., 2007 ). Under short days, the coincidence of high transcriptionrates of PIF4 and PIF5 and low degradation rates of these PIF proteinsdetermines rapid hypocotyl growth during late night ( Nozue et al.,2007 ).2.3. HD-Zip II transcription factorsTheﬁrst gene reported to be rapidly and reversibly regulated bylight quality changes in photoautothrophic seedlings was ATHB2(also known as HAT4 ), an Arabidopsis gene encoding a HD-Zip tran-scription factor ( Carabelli et al., 1993; Ruberti et al., 1991; Schenaand Davis, 1992 ). In young seedlings and mature plants, ATHB2 isexpressed at low levels in high R/FR light, but is rapidly and stronglyinduced by low R/FR light. Returning the plants to low R/FR resultsin an equally rapid decrease in the ATHB2 mRNA levels. Kinetics of
low R/FR light induction and its reversibility by high R/FR light per-formed in phyB and phyA phyB plants revealed that ATHB2 is revers-ibly regulated by changes in R/FR ratio largely through the action ofa phytochrome other than A or B and secondarily by phytochrome B(Carabelli et al., 1996; Steindler et al., 1997 ). Further studies demon-strated that phytochrome D and E are indeed also involved in the reg-ulation of ATHB2 by low R/FR light ( Franklin et al. 2003 ).Subsequently, global gene expression pro ﬁling identi ﬁed manygenes induced by low R/FR light in photoautotophic seedlings ( Devlinet al., 2003; Roig-Villanova et al., 2006; Salter et al., 2003; Sessa et al.,2005 ). Among them PIL1, a gene encoding a bHLH transcriptionfactor rapidly and strongly induced upon exposure to low R/FR. TriplephyB phyD phyE mutants showed no further increase in PIL1 tran-scripts following low R/FR treatment, further indicating the re-
dundant action of these photoreceptors in regulation of shadeavoidance ( Salter et al., 2003). Several of the genes induced by lowR/FR have also been reported to be repressed upon transfer of etio-lated seedlings to both FR and R light ( Carabelli et al., 1996; Franklinand Quail, 2010 ).The HD-Zip class of proteins is unique to plants, and charac-terized by the presence of a homeodomain closely linked to a leucinezipper motif ( Ruberti et al., 1991 ). Several Arabidopsis HD-Zip pro-tein encoding genes have been identi ﬁed in the early 1990s and,on the basis of sequence homology in the HD-Zip domain, groupedinto four families, HD-Zip I –IV (Sessa et al., 1994 ). Completion ofthe Arabidopsis genome sequence revealed that it encodes 48HD-Zip proteins all belonging to the four families previously identi-ﬁed ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 and references therein). HD-Zip geneshave been isolated from a variety of plants, including monocots anddicots ( Ariel et al., 2007 ).
dicots ( Ariel et al., 2007 ).ATHB2 is a member of the HD-Zip II family consisting of 10 genes.Phylogeny reconstruction revealed that almost all of the HD-Zip II
dicots ( Ariel et al., 2007 ).ATHB2 is a member of the HD-Zip II family consisting of 10 genes.Phylogeny reconstruction revealed that almost all of the HD-Zip IIgenes can be subdivided into 4 clades ( α–δ), each clade comprising2–3 paralogs ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 ). Gene expression studies demon-strated that all the γandδgenes are regulated by light qualitychanges that induce shade avoidance. Kinetics of induction, lowR/FR/high R/FR reversibility and auxin response analyses stronglysuggested that HAT1 ,HAT3 and ATHB4 ,a sATHB2 , are under the con-trol of the phytochrome system whereas HAT2 is up-regulated bylow R/FR as a consequence of the induction of the auxin signalingpathway provoked by low R/FR light ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 ).1049 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
Analysis of transgenic plants bearing constructs that alter ATHB2expression revealed a series of interesting developmental phenotypes(Schena et al., 1993; Steindler et al., 1999 ). For example, seedlingsoverproducing ATHB2 have longer hypocotyls and petioles, smallerand fewer leaves. Moreover, these seedlings also have a thinner rootmass, that is they produce less lateral roots than wild-type controls.The phenotypes of adult transgenic plants are similar to those ofseedlings but more exaggerated. Altogether the phenotypes of plantsoverexpressing ATHB2 were reminiscent of those displayed bywild-type plants grown in low R/FR light, further suggesting a rolefor this HD-Zip protein in the regulation of shade avoidance response(Morelli and Ruberti 2000, 2002; Steindler et al. 1999 ). Overexpres-sion of HAT1 ,HAT2 , initially isolated as an auxin-inducible gene byDNA microarray ( Sawa et al., 2002 ),HAT3 and ATHB4 results in phe-
notypes similar to those caused by elevated levels of ATHB2 ( Ciarbelliet al., 2008; Sawa et al., 2002; Sorin et al., 2009 ;Fig. 1 ), further sug-gesting a redundant function of these transcription factors in shadeavoidance.Interestingly, the expression of the HD-Zip II genes, including thoseinduced by light quality changes, is tightly regulated during plant devel-opment in a high R/FR light environment. Phenotypes of gain of func-tion and dominant negative lines demonstrated that one or more ofthe HD-Zip II γgenes negatively regulate cell proliferation during leafdevelopment in a high R/FR light environment ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 ).A role of the light-regulated HD-Zip II genes in organ development inhigh R/FR is also indicated by the cotyledon phenotype of seedlingslacking both ΑΤΗΒ 4a n d ΗΑΤ3(Sorin et al., 2009 ).2.4. Auxin biosynthesis, transport and signalingTo maximize the capability of an organ to elongate, as in the shade
avoidance response, plants must have evolved mechanisms tightlycoupling distinct developmental processes: cell proliferation, cell dif-ferentiation, and direction of cell expansion. Consistently, it wasshown that the increase in extension growth of a seedling in lowR/FR is the consequence of two events: a change in the orientationof cell expansion toward elongation in cells that do not divide, asthe epidermal and cortical cells in the hypocotyl, and the inhibitionof cambial cell proliferation that contributes to radial growth. Similarchanges were observed in seedlings overexpressing ATHB2 suggest-ing that low R/FR light, through the action of this transcription factor,produces distinct but coordinated effects on different cell types(Steindler et al., 1999 ). It is known that these processes are depen-dent on the action of phytohormones, and it was suggested thatamong them auxin is likely to act as a coordinator of organ growth
in low R/FR light, because it regulates many different aspects ofplant development, including cell division, cell elongation, cell differ-entiation ( Morelli and Ruberti, 2000 ). Consistent with this sugges-tion, it was found that axr1, severely impaired in auxin response,does not elongate signi ﬁcantly in low R/FR. It was also shown thatNPA, an auxin transport inhibitor, signi ﬁcantly reduces hypocotylelongation of wild-type seedlings in response to low R/FR ( Steindleret al., 1999 ). These results lead to a model for Arabidopsisshade-induced responses. The model postulated that low R/FR lightmay produce a reorientation of the auxin transport stream througha spatial redistribution of a speci ﬁc auxin ef ﬂux carrier protein orthe activation of regulatory protein(s) controlling speci ﬁc auxin ef-ﬂux carrier protein(s) or both. A higher lateral transport of auxin inthe hypocotyl may promote the elongation of epidermal and cortical
cells; on the other hand, a reduction of polar auxin transport throughthe central cylinder is likely to cause a let up in vascular differentia-
cells; on the other hand, a reduction of polar auxin transport throughthe central cylinder is likely to cause a let up in vascular differentia-tion and a decrement in auxin concentration reaching the root. This,in turn, may result in a reduction of lateral root formation and, even-tually, primary root growth. In support of this hypothesis is the rootphenotype of ATHB2 seedlings. Primary root growth and lateralroot formation are both inhibited by elevated levels of ATHB2, andat least the lateral root phenotype of ATHB2 seedlings is rescued byexogenous IAA ( Morelli and Ruberti, 2000, 2002; Steindler et al.,1999 ). Work from several laboratories provided further evidence onthe role of polar auxin transport in shade avoidance. For example,Kanyuka et al. (2003) showed that mutations in BIG, which is re-quired in normal auxin ef ﬂux, result in attenuated shade avoidanceresponses. Keuskamp et al. (2010) recently reported that low R/FR
light induces a lateral relocalization of PIN3, an auxin ef ﬂux regulatorpreviously implicated in tropic responses ( Friml et al., 2002 ), in theArabidopsis hypocotyls. Interestingly, Keuskamp et al. (2010) alsoshowed that ﬁtness of seedlings lacking PIN3 ( pin3–3mutants),which are impaired in hypocotyl elongation in low R/FR, is sup-pressed by 40% when competing with wild-type neighbors. Further-more, an enzyme involved in the IAA biosynthetic pathway fromL-tryptophan, TAA1, was recently identi ﬁed and shown to be involvedinde novo auxin biosynthesis in leaves in response to low R/FR light(Tao et al., 2008 ). Interestingly, the authors showed that TAA1 isrequired for hypocotyl and petiole elongation, further highlightingthe key role of polar auxin transport in shade avoidance ( Tao et al.,2008 ).Auxin levels were indirectly visualized in seedlings exposed to lowR/FR light using the synthetic DR5::GUS auxin reporter ( Ulmasov
et al., 1997 ), whose activity correlates with direct auxin measure-ments ( Casimiro et al., 2001 ). Consistent with the model proposedfor shade avoidance, GUS expression is signi ﬁcantly increased in cot-yledons and in the hypocotyl of DR5::GUS seedlings brie ﬂy exposedto low R/FR ( Carabelli et al., 2007; Morelli and Ruberti, 2002 ). Fur-thermore, free IAA levels were measured in the aerial part of seed-lings exposed to low R/FR, and found to be signi ﬁcantly highercompared to seedlings maintained in high R/FR ( Tao et al., 2008 ).Global expression pro ﬁling revealed that the expression of a numberof genes early responsive to auxin increases rapidly upon exposure tolow R/FR ( Devlin et al., 2003; Sessa et al., 2005; Tao et al., 2008 ).Among them, for example, IAA19, a gene previously implicated inphototropic growth ( Tatematsu et al., 2004 ), which is induced in pet-ioles and hypocotyls upon low R/FR exposure ( Pierik et al., 2009 ;Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 2 ).In dicotyledonous plants, elongation growth induced by low R/FRis often associated with a reduction of leaf development. AFig. 1. HAT3 overexpression enhances hypocotyl elongation in high R/FR light. The graphshows hypocotyl length of two independent transgenic lines expressing HAT3 under thecontrol of an estrogen-inducible promoter (pER8, Zuo et al., 2000 ) grown for 7 days inthe presence of different concentrations of the inducer, β-estradiol. Plant growth condi-tions and phenotypic analysis were as previously described ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 ).*P≤0.001 vs.control (seedlings grown in the absence of β-estradiol).1050 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
morphological analysis of fully expanded ﬁrst leaves revealed thatcell number, not cell size, contributes to the reduced leaf size of plantsgrown in low R/FR relative to high R/FR ( Carabelli et al., 2007 ). Inter-estingly, low R/FR rapidly and transiently reduces the frequency ofcell division in young leaf primordia through a non-cell autonomousmechanism that requires the action of the auxin receptor TIR1. Theauxin increase perceived through TIR1 induces CKX6 , an Arabidopsisgene encoding a cytokinin oxidase involved in cytokinin degradation(Redman et al., 2004; Werner et al., 2003 ), which in turn promotingcytokinin breakdown diminishes cell proliferation in developing leafprimordia. Interestingly, the up-regulation of DR5::GUS as well asthat of CKX6::GUS by low R/FR occurs in pre-provascular cells ofyoung leaf primordia, suggesting that induction of cytokinin degrada-tion in the developing vasculature may be suf ﬁcient to arrest leaf pri-
mordium growth in low R/FR ( Carabelli et al., 2007, 2008 ).3. Plant adaptation to low R/FR environmentTheﬁnding that persistency of a low R/FR signal causes a decreaseinATHB2 transcript level suggested the existence of a negative regu-latory mechanism operating in low R/FR light to reduce the strengthof the elongation response ( Sessa et al., 2005 ). By combining genomewide expression pro ﬁling and mutant analysis, a negative regulator ofshade avoidance was identi ﬁed (HFR1/SICS1) and found to be cen-trally involved in the attenuation of virtually all plant responses tocanopy shade. No phenotypic alteration is observed in hfr1/sics1 seed-lings grown in high R/FR. By contrast, mutant seedlings transferredto low R/FR display elongated hypocotyls relative to wild type inlow R/FR. Other aspects of shade avoidance are also exaggerated inhfr1/sics1 seedlings transferred to low R/FR. Leaf petioles are extreme-
ly elongated in mutant seedlings, and cotyledon and leaf area are sig-niﬁcantly smaller in hfr1/sics1 mutants than in wild type. Finally,prolonged exposure to low R/FR results in early ﬂowering in hfr1/sics1plants ( Sessa et al., 2005 ;Fig. 3 ).HFR1/SICS1, a gene encoding a bHLH transcription factor, was pre-viously identi ﬁed as a component of phytochrome A ( Fairchild et al.,2000; Fankhauser and Chory, 2000; Soh et al., 2000 ) and crypto-chrome 1 ( Duek and Fankhauser, 2003 ) signaling pathways in seed-ling deetiolation. HFR1/SICS1 is a short-lived protein in darkness, isdegraded through a 26S proteasome-dependent pathway and thisprocess requires COP1. Light, irrespective of its quality, enhancesHFR1/SICS1 protein stability ( Duek et al., 2004; Jang et al., 2005;Yang et al., 2005a, 2005b ). In photoautothrophic seedlings,HFR1/SICS1 is expressed at very low levels in high R/FR light but israpidly and strongly induced by low R/FR light. On the other hand,
returning the seedlings to high R/FR results in a rapid decrease oftheHFR1/SICS1 transcript levels ( Sessa et al., 2005 ).In wild-type seedlings, ATHB2 transcript reaches its maximumbetween 30 and 60 min and then slowly decreases ( Sessa et al.,2005 ;Fig. 3 ). The kinetic of ATHB2 induction by low R/FR is not sig-niﬁcantly affected in hfr1/sics1 mutants whereas the decrease oftheATHB2 mRNA provoked by prolonged exposure to low R/FR inwild-type seedlings is strongly reduced in seedlings lacking func-tional HFR1/SICS1 ( Sessa et al., 2005 ;Fig. 3 ). Consistent withHFR1/SICS1 degradation in darkness, no difference in ATHB2Fig. 3. HFR1/SICS1 acts as a master negative regulator of shade avoidance response. (A) Col-0 and hfr1-4/sics1-1 plants grown for 4 days in high R/FR and, subsequently, for 18 daysin low R/FR. Plant growth conditions were as previously described ( Sessa et al., 2005 ). Bar, 5 mm. (B) Kinetic analysis of ATHB2 expression in Col-0 and hfr1-4/sics1-1 seedlings
in low R/FR. Plant growth conditions were as previously described ( Sessa et al., 2005 ). Bar, 5 mm. (B) Kinetic analysis of ATHB2 expression in Col-0 and hfr1-4/sics1-1 seedlingsgrown for 7 days in high R/FR under a l6/8 h L/D cycle, and then transferred to low R/FR under the same L/D regime for the indicated times. The bar displays L /D cycle referredto time-of-day (hours). qRT-PCR expression analyses were performed as described ( Ciarbelli et al., 2008 ). Each value is the mean of three biological replicates normalized toACT2 expression (±SD). Relative transcript abundance of ATHB2 is normalized to its relative level in Col-0 seedlings in high R/FR (0).Fig. 2. Low R/FR rapidly induces IAA19::GUS expression in petioles and hypocotyls. Histo-chemical localization of GUS activity in IAA19::GUS seedlings grown for 4 days in high R/FRlight (A –C), and then shifted to low R/FR light for 8 h (D –F). Plant growth conditions and
histochemical detection of GUS activity were as previously described ( Carabelli et al.,2007; Sessa et al., 2005 ). Bars: A, D: 1 mm; B, C, E, F: 100 mm.1051 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
transcript level is observed at the end of the night in a L/D cycle inhfr1/sics1 seedlings relative to wild type ( Fig. 3 ).Global pro ﬁling of hfr1/sics1 seedlings exposed to low R/FR forone day identi ﬁed a number of genes signi ﬁcantly up-regulated inhfr1/sics1 mutants compared to wild type. Besides several transcrip-tion factor genes, a group of genes encoding hormone-related factors.Signiﬁcantly, genes implicated in auxin and gibberellin pathwaysare up-regulated in hfr1/sics1 seedlings upon prolonged exposure tolow R/FR light. Links between the light and gibberellin pathwayshave been described ( Stamm and Kumar, 2010 ). Moreover, two re-cent works have demonstrated that PIF3 and PIF4 integrate lightand gibberellin signaling in seedling photomorphogenesis ( de Lucaset al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008 ). DELLAs, a family of nucleargrowth-repressing proteins, are key components of the GA signalingpathway ( Harberd et al., 2009 ). According to the current model, DEL-
LAs restrain plant growth whereas GA promotes growth by overcom-ing DELLA-mediated growth restraint ( Harberd et al., 2009 ). Thebinding of bioactive GAs to the nuclear receptor GID1 promotes an in-teraction between GID1 and the DELLA domain of DELLAs. Subse-quently, this interaction enhances the af ﬁnity between DELLAs anda speci ﬁc SCF E3 ubiquitin –ligase complex involving the F-box pro-tein SLY1, thus targeting DELLAs for destruction by the 26S protea-some ( Harberd et al., 2009 ). Remarkably, de Lucas et al. (2008) andFeng et al. (2008) demonstrated that DELLAs physically interactwith PIF3 and PIF4, blocking their DNA-binding activity. Thus, uponlight exposure, when the GA levels decrease, DELLA-mediated regula-tion of PIF transcritpional activity provides a further mechanism thatpromotes seedling photomorhogenesis ( Lau and Deng, 2010 ).Links between shade avoidance response and GA signaling path-way have also been established ( Devlin et al., 2003; Morelli and
Ruberti, 2002; Stamm and Kumar, 2010; Vandenbussche and VanDer Straeten, 2004 ). Furthermore, recent work showed that abun-dance of the RGA DELLA protein is regulated during shade avoidance(Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007 ). Enhanced DELLA stability in the gaidominant mutant inhibits shade-induced elongation, suggestingthat DELLAs constrain shade-avoidance. However, quadruple DELLAloss-of-function mutants ( gai rga rgl1 rgl2 ) elongate in response tolow R/FR light as wild type, suggesting that both GA-dependent andGA-independent pathways contribute to the elongation responsesinduced by low R/FR light ( Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007 ). In Arabido-pis DELLAs are encoded by ﬁve genes: GAI,RGA,RGL1-3. Further un-derstanding of DELLA function in shade-induced elongation growthwill therefore require analysis of quintuple DELLA knockout mutants.Among the hormone-related genes differentially regulated inhfr1/sics1 mutants also are CKX5, an Arabidopsis gene encoding a
cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase involved in cytokinin breakdown(Werner et al., 2003 ), and BIM1 , a gene encoding a bHLH transcriptionfactor implicated in brassinosteroid signaling ( Yin et al., 2005 ).Research on BRs uncovered fascinating interactions between theseregulatory molecules and light signaling pathways. Furthermore,auxin- and BR-signaling pathways have been proposed to converge atthe level of the transcriptional regulation of target genes ( Nemhauseret al., 2004 ). Interestingly, recent work has established a link betweenHD-Zip II transcription factor genes early induced by low R/FR lightand BR response. Hypocotyls of athb4 hat3 double mutant seedlingsdisplay a reduced response to EBL in high R/FR light, indicating thatthe loss of activity of these two HD-Zip II proteins reduces responsive-ness to BRs ( Sorin et al., 2009 ).Together, the up-regulation of the auxin, GA and BR signaling path-ways and the down-regulation of the cytokinin pathway in hfr1/sics1
ness to BRs ( Sorin et al., 2009 ).Together, the up-regulation of the auxin, GA and BR signaling path-ways and the down-regulation of the cytokinin pathway in hfr1/sics1seedlings in low R/FR relative to wild type is consistent with theenhanced shade avoidance response of these mutants ( Sessa et al.,2005 ).The molecular mechanism of HFR1/SICS1 action in low R/FR hasbeen recently elucidated by Hornitschek et al. (2009) . HFR1/SICS1is a member of the bHLH family; however, several features of itsbasic domain lead Fairchild et al. (2000) to propose that either thisprotein is unable to bind DNA or interacts with DNA sequences dis-tinct from those recognized by other bHLH factors. Hornitscheket al. (2009) demonstrated that HFR1/SICS1 acts as a HLH inhibitor(Massari and Murre, 2000 ). Upon prolonged exposure to low R/FRlight, HFR1/SICS1 accumulates and interacts with PIF4 and PIF5 form-
ing non-DNA-binding heterodimers, thus limiting PIF4- andPIF5-mediated gene expression ( Hornitschek et al., 2009 ).In summary, Sessa et al. (2005) uncovered a gas-and-brake mech-anism for the control of the shade avoidance response acting througha dynamic balance of positive and negative transcriptional regulators.Positive regulators of shade avoidance are induced within a fewminutes of a change in R/FR. These rapid changes in gene expressionensure a fast reshaping of the plant body toward a light environmentoptimal for growth. Low R/FR also provokes a rapid induction ofHFR1/SICS1 to negatively regulate the downstream signaling initiatedby the same signal ( Fig. 4 ).HFR1/SICS1 acting as a negative controllerof shade avoidance ensures that an exaggerated reaction does notoccur when the plant is unsuccessful in escaping canopy shade.HFR1/SICS1 is likely to play a fundamental role in the acclimation ofthe plant to FR-rich light environment less favorable for photosyn-
thesis ensuring enough vegetative growth for a better seed produc-tion needed for long term survival. However, multiple negativefeedbacks are likely involved in attenuation of shade avoidance.Among them, the autoregulatory loop of ATHB2 ( Ohgishi et al.,2001 ) and the IAA negative feedback loop ( Santner and Estelle,2009 ). Furthermore, another atypical bHLH protein (PAR1 alsoknown as HLH1; Roig-Villanova et al., 2006; Sessa et al., 2005 ) hasbeen recently involved in negative regulation of shade-induced elon-gation ( Galstyan et al., 2011; Roig-Villanova et al., 2007 ). Finally,future work will have to further investigate the role of phyA in atten-uation of shade avoidance, and uncover its downstream signalinggenes.4. Integration of light signals with other environmental cuesPlant acclimation to a particular unfavorable environmentrequires a response adapted to the precise conditions that the plantencounters ( Mittler, 2006 ). Indeed, multiple environmental factors
may vary simultaneously and limit adaptive responses to a singlecue. Drought, heat stress and high light represent an excellent exam-ple of distinct environmental stresses that occur together in the ﬁeld(Mittler, 2006 ). In addition, different responses may arise becauseplants in a crowded environment not only need to adjust their pheno-type to altered light conditions, but may also have limited access toother critical resources. For instance, below-ground resources areadditional limitations, and these environments may favor differentsuites of plant traits.Although ﬁeld conditions are unlikely the controlled conditionsused in the laboratory, studies on the model system Arabidopsis arestarting to unravel the molecular events in plants' responses to arti ﬁ-cial growth conditions. In particular, molecular and genetic analysisbegan to reveal the crosstalk between environmental and develop-mental signals, or between stresses.
mental signals, or between stresses.4.1. Interplay between phytochrome and temperature signaling pathwaysPlants modulate their size and architecture in response to ambient
mental signals, or between stresses.4.1. Interplay between phytochrome and temperature signaling pathwaysPlants modulate their size and architecture in response to ambienttemperature. Therefore, it is not surprising that a complex interactionbetween light and temperature signaling pathways occurs in the reg-ulation of several developmental processes ( Donohue et al., 2008;Halliday and Whitelam, 2003; Halliday et al., 2003; Heschel et al.,2007; Pen ﬁeld et al., 2005 ).Several studies have shown that elongation growth under bothnormal and low R/FR light is highly dependent on temperature. Forexample, in cotton seedlings hypocotyl length was found to increase1052 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
as a function of soil temperature ( Chu et al., 1991 ), whereas in the an-nual weed Abutilon theophrasti a combination of higher temperaturesand low R/FR ratio was most effective at altering hypocotyl elonga-tion ( Weining, 2000 ).In Arabidopsis, exposure of plants to high temperature (28° –29 °C) mimics the effect of canopy shade, resulting in changes inplant architecture, such as elongated hypocotyls and petioles, elevat-ed leaves (hyponasty), reduced biomass, and early ﬂowering. It hasbeen suggested that the temperature-induced elongation responsesmay result in an improved heat dissipation by a better circulation ofair around the leaf ( Gray et al., 1998 ). The morphological changes in-duced by high temperature have been shown to involve auxin, BR andGA hormone pathways ( Gray et al., 1998; Stavang et al., 2009 ). As inthe case of shade avoidance, the temperature-dependent hypocotyland petiole elongation is regulated by the auxin biosynthetic gene
TAA1 (Yamada et al., 2009 ) and by the activity of PIF4 ( Koini et al.,2009 ). In addition, a very similar molecular mechanism of attenuationis shared between shade avoidance and high temperature responses.It has been indeed shown that HFR1/SICS1, a master negative regula-tor of shade avoidance ( Hornitschek et al., 2009; Sessa et al., 2005 ),also acts as a suppressor of PIF4 and PIF5 activity at warm tempera-tures ensuring the formation of enough plant biomass ( Foremanet al., 2011 ).Light and temperature signals are also integrated to regulatedevelopmental transitions such as germination and ﬂowering to max-imize the chances of species survival ( Franklin, 2009 ). Some evi-dences indicate that the phytochrome system itself is involved inthe perception of the temperature and light environment of the ma-ternal plant during seed maturation ( Dechaine et al., 2009; Donohueet al., 2007, 2008 ). PhyA suppresses germination when seeds are
matured under a cold and shaded environment ( Dechaine et al.,2009 ). Other studies revealed that phyD has a role in seed germi-nation when seeds are matured ( Dechaine et al., 2009 ) or imbibed(Heschel et al., 2008 ) under high temperatures, whereas phyE isimportant when seeds are imbibed in high temperatures followedby low temperatures ( Heschel et al., 2008 ) or when matured underhigh temperatures ( Dechaine et al., 2009 ).As frost is an annually recurring stressor that determines the lossof sensitive plant organs, in perennial plants and particularly in ever-green plants the hardening process must start well before the coldseason. The day-length measured via the phytochrome system wasidenti ﬁed as a trigger for the frost-hardening and dehardening pro-cesses ( Beck et al., 2004 ). Recent studies also showed that the phyto-chrome and temperature signaling pathways interact to regulatefreezing tolerance in the short-lived Arabidopsis plants ( Franklin
and Whitelam, 2007 ). Rather than by the day-length, thecold-tolerance mediated by the phytochrome is associated with thefact that plants are exposed to longer periods of low R/FR light as win-ter approaches. The tolerance to cold stimulated by light qualitychanges is conferred through phyB and phyD via the increased ex-pression at 16 °C of important components of the cold response,such as CRT/DRE-binding factors and COR15a ( Franklin and White-lam, 2007 ).4.2. Neighbor detection and herbivore responsePlants are known to emit volatile organic compounds in responseto various biotic or abiotic stresses. In analogy with low R/FR as signalfor neighbor detection, the volatile compounds may be used by indi-vidual plants as warning signals for imminent attacks by insect pests(Karban and Maron, 2002 ) and pathogen microorganisms ( Shulaevet al., 1997 ).
et al., 1997 ).Fig. 4. Transcriptional networks involved in shade avoidance response. Changes in R/FR ratio within a vegetation are sensed through multiple phytochromes (phyB, phyD and
et al., 1997 ).Fig. 4. Transcriptional networks involved in shade avoidance response. Changes in R/FR ratio within a vegetation are sensed through multiple phytochromes (phyB, phyD andphyE), and result in a shift of the photoequilibrium between the Pr and Pfr forms toward Pr which, in turn, leads to an increase in PIF protein levels. The se phy-regulated changesin PIF protein levels rapidly induce the transcription of genes encoding positive and negative regulators of shade avoidance response. By forming no n-DNA-binding heterodimers,HFR1/SICS1 inhibits PIF activity ensuring that an exaggerated response to low R/FR light does not occur when the plant is unsuccessful in escaping can opy shade ( Hornitschek et al.,2009; Sessa et al., 2005 ). Shade avoidance is further attenuated by the autoregolatory feedback loop of ATHB2 ( Jiao et al., 2007 and references therein).1053 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
Detection of these volatile signaling molecules can activate path-ways that result in increased levels of plant defenses before theplant is actually attacked ( Engelberth et al., 2004 ). Physiological ex-periments suggested potential points of interaction and crosstalkbetween the mechanisms involved in shade avoidance response anddefense signaling. Light has long been known to be required for afull defense in plants ( Roberts and Paul, 2006 ). For example, phyto-chromes activate or modulate responses induced by defense hor-mones such as salicylic acid ( Genoud et al., 2002 ), a key signalingmolecule involved in all levels of plant innate immunity ( Loake andGrant, 2007 ). Light perceived by the phytochrome is not only requiredfor SA biosynthesis, but also controls SA perception, because treatmentof Arabidopsis leaves with exogenous SA in dim light or in the darkresults in strongly reduced response ( Genoud et al., 2002 ).
Other reports indicated that plants subject to light competition intheﬁeld or arti ﬁcial light condition mimicking canopy shade allow abetter survival and growth of insects, and display reduced JA sensi-tivity ( Izaguirre et al., 2006; Kurashige and Agrawal, 2005; Morenoet al., 2009 ). In particular, studies in Nicotiana longi ﬂorashowedthat low R/FR light obtained by adding FR radiation to full sunlightcan elicit a down-regulation of plant defenses, implying an activeprocess mediated by phytochrome rather than by resource limita-tion ( Izaguirre et al., 2006 ). One of the ﬁrst indications of a link be-tween JA and phytochrome signaling came from the discovery thata mutation in the Arabidopsis gene FIN219 , which was originallyidenti ﬁed as a suppressor of the cop1 mutation ( Hsieh et al., 2000 ),is allelic to jar1, a mutant lacking defense against pests and patho-gens ( Staswick et al., 2002 ). On the contrary, impairment of phyto-
chrome photoreceptors in a chromophore de ﬁciency mutant leadsto overproduction of JA and activates JA responses ( Zhai et al.,2007 ). In addition, studies in cucumber and tomato revealed thatplants lacking phyB activity are more vulnerable to insects ( Izaguirreet al., 2006; McGuire and Agrawal, 2005 ). Furthermore, JIN1 wasfound to be an allele of MYC2 ( Lorenzo et al., 2004 ), a bHLH tran-scription factor acting as a repressor of BL-mediated photomorpho-genic growth and as negative regulator of BL- and FR-regulatedgene expression ( Gangappa et al., 2010; Yadav et al., 2005 ). OtherMYC2-related proteins, MYC3 and MYC4, were found to act redun-dantly with MYC2 to regulate JA response ( Cheng et al., 2011;Fernández-Calvo et al., 2011; Niu et al., 2011 ). In analogy with therole of IAA proteins in auxin signaling ( Santner and Estelle, 2009 ),a family of proteins (JAZ) acts as repressors of the JA response by
a direct binding at least to these bHLH transcription factors ( Chicoet al., 2008; Staswick, 2008 ). Upon hormone accumulation and per-ception, degradation of JAZ repressors liberates MYC2 andrelated-proteins resulting in the transcription of their target genes.Recently, an interesting study was published showing that JA signal-ing and low R/FR light converge at the level of JAZ proteins resultingin changes in their stability ( Robson et al., 2010 ). Moreover, low R/FRlight results in an up-regulated expression of several JAZgenes(Moreno et al., 2009 ). Interestingly, the negative role of JAZ proteinsin JA signaling may also be in ﬂuenced by the presence of active GAsignaling. In fact, the JAZ1 protein interacts in vivo with DELLA pro-teins, repressors of the GA pathway, enhancing the ability of MYC2and related proteins to regulate their target genes. On the contrary,GA triggers degradation of DELLAs, which allows JAZ1 to bind MYC2
suppressing the JA response ( Hou et al., 2010 ). Since GA signaling isan important component of shade avoidance response(Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007; Pierik et al., 2004 ), part of the mecha-
suppressing the JA response ( Hou et al., 2010 ). Since GA signaling isan important component of shade avoidance response(Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007; Pierik et al., 2004 ), part of the mecha-nism repressing JA response in low R/FR light may be mediated by an in-creased stability of the JAZ proteins.The repression of JA response by low R/FR has been interpretedas a primary plant response to save resources by reducing investmentin defense. This conclusion derived from the analysis of sav3 seedlingslacking TAA1 ( Tao et al., 2008 ), because supplemental FR given tothis mutant ( Tao et al., 2008 ) fails to elicit the shade avoidancephenotype but still down-regulates plant defense ( Moreno et al.,2009 ). The active repression of JA-response by low R/FR light may in-deed avoid the inhibitory effects of jasmonates on cell division(Zhang and Turner, 2008 ). In particular, an excessive inhibition ofvascular cell division may be very disadvantageous under light condi-
tions where supporting organs have to elongate rapidly. Furthermore,JA-mediated inhibition of cell division may be critical for an effectiveproduction of seeds.Although the down-regulation of the JA response by canopy shademay provide a major selective advantage for plants growing in thewild, it may impact yield when crops are grown at high plant densityin the absence of an effective chemical or biological protection againstinsects.5. From Arabidopsis to cropsCrop productivity is a complex function of the acquisition and dis-tribution of resources. One approach to improve crop yield is to in-crease the plant density per unit soil area. At high density plantings,the shade avoidance response could be advantageous because maydecrease the size variability between individuals. By reducing dif-ferences in height among individuals, shade avoidance indirectlyreduces the variation in growth rate, size and reproductive output.
In spite of that, shade avoidance represents an undesirable trait thatvery often diverts resources away from agriculturally importantorgans such as root, leaf and seed/fruit, and it prevents cultivationof several crops above certain plant densities ( Sangoi et al., 2002;Tetio-Kagho, 1988 ).Although traditional breeding programs have selected for in-creased performance under high planting density, many crops haveretained the shade avoidance response. For instance, in forage grasses(Casal et al., 1987; Deregibus et al., 1983, 1985 ;) and winter cereals(Casal, 1988; Casal et al., 1986, 1990; Kasperbauer and Karlen, 1986;Skinner and Simmons, 1993 ) reduced tillering is the most dramaticresponse to low R/FR ratio. The shade avoidance response is presenteven in modern commercial hybrids of maize, one of the most suc-cessful examples for breeder-directed evolution. For example, tem-perate maize varieties perceive changes in light quality and alter
leaf angle to maximize light interception when grown at high density(Fellner et al. 2003; Maddonni et al. 2002 ). More recently, dataobtained by Dubois et al. (2010) reinforced the hypothesis that elon-gation responses in maize were not lost during domestication orbreeding process. Therefore, yield increases in maize appear to bedue to increased tolerance for limited resources or tolerance to stres-ses rather than to a suppression of elongation growth caused by lowR/FR light ( Duvick, 1997; Troyer, 2001 ).In production agriculture, management practice is designed tominimize crop –weed interactions and ensure crop survival and re-production. Recently, it has been shown that the presence of earlyemerging weeds reﬂecting FR-enriched light trigger the expressionof the shade avoidance response within a crop, including maize ( Liuet al., 2009; Page et al., 2009; Rajcan et al., 2004 ). The results of green-house and ﬁeld trials demonstrate that shade avoidance in maize can
be induced shortly after seedling emergence and that the effects of
house and ﬁeld trials demonstrate that shade avoidance in maize canbe induced shortly after seedling emergence and that the effects ofthis early response can be detected throughout the entire life cycleof the crop. Seedlings exposed at emergence to FR-enriched lightreﬂected by the weeds displayed an initial increase in plant heightand a reduction in the root-to-shoot ratio. This may result in an in-creased plant-to-plant variability in reproductive effort and reducedindividual plant ﬁtness ( Page et al., 2010 ).Page et al. (2010) also sug-gested that these plants may perform sub-optimally in terms of yieldespecially if resource availability is limited or the crop experiencessubsequent stresses ( e.g.drought, nutrient limitations).In recent years, biotechnological approaches have been tried withthe aim at minimizing the shade avoidance response of crop plants
under high density plantings with the ﬁnal goal of enhancing yield.1054 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
One potential strategy is to inhibit the elongation responses throughthe overexpression of phytochrome photoreceptors ( Sawers et al.,2005 ). However, the heterologous expression of PHY genes veryoften resulted in a range of different and in some cases unwantedphenotypes even within a species. For instance, overexpression ofthe Arabidopsis PHYA gene in a Japonica variety of rice resulted in anegative impact on yield resulting in a reduced formation of tillers,whereas expression of the same gene in an Indica variety producedan opposite phenotype and an higher yield ( Garg et al., 2006; Konget al., 2004 ). This and other unexpected results obtained in tobacco(Kay et al., 1989; Keller et al., 1989; Nagatani et al., 1991 ) suggestthat the developmental plasticity of a given cultivar may vary consid-erably in response to the heterologous expression of phytochromesand emphasize the inherent dif ﬁculties to translate the results ob-
tained in model plants to crops. However, it is important to stressthat these results were obtained through a constitutive expressionof heterologous phytochromes. More consistent results may be ob-tained using homologous phytochrome genes driven by light- and/or tissue-speci ﬁc promoters. Furthermore, expression of modi ﬁedPHY proteins may be an additional strategy to limit shade avoidance.For example, bathochromic oat phyA mutants whose Pr-absorbanceband maximum shifted to a longer wavelength compared towild-type phyA have been developed. Remarkably, Arabidopsis plantswith the modi ﬁed phyAs showed signi ﬁcantly increased shade toler-ance compared to wild-type plants and transgenic plants withwild-type phytochromes ( Kim, 2005 ).More recently, the identi ﬁcation of the bHLH transcription factorHFR1/SICS1 as a master negative regulator of shade avoidance in Ara-bidopsis ( Sessa et al., 2005 ) opened up the possibility to design new
strategies to modulate plant responses to a FR-enriched light environ-ment which typically occurs in high-density crop plantings. Forexample, transgenic plants expressing higher levels of HFR1/SICS1as soon as the phytochrome systems perceive the light quality changewould likely acclimate faster than wild type plants to a low R/FRenvironment. Higher levels of HFR1/SICS1 at the very early stagesof shade avoidance may be achieved using natural or engineeredshade-induced promoters stronger than the HFR1/SICS1 promoter.Shade-regulated expression of engineered HFR1/SICS1 proteins mayrepresent an alternative strategy to attenuate shade avoidance. Ithas been shown, for example, that HFR1- ΔN105, a truncated formof HFR1/SICS1 with increased stability, suppresses some aspects ofthe end-of-day far-red light response when overexpressed in Arabi-dopsis plants ( Jang et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2003 ).Transcription factors acting as positive regulators of shade
avoidance, such as PIF4, PIF5, ATHB2 and related HD-Zip II proteins(Ciarbelli et al., 2008; Lorrain et al., 2008; Sorin et al., 2009; Steindleret al., 1999 ) also represent targets for biotechnological improve-ment of plant responses to neighbor vegetation. In fact, transcriptionfactors may be converted to dominant negative forms by fusing arepressor domain to the protein ( e.g.the EAR repressor domain;Hiratsu et al., 2003 ) or by abolishing the DNA binding activitywhen acting in homo- or hetero-dimeric complexes ( Staudt andWenkel, 2011 ). Indeed, a derivative of ATHB2 unable to bind DNAbecause of a single amino acid substitution in the homeodomain(ATHB2N51A) is able to produce a dominant-negative phenotypein Arabidopsis and tomato plants. Arabidopsis ATHB2N51A transgen-ic plants had larger cotyledons, higher number of leaves and lateralinﬂorescence, a more developed root mass; in addition, these plantselongated less in low R/FR light. Similarly, tomatoATHB2N51A trans-
ATHB2N51A trans-genic plants showed a high number of lateral branches and improvedleaf expansion ( Iannacone et al., 2008 ).
elongated less in low R/FR light. Similarly, tomatoATHB2N51A trans-genic plants showed a high number of lateral branches and improvedleaf expansion ( Iannacone et al., 2008 ).Finally, another approach to attenuate the activity of the positiveregulators of shade avoidance response may be through genedown-regulation. This may be achieved by RNA interference or arti ﬁ-cial microRNAs ( Schwab et al., 2010 ) in a developmental stage-and/or tissue speci ﬁc manner.6. ConclusionsDespite the importance of shade avoidance in natural communi-ties and in agricultural settings, relatively little is known about thecellular and molecular mechanisms regulating this response.In the last decade, work mostly performed in the model organismArabidopsis identi ﬁed key transcription factor genes that underpinneighbor detection, uncovered complex molecular interactions be-tween light and hormone signaling pathways, and revealed fascinat-
ing cross-talks in regulatory networks involved in plant responsesto low R/FR and other environmental signals. However, further stud-ies in Arabidopsis aimed to unravel the mechanisms of response andadaptation to light quality changes operating in the plant on thewhole and at the level of single organs will be necessary. Further-more, Arabidopsis and its relatives represent an ideal system for nat-ural variation and comparative genomics studies that are crucial todetermine the mechanisms underlying phenotypic variation inshade avoidance in nature. For example, recent work showed thatnatural alleles of ELF3 differentially regulate circadian period andﬂowering time in response to shade ( Jiménez-Gómez et al., 2010 ),implicating this gene for the ﬁrst time in plant responses to lightquality changes. Finally, Arabidopsis will likely play a major role inthe generation of predictive models of plant responses to the envi-
ronment. Natural environments are highly complex and globalmodels with predictive value may contribute signi ﬁcantly to designinnovative strategies to produce varieties able to withstand changingenvironments.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Kotaro Yamamoto (Hokkaido University, Sapporo,Japan) for the IAA19::GUS seeds. We also thank Angela RaffaellaCiarbelli for initial work on HAT3 inducible transgenic lines, andDaniela Bongiorno for skillful technical assistance. Our apologiesto the many researchers whose work or original publications couldnot be cited here because of space limitations. This work was sup-ported, in part, by grants from MIUR_ERA-PG Program and MiPAAF_AGRONANOTECH Program.ReferencesAl-Sady B, Ni W, Kircher S, Scháfer E, Quail PH. Photoactivated phytochrome inducesrapid PIF3 phosphorylation prior to proteasome-mediated degradation. Mol Cell2006;23:439 –46.Al-Sady B, Kikis EA, Monte E, Quail PH. Mechanistic duality of transcription factor function
in phytochrome signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:2232 –7.Ariel FD, Manavella PA, Dezar CA, Chan RL. The true story of the HD-Zip family. TrendsPlant Sci 2007;12:419 –26.Aukerman MJ, Hirschfeld M, Wester L, Weaver M, Clack T, Amasino RM, et al. A deletion inthePHYD gene of the Arabidopsis Wassilewskija ecotype de ﬁnes a role for phyto-chrome D in red/far-red light sensing. Plant Cell 1997;9:1317 –26.Bae G, Choi G. Decoding of light signals by plant phytochromes and their interactingproteins. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2008;59:281 –311.Ballaré CL. Keeping up with the neighbours: phytochrome sensing and other signalingmechanisms. Trends Plant Sci 1999;4:97-102.Bauer D, Viczián A, Kircher S, Nobis T, Nitschke R, Kunkel T, et al. Constitutive photo-morphogenesis 1 and multiple photoreceptors control degradation of phyto-chrome interacting factor 3, a transcription factor required for light signaling inArabidopsis. Plant Cell 2004;16:1433 –45.
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2004;16:1433 –45.Beck EH, Heim R, Hansen J. Plant resistance to cold stress: mechanisms and environ-
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2004;16:1433 –45.Beck EH, Heim R, Hansen J. Plant resistance to cold stress: mechanisms and environ-mental signals triggering frost hardening and dehardening. J Biosci 2004;29:449–59.Carabelli M, Sessa G, Baima S, Morelli G, Ruberti I. The Arabidopsis Athb-2 and - 4genesare strongly induced by far-red-rich light. Plant J 1993;4:469 –79.Carabelli M, Morelli G, Whitelam G, Ruberti I. Twilight-zone and canopy shade induc-tion of the Athb-2 homeobox gene in green plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A1996;93:3530 –5.Carabelli M, Possenti M, Sessa G, Ciol ﬁA, Sassi M, Morelli G, et al. Canopy shade causesa rapid and transient arrest in leaf development through auxin-induced cytokininoxidase activity. Genes Dev 2007;21:1863 –8.Carabelli M, Possenti M, Sessa G, Ciol ﬁA, Sassi M, Morelli G, et al. A novel regulatorycircuit underlying plant response to canopy shade. Plant Signal Behav 2008;3:
137–9.1055 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
Casal JJ, Sánchez RA, Deregibus VA. Effects of plant density on tillering: the involve-ment of the R/FR and the proportion of radiation intercepted per plant. Exp Envi-ron Bot 1986;26:365 –71.Casal JJ, Sánchez RA, Deregibus VA. Tillering responses of Lolium multi ﬂorum plants tochanges of red/far-red ratio typical of sparse canopies. J Exp Bot 1987;38:1432 –9.Casal JJ. Light quality effects on the appearance of tillers of different order in wheat(Triticum aestivum ). Ann Appl Biol 1988;112:167 –73.Casal JJ, Sánchez RA, Gibson D. The signi ﬁcance of changes in the red/far red ratio, associ-ated with the neighbour plants or twilight, for tillering in Lolium multi ﬂorum Lam .New Phytol 1990;116:565 –72.Casimiro I, Marchant A, Bhalerao RP, Beeckman T, Dhooge S, Swarup R, et al. Auxintransport promotes Arabidopsis lateral root initiation. Plant Cell 2001;13:843 –52.Castillon A, Shen H, Huq E. Phytochrome Interacting Factors: central players in
phytochrome-mediated light signaling networks. Trends Plant Sci 2007;12:514 –21.Cheng Z, Sun L, Qi T, Zhang B, Peng W, Liu Y, et al. The bHLH transcription factor MYC3interacts with the Jasmonate ZIM-Domain proteins to mediate jasmonate responsein Arabidopsis. Mol Plant 2011;4:279 –88.Chico JM, Chini A, Fonseca S, Solano R. JAZ repressors set the rhythm in jasmonate sig-naling. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008;11:486 –94.Chu YN, Coble CG, Jordan WR. Hypocotyl elongation and swelling of cotton as affectedby soil temperature, moisture and physical impedances. Crop Sci 1991;31:410 –5.Ciarbelli AR, Ciol ﬁA, Salvucci S, Ruzza V, Possenti M, Carabelli M, et al. The Arabidopsishomeodomain-leucine zipper II gene family: diversity and redundance. Plant MolBiol 2008;68:465 –78.Dechaine JM, Gardner G, Weinig C. Phytochromes differentially regulate seed germina-tion responses to light quality and temperature cues during seed maturation. PlantCell Environ 2009;32:1297 –309.
Cell Environ 2009;32:1297 –309.de Lucas M, Daviere J-M, Rodriguez-Falcon M, Pontin M, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Lorrain S,et al. A molecular framework for light and gibberellin control of cell elongation.Nature 2008;451:480 –4.Deregibus VA, Sanchez RA, Casal JJ. Effects of light quality on tiller production in Loliumspp. Plant Physiol 1983;72:900 –2.Deregibus VA, Sanchez RA, Casal JJ, Trlica MJ. Tillering responses to enrichment ofred light beneath the canopy in a humid natural grassland. J Appl Ecol 1985;22:199–206.Devlin PF, Patel SR, Whitelam GC. Phytochrome E in ﬂuences internode elongation andﬂowering time in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 1998;10:1479 –87.Devlin PF, Robson PRH, Patel SR, Goosey L, Sharrock RA, Whitelam GC. Phytochrome Dacts in the shade-avoidance syndrome in Arabidopsis by controlling elongationandﬂowering time. Plant Physiol 1999;119:909 –15.Devlin PF, Yanovsky MJ, Kay SA. A genomic analysis of the shade avoidance response in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2003;133:1617 –29.Djakovic-Petrovic T, de Wit M, Voesenek LACJ, Pierik R. DELLA protein function ingrowth responses to canopy signals. Plant J 2007;51:117 –26.Donohue K, Heschel MS, Chiang GC, Butler CM, Barua D. Phytochrome mediates germi-nation responses to multiple seasonal cues. Plant Cell Environ 2007;30:202 –12.Donohue K, Heschel MS, Butler CM, Barua D, Sharrock RA, Whitelam GC, et al. Diversi-ﬁcation of phytochrome contributions to germination as a function ofseed-maturation environment. New Phytol 2008;177:367 –79.Dubois PG, Olsefski GT, Flint-Garcia S, Setter TL, Hoekenga OA, Brutnell TP. Physiolog-ical and genetic characterization of End-of-Day Far-Red light response in maizeseedlings. Plant Physiol 2010;154:173 –86.Duek PD, Fankhauser C. HFR1, a putative bHLH transcription factor, mediates both phy-tochrome A and cryptochrome signaling. Plant J 2003;34:827 –36.
Duek PD, Elmer MV, van Oosten VR, Fankhauser C. The degradation of HFR1, a putativebHLH class transcription factor involved in light signaling, is regulated by phos-
Duek PD, Elmer MV, van Oosten VR, Fankhauser C. The degradation of HFR1, a putativebHLH class transcription factor involved in light signaling, is regulated by phos-phorylation and requires COP1. Curr Biol 2004;14:2296 –301.Duvick DN. What is yield? In: Edmeades GO, editor. Developing drought and lowN-tolerant maize. El Batan, Mexico: CIMMYT; 1997. p. 332 –5.Engelberth J, Alborn HT, Schmelz EA, Tumlinson JH. Airborne signals prime plantsagainst insect herbivore attack. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:1781 –5.Fairchild CD, Schumaker MA, Quail PH. HFR1 encodes an atypical bHLH protein thatacts in phytochrome A signal transduction. Genes Dev 2000;14:2377 –91.Fankhauser C, Chory J. RSF1 , an Arabidopsis locus implicated in phytochrome A signal-ing. Plant Physiol 2000;124:39 –45.Fellner M, Horton LA, Cocke AE, Stephens NR, Ford ED, Van Volkenburgh E. Light inter-acts with auxin during leaf elongation and leaf angle development in young cornseedlings. Planta 2003;216:366 –76.
seedlings. Planta 2003;216:366 –76.Feng S, Martinez C, Gusmaroli G, Wang Y, Zhou J, Wang F, et al. Coordinated regulation ofArabidopsis thaliana development by light and gibberellins. Nature 2008;451:475 –9.Fernández-Calvo P, Chini A, Fernández-Barbero G, Chico JM, Gimenez-Ibanez S, Geer-inck J, et al. The Arabidopsis bHLH transcription factors MYC3 and MYC4 are tar-gets of JAZ repressors and act additively with MYC2 in the activation ofjasmonate responses. Plant Cell 2011;23:701 –15.Foreman J, Johansson H, Hornitschek P, Josse E-M, Fankhauser C, Halliday KJ. Light re-ceptor action is critical for maintaining plant biomass at warm ambient tempera-tures. Plant J 2011;65:441 –52.Franklin KA, Praekelt U, Stoddart WM, Billingham OE, Halliday KJ, Whitelam GC. Phyto-chromes B, D, and E act redundantly to control multiple physiological responses inArabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2003;131:1340 –6.Franklin KA, Whitelam GC. Light-quality regulation of freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Nat Genet 2007;39:1410 –3.Franklin KA. Light and temperature signal crosstalk in plant development. Curr OpinPlant Biol 2009;12:63 –8.Franklin KA, Quail PH. Phytochrome functions in Arabidopsis development. J Exp Bot2010;61:11 –24.Friml J, Wi śniewska J, Benková E, Mendgen K, Palme K. Lateral relocation of auxin ef ﬂuxregulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 2002;415:806 –9.Galstyan A, Cifuentes-Esquivel N, Bou-Torrent J, Martinez-Garcia JF. The shade avoid-ance syndrome in Arabidopsis: a fundamental role for atypical basic helix-loop-he-lix proteins as transcriptional cofactors. Plant J 2011;66:258 –67.Gangappa SN, Rajendra Prasad VB, Chattopadhyay S. Functional interconnection ofMYC2 and SPA1 in the photomorphogenic seedling development of Arabidopsis.Plant Physiol 2010;154:1210 –9.Garg AK, Sawers RJ, Wang H, Kim J-KK, Walker JM, Brutnell TP, et al. Light-regulatedoverexpression of an Arabidopsis phytochrome A gene in rice alters plant architec-
ture and increases grain yield. Planta 2006;223:627 –36.Genoud T, Buchala AJ, Chua N-H, Metraux JP. Phytochrome signalling modulates theSA-perceptive pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant J 2002;31:87 –95.Gray WM, Ostin A, Sandberg G, Romano CP, Estelle M. High temperature promotesauxin-mediated hypocotyl elongation in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A1998;95:7197 –202.Halliday KJ, Salter MG, Thingnaes E, Whitelam GC. Phytochrome control of ﬂowering istemperature sensitive and correlates with expression of the ﬂoral integrator FT.Plant J 2003;33:875 –85.Halliday KJ, Whitelam GC. Changes in photoperiod or temperature alter the functionalrelationships between phytochromes and reveal roles for phyD and phyE. PlantPhysiol 2003;131:1913 –20.Harberd NP, Bel ﬁeld E, Yasumura Y. The angiosperm gibberellin-GID1-DELLA growthregulatory mechanism: how an “inhibitor of an inhibitor ”enables ﬂexible responsetoﬂuctuating environments. Plant Cell 2009;21:1328 –39.
regulatory mechanism: how an “inhibitor of an inhibitor ”enables ﬂexible responsetoﬂuctuating environments. Plant Cell 2009;21:1328 –39.Heschel MS, Selby J, Butler C, Whitelam GC, Sharrock RA, Donohue K. A new role forphytochromes in temperature-dependent germination. New Phytol 2007;174:735–41.Heschel MS, Butler CM, Barua D, Chiang GCK, Wheeler A, Sharrock RA, et al. Newroles of phytochromes during seed germination. Int J Plant Sci 2008;169:531 –40.Hiratsu K, Matsui K, Koyama T, Ohme-Takagi M. Dominant repression of target genes bychimeric repressors that include the EAR motif, a repression domain, in Arabidopsis.Plant J 2003;34:733 –9.Hornitschek P, Lorrain S, Zoete V, Michielin O, Fankhauser C. Inhibition of the shadeavoidance response by formation of non-DNA binding bHLH heterodimers. EMBOJ 2009;28:3893 –902.Hou X, Lee LY, Xia K, Yan Y, Yu H. DELLAs modulate jasmonate signaling via competi-tive binding to JAZs. Dev Cell 2010;19:884 –94.
tive binding to JAZs. Dev Cell 2010;19:884 –94.Hsieh HL, Okamoto H, Wang M, Ang LH, Matsui M, Goodman H, et al. FIN219, anauxin-regulated gene, de ﬁnes a link between phytochrome A and the downstreamregulator COP1 in light control of Arabidopsis development. Genes Dev 2000;14:1958 –70.Iannacone R, Mittempergher F, Morelli G, Panio G, Perito A, Ruberti I, et al. In ﬂuence ofan Arabidopsis dominant negative athb2 mutant on tomato plant development.Acta Hort 2008;789:263 –76.Izaguirre MM, Mazza CA, Biondini M, Baldwin IT, Ballaré CL. Remote sensing of futurecompetitors: impacts on plant defenses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:7170 –4.Jang I-C, Yang J-Y, Seo HS, Chua N-H. HFR1 is targeted by COP1 E3 ligase forpost-translational proteolysis during phytochrome A signaling. Genes Dev2005;19:593 –602.Jang I-C, Henriques R, Seo HS, Nagatani A, Chua N-H. Arabidopsis PHYTOCHROME
INTERACTING FACTOR proteins promote phytochrome B polyubiquitination byCOP1 E3 ligase in the nucleus. Plant Cell 2010;22:2370 –83.Jiao Y, Lau OS, Deng XW. Light-regulated transcriptional networks in higher plants. NatRev Genet 2007;8:217 –30.Jiménez-Gómez JM, Wallace AD, Maloof JN. Network analysis identi ﬁesELF3as aQTL for the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genet 2010;6:e1001100.Johnson E, Bradley JM, Harberd NP, Whitelam GC. Photoresponses of light-grown phyAmutants of Arabidopsis: phytochrome A is required for the perception of daylengthextensions. Plant Physiol 1994;105:141 –9.Kanyuka K, Praekelt U, Franklin KA, Billingham OE, Hooley R, Whitelam GC, et al. Muta-tions in the huge Arabidopsis gene BIGaffect a range of hormone and light responses.Plant J 2003;35:57 –70.Karban R, Maron J. The ﬁtness consequences of interspeci ﬁc eavesdropping betweenplants. Ecology 2002;83:1209 –13.
plants. Ecology 2002;83:1209 –13.Kasperbauer MJ, Karlen DL. Light-mediated bioregulation of tillering and photosyn-thate partitioning in wheat. Physiol Plant 1986;66:159 –63.Kay SA, Nagatani A, Keith B, Deak M, Furuya M, Chua NH. Rice phytochrome is biolog-ically active in transgenic tobacco. Plant Cell 1989;1:775 –82.Keuskamp DH, Pollmann S, Voesenek LA, Peeters AJ, Pierik R. Auxin transport throughPIN-FORMED 3 (PIN3) controls shade avoidance and ﬁtness during competition.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:22740 –4.Keuskamp DH, Sasidharan R, Vos I, Peeters AJ, Voesenek LA, Pierik R. Blue-light-me-diated shade avoidance requires combined auxin and brassinosteroid action in Ara-bidopsis seedlings. Plant J 2011;67:208 –17.Keller JM, Shanklin J, Vierstra RD, Hershey HP. Expression of a functional monocotyle-donous phytochrome in transgenic tobacco. EMBO J 1989;8:1005 –12.Keller MM, Jaillais Y, Pedmale UV, Moreno JE, Chory J, Ballaré CL. Cryptochrome 1 and
phytochrome B control shade-avoidance responses in Arabidopsis via partially in-dependent hormonal cascades. Plant J 2011;67:195 –207.Koini MA, Alvey L, Allen T, Tilley CA, Harberd NP, Whitelam GC, et al. Hightemperature-mediated adaptations in plant architecture require the bHLH tran-
Koini MA, Alvey L, Allen T, Tilley CA, Harberd NP, Whitelam GC, et al. Hightemperature-mediated adaptations in plant architecture require the bHLH tran-scription factor PIF4. Curr Biol 2009;19:408 –13.1056 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
Khanna R, Shen Y, Marion CM, Tsuchisaka A, Theologis A, Schäfer E, et al. The basichelix-loop-helix transcription factor PIF5 acts on ethylene biosynthesis andphytochrome signaling by distinct mechanisms. Plant Cell 2007;19:3915 –29.Kim YH. Development and characterization of bathochromic phytochrome mutants.ETD collection for University of Nebraska - Lincoln; 2005.. Paper AAI3163993.Kong SG, Lee DS, Kwak SN, Kim JK, Sohn JK, Kim IS. Characterization of sunlight-growntransgenic rice plants expressing Arabidopsis phytochrome A. Mol Breed 2004;14:35–45.Kurashige NS, Agrawal AA. Phenotypic plasticity to light competition and herbivory inChenopodium album (Chenopodiaceae ). Am J Bot 2005;92:21 –6.Lau OS, Deng XW. Plant hormone signaling lightens up: integrators of light and hor-mones. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2010;13:571 –7.Leivar P, Monte E, Oka Y, Liu T, Carle C, Castillon A, et al. Multiplephytochrome-interacting bHLH transcription factors repress premature seedling
photomorphogenesis in darkness. Curr Biol 2008a;18:1815 –23.Leivar P, Monte E, Al-Sady B, Carle C, Storer A, Alonso J, et al. The Arabidopsisphytochrome-interacting factor PIF7, together with PIF3 and PIF4, regulates re-sponses to prolonged red light by modulating phyB levels. Plant Cell 2008b;20:337 –52.Leivar P, Quail PH. PIFs: pivotal components in a cellular signaling hub. Trends Plant Sci2011;16:19 –28.Liu JL, Mahoney KJ, Sikkema PH, Swanton CJ. The importance of light quality incrop-weed competition. Weed Res 2009;49:217 –24.Loake G, Grant M. Salicylic acid in plant defence —the players and protagonists. CurrOpin Plant Biol 2007;10:466 –72.Lorenzo O, Chico JM, Sanchez-Serrano JJ, Solano R. JA-INSENSITIVE1 encodes a MYCtranscription factor essential to discrim inate between different JA-regulateddefense responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2004;16:1938 –50.Lorrain S, Allen T, Duek PD, Whitelam GC, Fankhauser C. Phytochrome-mediated inhi-
bition of shade avoidance involves degradation of growth-promoting bHLH tran-scription factors. Plant J 2008;53:312 –23.Maddonni GA, Otegui ME, Andrieu B, Chelle M, Casal JJ. Maize leaves turn away fromneighbors. Plant Physiol 2002;130:1181 –9.Massari ME, Murre C. Helix-Loop-Helix proteins: regulators of transcription in eucar-yotic organisms. Mol Cell Biol 2000;20:429 –40.Mathews S, Sharrock RA. Phytochrome gene diversity. Plant Cell Environ 1997;20:666–71.Mathews S. Phytochrome-mediated devel opment in land plants: red light sensingevolves to meet the challenges of changing light environments. Mol Ecol2006;15:3483 –503.McGuire R, Agrawal AA. Trade-offs between the shade-avoidance response and plantresistance to herbivores? Tests with mutant Cucumis sativus . Funct Ecol 2005;19:1025 –31.Mittler R. Abiotic stress, the ﬁeld environment and stress combination. Trends Plant Sci2006;11:15 –9.
2006;11:15 –9.Morelli G, Ruberti I. Shade avoidance responses. Driving auxin along lateral routes.Plant Physiol 2000;122:621 –6.Morelli G, Ruberti I. Light and shade in the photocontrol of Arabidopsis growth. TrendsPlant Sci 2002;7:399 –404.M o r e n oJ E ,T a oY ,C h o r yJ ,B a l l a r éC L .E c o logical modulation of plant defense viaphytochrome control of JA sensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:4935–40.Nagatani A, Kay SA, Deak M, Chua NH, Furuya M. Rice type I phytochrome regulates hypo-cotyl elongation in transgenic tobacco seedlings. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:5207 –11.Nemhauser JL, Mockler TC, Chory J. Interdependency of brassinosteroid and auxin sig-naling in Arabidopsis. PLoS Biol 2004;2:E258.Niu Y, Figueroa P, Browse J. Characterization of JAZ-interacting bHLH transcription fac-tors that regulate jasmonate responses in Arabidopsis. J Exp Bot 2011;62:2143 –54.Nozue K, Covington MF, Duek PD, Lorrain S, Fankhauser C, Harmer SL, et al. Rhythmic
growth explained by coincidence between internal and external cues. Nature2007;448:358 –61.
Nozue K, Covington MF, Duek PD, Lorrain S, Fankhauser C, Harmer SL, et al. Rhythmicgrowth explained by coincidence between internal and external cues. Nature2007;448:358 –61.Ohgishi M, Oka A, Morelli G, Ruberti I, Aoyama T. Negative autoregulation of the Arabi-dopsis homeobox gene ATHB-2 . Plant J 2001;25:389 –98.Page ER, Tollenaar M, Lee EA, Luklens L, Swa nton CJ. Does shade avoidance underliethe critical period for weed control in maize ( Zea mays L. )? Weed Res 2009;49:563 –71.Page ER, Tollenaar M, Lee EA, Lukens L, Swanton CJ. Shade avoidance: an integral com-ponent of crop —weed competition. Weed Res 2010;50:281 –8.Park E, Kim J, Lee Y, Shin J, Oh E, Chung WI, et al. Degradation of phytochrome interact-ing factor 3 in phytochrome-mediated light signaling. Plant Cell Physiol 2004;45:968–75.Penﬁeld S, Josse EM, Kannangara R, Gilday AD, Halliday KJ, Graham IA. Cold and lightcontrol seed germination through the bHLH transcription factor SPATULA. Curr
Biol 2005;15:1998 –2006.Pierik R, Cuppens MLC, Voesenek LACJ, Visser EJW. Interactions between ethylene andgibberellins in phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in tobacco.Plant Physiol 2004;136:2928 –36.Pierik R, Djakovic-Petrovic T, Keuskamp DH, de Wit M, Voesenek LA. Auxin and eth-ylene regulate elongation responses to neighbor proximity signals independentof gibberellin and DELLA proteins in Ar abidopsis. Plant Physiol 2009;149:1701 –12.Rajcan I, Chandler KJ, Swanton CJ. Red-far-red ratio of re ﬂected light: a hypothesis ofwhy early season weed control is important in corn. Weed Sci 2004;52:774 –8.Redman JC, Haas BJ, Tanimoto G, Town CD. Development and evaluation of an Arabi-dopsis whole genome Affymetrix probe array. Plant J 2004;38:545 –61.Reed JW, Nagpal P, Poole DS, Furuya M, Chory J. Mutations in the gene for the red/far-redlight receptor phytochrome B alter cell elongation and physiological responses
throughout Arabidopsis development. Plant Cell 1993;5:147 –57.Roberts MR, Paul ND. Seduced by the dark side: Integrating molecular and ecologicalperspectives on the in ﬂuence of light on plant defence against pests and patho-gens. New Phytol 2006;170:677 –99.Robson F, Okamoto H, Patrick E, Harris S-R, Wasternack C, Brearley C, et al. Jasmonateand phytochrome A signaling in Arabidopsis wound and shade responses are inte-grated through JAZ1 stability. Plant Cell 2010;22:1143 –60.Roig-Villanova I, Bou J, Sorin C, Devlin PF, Martínez-García JF. Identi ﬁcation of primarytarget genes of phytochrome signaling. Early transcriptional control during shadeavoidance responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2006;141:85 –96.Roig-Villanova I, Bou-Torrent J, Galstyan A, Carretero-Paulet L, Portolés S, Rodríguez--Concepción M, et al. Interaction of shade avoidance and auxin responses: a rolefor two novel atypical bHLH proteins. EMBO J 2007;26:4756 –67.
Ruberti I, Sessa G, Lucchetti S, Morelli G. A novel class of plant proteins containing a home-odomain with a closely linked leucine zipper motif. EMBO J 1991;10:1787 –91.Salter MG, Franklin KA, Whitelam GC. Gating of the rapid shade avoidance response bythe circadian clock in plants. Nature 2003;426:680 –3.Sangoi L, Gracietti M, Rampazzo C, Bianchetti P. Response of Brazilian maize hybridsfrom different eras to changes in plant density. Field Crop Res 2002;79:39 –51.Santner A, Estelle M. Recent advances and emerging trends in plant hormone signal-ling. Nature 2009;459:1071 –8.Sawa S, Ohgishi M, Goda H, Higuchi K, Shimada Y, Yoshida S, et al. The HAT2 gene, a mem-ber of the HD-Zip gene family, isolated as an auxin inducible gene by DNA microarrayscreening, affects auxin response in Arabidopsis. Plant J 2002;32:1011 –22.Sawers RJ, Sheehan MJ, Brutnell TP. Cereal phytochromes: targets of selection, targetsfor manipulation? Trends Plant Sci 2005;10:1381-43.
Schena M, Davis RW. HD-Zip proteins: members of an Arabidopsis homeodomain pro-
for manipulation? Trends Plant Sci 2005;10:1381-43.Schena M, Davis RW. HD-Zip proteins: members of an Arabidopsis homeodomain pro-tein superfamily. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:3894 –8.Schena M, Lloyd AM, Davis RW. The HAT4 gene of Arabidopsis encodes a developmen-tal regulator. Genes Dev 1993;7:367 –79.Schwab R, Ossowski S, Warthmann N, Weigel D. Directed gene silencing with arti ﬁcialmicroRNAs. Methods Mol Biol 2010;592:71 –88.Schmitt J. Is photomorphogenic shade avoidance adaptive? Perspectives from popula-tion biology. Plant Cell Environ 1997;20:826 –30.Sessa G, Carabelli M, Ruberti I, Baima S, Lucchetti S, Morelli G. Identi ﬁcation of distinctfamilies of HD-Zip proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana. In: Puigdomenech P, Coruzzi G,editors. Molecular-genetic analysis of plant development and metabolism. BerlinHeidelberg: Springer Verlag; 1994. p. 411 –26.Sessa G, Carabelli M, Sassi M, Ciol ﬁA, Possenti M, Mittempergher F, et al. A dynamic
balance between gene activation and repression regulates the shade avoidance re-sponse in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev 2005;19:2811 –5.Shen H, Moon J, Huq E. PIF1 is regulated by light-mediated degradation through theubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway to optimize photomorphogenesis of seedlingsin Arabidopsis. Plant J 2005;44:1023 –35.Shen Y, Khanna R, Carle CM, Quail PH. Phytochrome induces rapid PIF5 phosphorylationand degradation in response to red-light activation. Plant Physiol 2007;145:1043 –51.Shulaev V, Silverman P, Raskin I. Airborne signalling by methyl salicylate in plant path-ogen resistance. Nature 1997;385:718 –21.Skinner RH, Simmons SR. Modulation of leaf elongation, tiller appearance and tillersenescence in spring barley by far-red light. Plant Cell Environ 1993;16:555 –62.Smith H, Whitelam GC. The shade avoidance syndrome: multiple responses mediatedby multiple phytochromes. Plant Cell Environ 1997;20:840 –4.
Soh M-S, Kim Y-M, Han S-J, Song P-S. REP1 , a basic helix-loop-helix protein, is requiredfor a branch pathway of phytochrome A signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell2000;12:2061 –73.Sorin C, Salla-Martret M, Bou-Torrent J, Roig-Villanova I, Martínez-García JF. ATHB4, aregulator of shade avoidance, modulates hormone response in Arabidopsis seed-lings. Plant J 2009;59:266 –77.Stamm P, Kumar PP. The phytohormone signal network regulating elongation growthduring shade avoidance. J Exp Bot 2010;61:2889 –903.Staswick PE, Tiryaki I, Rowe ML. Jasmonate response locus JAR1 and several relatedArabidopsis genes encode enzymes of the ﬁreﬂy luciferase superfamily that showactivity on jasmonic, salicylic, and indole-3-acetic acids in an assay for adenylation.Plant Cell 2002;14:1405 –15.Staswick PE. JAZing up jasmonate signaling. Trends Plant Sci 2008;13:66 –71.Staudt AC, Wenkel S. Regulation of protein function by ‘microProteins ’. EMBO Rep2011;12:35 –42.
2011;12:35 –42.Stavang JA, Gallego-Bartolomé J, D Gómez M, Yoshida S, Asami T, Olsen JE, et al. Hormonalregulation of temperature-induced growth in Arabidopsis. Plant J 2009;60:589 –601.Steindler C, Borello U, Carabelli M, Morelli G, Ruberti I. Phytochome A, phytochome Band other phytochome(s) regulate ATHB-2 gene expression in etiolated andgreen Arabidopsis plants. Plant Cell Environ 1997;20:759 –63.Steindler C, Matteucci A, Sessa G, Weimar T, Ohgishi M, Aoyama T, et al. Shade avoid-ance responses are mediated by the ATHB-2 HD-Zip protein, a negative regulatorof gene expression. Development 1999;126:4235 –45.Sullivan JA, Shirasu K, Deng XW. The diverse roles of ubiquitin and the 26S proteasomein the life of plants. Nat Rev Genet 2003;4:948 –58.Tao Y, Ferrer J-L, Ljung K, Pojer F, Hong F, Long JA, et al. Rapid synthesis of auxin via anew tryptophan-dependent pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell2008;133:164 –76.
2008;133:164 –76.Tatematsu K, Kumagai S, Muto H, Sato A, Watahiki MK, Harper RM, et al. MASSUGU2 encodesAux/IAA19, an auxin-regulated protein that functions together with the transcriptional
2008;133:164 –76.Tatematsu K, Kumagai S, Muto H, Sato A, Watahiki MK, Harper RM, et al. MASSUGU2 encodesAux/IAA19, an auxin-regulated protein that functions together with the transcriptionalactivator NPH4/ARF7 to regulate differenti al growth responses of hypocotyl and forma-tion of lateral roots in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 2004;16:379 –93.1057 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
Tetio-Kagho F. Responses of maize to plant population density: I. Reproductive devel-opment, yield, and yield adjustments. Agron J 1988;80:935 –40.Troyer F. Temperate corn —background, behavior, and breeding. In: Hallauer AR, editor.Specialty corns. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2001. p. 393 –466.Ulmasov T, Murfett J, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ. Aux/IAA proteins repress expression ofreporter genes containing natural and highly active synthetic auxin response ele-ments. Plant Cell 1997;9:1963 –71.Vandenbussche F, Van Der Straeten D. Shaping the shoot: a circuitry that integratesmultiple signals. Trends Plant Sci 2004;9:499 –506.Weining C. Limits to adaptive plasticity: temperature and photoperiod in ﬂuenceshade-avoidance responses. Am J Bot 2000;87:1660 –8.Werner T, Motyka V, Laucou V, Smets R, Van Onckelen H, Schmulling T. Cytokinin-de-ﬁcient transgenic Arabidopsis plants show multiple developmental alterations in-
dicating opposite functions of cytokinins in the regulation of shoot and rootmeristem activity. Plant Cell 2003;11:2532 –50.Yadav V, Mallappa C, Gangappa SN, Bhatia S, Chattopadhyay S. A basic helix-loop-helixtranscription factor in Arabidopsis, MYC2, acts as a repressor of blue light-mediatedphotomorphogenic growth. Plant Cell 2005;17:1953 –66.Yamada M, Greenham K, Prigge MJ, Jensen PJ, Estelle M. The TRANSPORT INHIBITORRESPONSE2 gene is required for auxin synthesis and diverse aspects of plant devel-opment. Plant Physiol 2009;151:168 –79.Yang K-YY, Kim Y-MM, Lee S, Song P-SS, Soh M-SS. Overexpression of a mutant basichelix-loop-helix protein HFR1, HFR1-deltaN105, activates a branch pathway oflight signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2003;133:1630 –42.Yang J, Lin R, Sullivan J, Hoecker U, Liu B, Xu L, et al. Light regulates COP1-mediateddegradation of HFR1, a transcription factor essential for light signaling in Arabi-dopsis. Plant Cell 2005a;17:804 –21.
dopsis. Plant Cell 2005a;17:804 –21.Yang J, Lin R, Hoecker U, Liu B, Wang H. Repression of light signaling by ArabidopsisSPA1 involves post-translational regulation of HFR1 protein accumulation. Plant J2005b;43:131 –41.Yin Y, Vafeados D, Tao Y, Yoshida S, Asami T, Chory J. A new class of transcription factorsmediates brassinosteroid-regulated gene expression in Arabidopsis. Cell 2005;120:249–59.Zhai Q, Li CB, Zheng W, Wu X, Zhao J, et al. Phytochrome chromophore de ﬁciency leads tooverproduction of jasmonic acid and elevated expression of jasmonate-responsivegenes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol 2007;48:1061 –71.Zhang YI, Turner JG. Wound-induced endogenous jasmonates stunt plant growth byinhibiting mitosis. PLoS One 2008:e3699.Zuo J, Niu QW, Chua NH. Technical advance: an estrogen receptor-based transactivator XVEmediates highly inducible gene expression in transgenic plants. Plant J 2000;24:265–73.1058 I. Ruberti et al. / Biotechnology Advances 30 (2012) 1047 –1058
