Leading EdgeReviewCommunication by Extracellular Vesicles:W h e r eW eA r ea n dW h e r eW eN e e dt oG oMercedes Tkach1and Clotilde The ´ry1,*1Institut Curie, PSL Research University, INSERM U932, 75005 Paris, France*Correspondence: clotilde.thery@curie.frhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.043In multicellular organisms, distant cells can exchange information by sending out signals com-posed of single molecules or, as increasingly exempliﬁed in the literature, via complex packets stuf-fed with a selection of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, called extracellular vesicles (EVs; alsoknown as exosomes and microvesicles, among other names). This Review covers some of themost striking functions described for EV secretion but also presents the limitations on our knowl-
edge of their physiological roles. While there are initial indications that EV-mediated pathways op-erate in vivo, the actual nature of the EVs involved in these effects still needs to be clariﬁed. Here, wefocus on the context of tumor cells and their microenvironment, but similar results and challengesapply to all patho/physiological systems in which EV-mediated communication is proposed to takeplace.IntroductionCells can communicate with neighboring cells or with distantcells through the secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVsare composed of a lipid bilayer containing transmembrane pro-teins and enclosing cytosolic proteins and RNA. Cells cansecrete different types of EVs that have been classiﬁed accord-ing to their sub-cellular origin ( Colombo et al., 2014 ). On onehand, EVs can be formed and released by budding from the cells’plasma membrane. These EVs display a diverse range of sizes(100–1,000 nm in diameter) and are generally known in the
literature as microvesicles, ectosomes, or microparticles. Othertypes of vesicles, the exosomes, are generated inside multive-sicular endosomes or multivesicular bodies (MVBs) and aresecreted when these compartments fuse with the plasma mem-brane. Exosomes are vesicles smaller than 150 nm in diameterand are enriched in endosome-derived components. All EVsbear surface molecules that allow them to be targeted to recip-ient cells. Once attached to a target cell, EVs can inducesignaling via receptor-ligand interaction or can be internalizedby endocytosis and/or phagocytosis or even fuse with the targetcell’s membrane to deliver their content into its cytosol, therebymodifying the physiological state of the recipient cell.In this Review, we highlight and discuss the more recentstudies on cancer-derived EVs, with a special focus on the latestdiscoveries on the role of EVs in cancer metastasis. The term‘‘exosomes’’ is often used in these articles to designate the
EVs analyzed. However, we now know that the most popularexosome puriﬁcation protocols used historically in the literature(differential ultracentrifugation, 220 nm ﬁltration [ Thery et al.,2006 ])—and the recently released commercial kits—co-isolatedifferent types of EVs. Thus, the term exosomes is generallyused to refer to a mixed population of small EVs (sEVs) withoutfurther demonstration of their intracellular origin. In fact, func-tions assigned to exosomes may either reﬂect generic EV activ-ities or truly exosome-speciﬁc ones; however, the publisheddata cannot be used to determine the precise speciﬁcity. Wethus chose here to use the generic term EVs when vesicles areisolated without speciﬁc attention to their size or sEVs whenthe method used selects vesicles smaller than 200 nm, indepen-dent of the term used in the article referred to.EV-Borne Proteins Promote Cancer Progression andMetastasisEVs have been shown to participate in the dissemination of can-
cer cells, and many groups have described how tumor- andstroma-derived EVs are involved in the different steps of the met-astatic cascade ( Figure 1 ). Tumor sEVs can directly modify tumorcells’ intrinsic motility and invasiveness capacity. In particular,
cells’ intrinsic motility and invasiveness capacity. In particular,sEVs can promote directional cell motility through ECM compo-nents, such as ﬁbronectin, which bind to integrins present onsEVs and thus provide a substrate favoring cell adhesion andenhancing cell speed ( Sung et al., 2015 ). Moreover, sEVs partic-ipate in the biogenesis and activity of an invasive structure calledinvadopodia through the MVB-dependent delivery of metallo-proteinases such as MT1-MMP and other cargo molecules(Hoshino et al., 2013 ), thus promoting cell motility. EVs candirectly contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation byspreading matrix metalloproteinases present either on sEVs(Yue et al., 2015 ) or in tumor-shed large EVs ( Clancy et al.,2015 ). The latter also have been shown to facilitate amoeboidmovement and facilitate invasion. Not only tumor-derived EVs,but also sEVs from cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts can stimulate
invasiveness of recipient breast cancer cells, in this case by acti-vating the planar cell polarity signaling pathway ( Luga et al.,2012 ).Tumor sEVs can alter the cellular physiology of both surround-ing and distant non-tumor cells to allow dissemination andgrowth of cancer cells, i.e., by triggering vascular permeability1226 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
(Peinado et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2014 ) or by conditioningpre-metastatic sites in distant organs ( Costa-Silva et al., 2015;Hoshino et al., 2015; Peinado et al., 2012 ). In particular, mela-noma tumor sEVs bearing a tyrosine-kinase receptor can pro-mote migration of bone marrow progenitor cells to future sitesof metastasis, whereas sEVs secreted by a less-aggressiveversion of the same tumor, devoid of the relevant receptor, donot display this effect ( Peinado et al., 2012 ). Alternatively, sEVsfrom pancreatic cancer cells themselves migrate to distantorgans and promote the formation of a pre-metastatic niche bycreating a ﬁbrotic environment enriched in TGF b, ﬁbronectin,and a macrophage-attracting chemokine ( Costa-Silva et al.,2015 ). Interestingly, sEVs from different tumor types bear integ-rins (ITGs) that target these sEVs to speciﬁc organs and triggersignaling pathways, thereby initiating pre-metastatic niche
formation ( Hoshino et al., 2015 ). For example, sEVs expressingITGavb5bind speciﬁcally to Kupffer cells, mediating liver tropism,while ITG a6b4and ITG a6b1on sEVs bind to lung-resident ﬁbro-blasts and epithelial cells, leading to lung tropism ( Hoshinoet al., 2015 ). Modiﬁcations induced by sEVs in these distantorgans then attract metastatic tumor cells.This observation has been recently used in an innovative wayto redirect tumor cell dissemination in a non-deleterious location(de la Fuente et al., 2015 ). An artiﬁcial pre-metastatic nichegenerated by embedding tumor sEVs in a 3D scaffold and thenimplanted in mouse peritoneum was able to capture ovarian tu-mor cells present in the peritoneum and divert them from theirnormal organ target for dissemination, resulting in strikinglyincreased survival of the animal. The possible application ofthis device in human patients could represent a very promising
approach to suppress metastasis.However, despite being extremely appealing, we must stressthat the working model of circulating tumor-derived sEVsfostering pre-metastatic niche formation has not been demon-strated in a fully physiological in vivo context. In published arti-cles to date, animals were subjected to sustained injections ofin-vitro-puriﬁed tumor-derived sEVs, resulting in this enhancedmetastasis. Whether sEV secretion in vivo by tumor cells isable to achieve this function is still not clear. One possible wayto address this is by interfering in vivo with sEV biogenesis incancer cells. Some studies have attempted to do this by inhibit-ing Ras-related RAB proteins. RAB27A or RAB35 have been ﬁrstshown to be required for sEV secretion in HeLa cervical carci-noma ( Ostrowski et al., 2010 ) and Oli-Neu oligodendroglial pre-cursor cell lines ( Hsu et al., 2010 ), respectively. Consistently,knocking down RAB27A in melanoma ( Peinado et al., 2012 ),
breast ( Bobrie et al., 2012 ), ﬁbrosarcoma ( Sung et al., 2015 ),or prostate cancer cell lines ( Webber et al., 2015 ) reducesthe secretion of sEVs. Cells lacking RAB27A, when injectedin vivo, displayed reduced local migration ( Sung et al., 2015 )o rreduced growth due to impaired recruitment of bone-marrow-derived pro-tumoral immune cells (Bobrie et al., 2012 ), orimpaired modiﬁcation of co-injected ﬁbroblasts into pro-tumoralmyoﬁbroblasts ( Webber et al., 2015 )(Figure 1 ). Lower incidenceof metastasis was also observed ( Bobrie et al., 2012; Peinadoet al., 2012 ). However, RAB27A does not exclusively regulateEV secretion. Loss of the protein also decreases EV-indepen-dent secretion of soluble factors, such as some growth factorsand metalloproteinases that are also involved in tumor metas-tasis ( Bobrie et al., 2012; Peinado et al., 2012 ). The same prob-lem has arisen with the other molecules proposed so far to
regulate speciﬁcally sEV secretion, such as sphingomyelinasesFigure 1. EV-Mediated Effects PromotingTumor Growth, Invasiveness, and Metas-tasisTumor-derived EVs can have several effects on
regulate speciﬁcally sEV secretion, such as sphingomyelinasesFigure 1. EV-Mediated Effects PromotingTumor Growth, Invasiveness, and Metas-tasisTumor-derived EVs can have several effects onrecipient cells. At the site of the primary tumor(left), EVs can enhance cancer cell motility bystabilizing cellular protrusions promoting aneffective and directionally persistent migration viadeposition of ECM cargoes, such as ﬁbronectin,into sEVs. The secretion of EVs containing metal-loproteinases also directly participates in ECMremodeling and promotes function of specializedcell protrusions endowed with degradative activ-ity, called the invadopodia. ECM remodelingsupports tumor cell motility through the tissues.EVs can also promote differentiation or recruit-ment of pro-tumoral stromal cells (ﬁbroblasts andbone-marrow-derived cells). Reciprocally, tumorcell motility, but also acquisition of drug resis-tance, can be enhanced via a complex interplay
with EVs secreted by surrounding ﬁbroblasts. Inaddition, sEVs can enter the circulation and travelto distant sites from the primary tumor (right).Various sEV cargoes promote vascular perme-ability, and EVs can enter the distant tissue, wherethey may generate a pre-metastatic niche byinducing ECM remodeling and promoting therecruitment of bone-marrow-derived cells andeventually, tumor cells. This ﬁgure schematizesthe effects of EVs demonstrated by mixed in-vivo-/in-vitro-based experiments. See the text for dis-cussion on the evidence for fully physiologicalin vivo occurrence of these functions.Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1227
(SMases) ( Trajkovic et al., 2008 ). Knockdown or inhibition ofSMases by small-molecule inhibitors, which results in impairedceramide formation, has often been used to inhibit exosome/sEV secretion but without demonstration of the speciﬁcity ofthis effect for sEV secretion, as opposed to other secretions orother physiological features of the cells. Thus, to understandthe functions of EVs in vivo, the development of complementarymethodologies will be required.Catching Communication in ActionA major challenge for the EV ﬁeld and, more broadly, for under-standing how EVs may support both physiological and patho-physiological processes is being able to demonstrate in vivoEV transfer between cells. To address this problem, a few groupshave recently developed clever modiﬁcations of EVs, allowingtracking of their behavior and their target cells in vivo ( Figure 2 ).Either proteins or mRNA cargoes of EVs have been thusmodiﬁed. For instance, fusing a ﬂuorescent protein to a palmi-
toylation sequence induces its localization at the plasma mem-brane as well as in secreted EVs of all sizes. The EVs couldthen be visualized in the tumor microenvironment by intravitalmicroscopy on animals bearing tumors expressing this fusionprotein ( Lai et al., 2015 ). Fusion of luciferase to a protein trans-membrane domain also allowed its secretion in EVs and subse-quent enzymatic measurement of luciferase activity in distantcells ( Lai et al., 2014 ). These authors also designed an intracel-lular probe to ﬂuorescently label mRNA secreted in EVs and toolsto measure EV-borne mRNA encoding luciferase signal ( Laiet al., 2015 ). While these tools are promising, studies so farhave only demonstrated EV-borne mRNA transfer betweencultured cells in vitro.Another elegant approach to address EV transfer has nowdemonstrated functional EV-mediated transfer in vivo of an
mRNA into target cells in the absence of any ex vivo manipulation(Ridder et al., 2014 ). Transgenic mice expressing the CRE re-combinase speciﬁcally in immune cells and a LacZ reportergene, expressed only upon excision of a STOP sequence,were used for this purpose ( Ridder et al., 2014 ). Ridder et al.showed that EVs containing the CRE mRNA, but devoid of theCRE protein, are present in blood circulation of these transgenicmice. Strikingly, LacZ expression was observed in some neuronsand other non-immune cells throughout the animals. Leakinessof the immune cell-speciﬁc promoter and fusion betweenCRE-expressing and reporter-expressing cells were carefullyexcluded, leading to the conclusion that the CRE mRNA carriedby immune cell EVs was transferred in the recipient non-immunecells and translated into functional CRE protein. Although thenumber of recombined neural cells was very low, suggesting alimited efﬁciency of this transfer in normal conditions, induction
of systemic inﬂammation increased it, opening up the possibilitythat in vivo EV-mediated transfer may be particularly relevant tosome pathological conditions.This methodology has also been recently used to visualizecancer-derived EV transfer to other cancer cells ( Zomer et al.,2015 ) and to immune cells ( Ridder et al., 2015 ) in living miceand to study the effect of this transfer. In Zomer et al., the authorsdesigned a reporter system based on the conversion of DsRed+tumor cells to eGFP+ tumor cells upon uptake of tumor EVs con-taining CRE mRNA and analyzed the behavior of these latter cellswithout any manipulation of the EV-releasing cells. Using thissystem, intravital imaging revealed the EV transfer of functionalmRNA from a malignant human tumor cell to a less malignantFigure 2. Approaches Used to Analyze EV-Mediated Transfer In VivoRecent novel approaches allowing the visualiza-
Recent novel approaches allowing the visualiza-tion of EV transfer to recipient cells in vivo involvegenetic modiﬁcation of the secreting cells, whichthen secrete EVs containing labeled components.
Recent novel approaches allowing the visualiza-tion of EV transfer to recipient cells in vivo involvegenetic modiﬁcation of the secreting cells, whichthen secrete EVs containing labeled components.(I) Genetic fusion of ﬂuorescent proteins to aconsensus palmitoylation sequence, enablingwhole-cell membrane labeling, and to an mRNAallows tracking of cells with bound or internalizedEVs by their newly acquired ﬂuorescence. (II)Expression of a membrane-bound luciferase al-lows analysis of distant bioluminescent cellsin vivo, resulting from EV-bound luciferase proteincapture and/or luciferase mRNA neo-expression.(III) To demonstrate speciﬁcally neo-expression ofan EV-associated mRNA, the CRE recombinasecan be expressed in EV-secreting cells. Endoge-nous nuclear localization of CRE results inabsence of the protein but presence of the mRNAin the secreted EVs. Transfer of the CRE mRNAcontained within an EV to a cell carrying a ﬂuo-
contained within an EV to a cell carrying a ﬂuo-rescent or enzymatic reporter gene expressedonly after DNA recombination and excision of aSTOP signal is detected by ﬂuorescence orcolorimetric changes.1228 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
one and demonstrated that the uptake of these EVs can alter themigratory behavior and metastatic capacity of the recipient cell(Zomer et al., 2015 ). It will be interesting to study this transferof EVs among tumor cells in immunocompetent mice. In Ridderet al., a similar strategy highlighted the transfer of vesicle-enclosed CRE mRNA to non-tumor cells and showed thatmyeloid-derived suppressor cells that took up tumor EVs dis-played increased immunosupressive functions ( Ridder et al.,2015 ). In these two studies, the actual nature of the EVs involvedin mRNA transfer was not investigated, nor was the transfermechanism. It is therefore not clear whether transfer involves adirect fusion of EVs with the recipient cells or phagocytosis oflive or apoptotic cell-derived EVs by the recipient cell. To moresolidly support the pathway for EV-mediated transfer of CREmRNA, inhibition of EV biogenesis in vivo would be ideal; how-
ever, as mentioned before, these experiments are quite difﬁcultto accomplish and are not completely speciﬁc. Other transfermechanisms, like formation of gap junctions or of nanotubesconnecting two adjacent cells, were also not formally excluded.However, it was also observed that transfer occurred at a dis-tance between two tumors localized in different parts of the an-imal, excluding the possibility of local communication betweencells and supporting the idea of mRNA being transferred througha long-range extracellular carrier. Overall, this visualization sys-tem allows identiﬁcation and isolation of cells that are targetsof EVs in vivo and will be very important for understanding howtumor- and stromal-derived EVs affect their environment.A Role for EV-Mediated Small RNA Transfer?In addition to proteins and mRNAs, miRNAs and other non-cod-ing RNAs are also possible active EV cargoes. The idea thatmiRNA secreted in sEVs can be functionally delivered to target
cells, resulting in direct modulation of their mRNA targets, hasbecome one of the most actively explored hypotheses in theEV ﬁeld, especially in cancer. This idea was initially demon-strated for Epstein-Barr virus-infected cells, where secretedsEVs transferred viral miRNAs into neighboring non-infectedcells, leading to repression of virus-target genes ( Pegtel et al.,2010 ). Following this path, several groups have recently reportedthat EV-mediated secretion of a given miRNA in the tumor micro-environment is responsible for tumor metastasis. Various mech-anisms have been proposed, involving either an effect on thelocal or distant tumor stroma (including modulating endothelialcell permeability, metabolism, or the pre-metastatic niche) oron the tumor cells themselves (by increasing oncogenic proper-ties and/or invasiveness).However, even if involvement of the described miRNA isgenerally well supported, direct demonstration that functional
EV-mediated miRNA transfer is the relevant mechanism is stilldifﬁcult to achieve. Importantly, carriers other than EVs couldmediate miRNA transfer. All EV isolation techniques potentiallyco-isolate other RNA-binding structures, such as large proteincomplexes ( Palma et al., 2012 ) and lipoproteins ( Vickers et al.,2011 ). Lipoprotein-associated RNAs have been shown to beresistant to RNase treatment and to deliver miRNAs into hostcells, and there is currently no reason for excluding that transferof naked protein-miRNA complexes into the cytosol of hostcells can occur. Therefore, as the International Society for Extra-cellular Vesicles recently highlighted ( Lo¨tvall et al., 2014 ), addi-tional steps of separation of EVs from other structures, e.g.,by ﬂoatation into density gradients or by immuno-isolation viaspeciﬁc antibodies, are necessary before claiming speciﬁcEV-mediated miRNA transfer.The miRNA-dependent effect observed could, in fact, be
speciﬁc antibodies, are necessary before claiming speciﬁcEV-mediated miRNA transfer.The miRNA-dependent effect observed could, in fact, bemediated by induction of endogenous miRNA expression inthe target cell by other EV components, rather than by the EV-en-closed miRNA. Such a mechanism can be excluded if the recip-ient cell is incapable of expressing the studied miRNA—forinstance, when the transferred miRNA is encoded only by aforeign genome, e.g., viral ( Pegtel et al., 2010 ) or parasitic(Buck et al., 2014 ). Similarly, if the recipient cell comes from amouse engineered to lack the miRNA ( Alexander et al., 2015 ),the dependence on EV-delivered miRNAs is more certain. How-ever, this control has not yet been used to our knowledge in can-cer studies. For example, recently, Zhang et al. have proposedthat sEV-mediated transfer of astrocyte-derived miRNAs target-ing PTEN leads to the loss of expression of this tumor suppressor
in brain metastatic tumor cells, enhancing metastasis outgrowth(Zhang et al., 2015 ). Even though the hypothesis proposed in thiswork is very appealing, conclusive demonstration that miRNAsare being transferred through sEVs and that this is the mecha-nism responsible for PTEN downregulation in brain tumor metas-tasis is lacking. While the effects appear dependent on expres-sion of the miRNAs in astrocytes and are lost upon globaldeletion of Rab27a in the brain, both controls potentially altermany other aspects than miRNA-containing sEV secretion by as-trocytes; thus, speciﬁc EV-dependent transport of endogenousmiRNA remains a model to be tested.Other studies have explored similar questions, and it is clearthat the ﬁeld is working toward a suite of more deﬁnitive controls.For example, studies showing that co-treatment of recipient cellswith an anti-miRNA together with miRNA-carrying EVs estab-lished that the analyzed miRNA is necessary for the functional
effect observed ( Le et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2014 ). But sincethe anti-miRNA can inhibit expression of both the endogenousand the EV-transported molecule, this control does not actuallydemonstrate EV-mediated miRNA transfer. In this experimentalsetting, absence of upregulation of the endogenous pre- or pri-miRNA while the mature miRNA is increased in EV-recipient cells(Basu and Bhattacharyya, 2014; Le et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2014 )may be the strongest observation arguing for acquisition of themature miRNA.An important mechanistic aspect remains, however, myste-rious. To achieve silencing of their mRNA targets, miRNAsmust be associated with the RNA-induced silencing complex(RISC) containing the argonaute 2 (AGO2) endonuclease ( Wilsonand Doudna, 2013 ). For endogenous miRNAs, this association isformed following processing of the double-stranded pre-miRNAinto miRNA/miRNA* duplex by DICER and subsequent incorpo-ration into the AGO2-RISC-loading complex. Thus, how naked
mature miRNAs brought in by EVs can associate with endoge-nous AGO2 and compete with an overwhelming amount ofendogenous miRNA will remain unclear unless new molecularmechanisms of miRNA transfer into the RISC-loading complexare discovered. The form of miRNA present in EVs (i.e., asmature single-strand, miRNA/miRNA* duplex or other form,Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1229
naked or bound with AGO or other proteins) is generally not re-ported, and it will be important to answer this question indifferent cell types (e.g., tumoral or non-tumoral) and physiolog-ical contexts to elucidate the relevance of EVs as efﬁcient miRNAcarriers.In that line, a recent study has brought an unexpected andpossibly controversial turn to this ﬁeld ( Melo et al., 2014 ). Meloet al. have observed that pre-miRNAs loaded into the RISC ma-chinery are secreted by tumor (but not by non-tumor) cell lines insEVs and that miRNA maturation takes place extracellularlywhen sEVs are incubated at 37/C14C. The implication is that trans-ferred AGO2-associated miRNA could thus be directly functionalin a recipient cell. It will be interesting to see whether these re-sults are borne out in other types of tumors. Furthermore, theactual nature of the RISC/miRNA carrier will have to be deter-mined more precisely since another study reported that AGO2
secreted in tumor sEVs is not recovered in the same fractionsas classical sEV markers ( Van Deun et al., 2014 ). In conclusion,whether EV-mediated miRNA transfer is a functionally relevantcommunication mechanism in cancer, especially in vivo in theabsence of artiﬁcial overexpression of a miRNA, is still anexciting but not yet fully demonstrated hypothesis.In addition to miRNAs, EVs are now known to contain severalother species of small non-coding RNA or RNA fragments(Nolte-’t Hoen et al., 2012 ). A recent report shows that miRNAmay even be a minor form of RNA in all types of EVs, whereastRNA fragments and Y-RNAs are speciﬁcally secreted in EVs(Tosar et al., 2015 ). It will be very interesting to determine nowwhether these comparatively poorly studied non-coding RNAsdisplay some of the gene-regulatory functions so far attributedto miRNAs in EVs. Indeed, a recent report showed that tRNAfragments present in sperm regulate gene expression in the
embryo and that the levels of these short tRNAs can be alteredin response to paternal diet ( Sharma et al., 2016 ). Interestingly,the tRNA fragments are not generated in spermatozoa them-selves but are acquired during their transit through the epidid-ymis, possibly via EVs named epididymosomes, which aresecreted by cells forming the epithelium of this canal. The trans-fer of EVs to sperm had been previously documented inDrosophila in vivo ( Corrigan et al., 2014 ) and in large mammalsin vitro ( Caballero et al., 2013 ). The novel idea that parentalexposure can affect progeny through mechanisms involvingtransfer of information within EVs is a very promising and excitinghypothesis.Ties to ImmunityA different consequence of EV-associated RNA transfer in the tu-mor microenvironment has been recently described ( Boelenset al., 2014 ). EV-borne RNAs bearing 50-triphosphate ends are
0-triphosphate ends arerecognized in the recipient cell cytosol by the RIG-I sensor,which induces development of an interferon response (includingexpression of genes like STAT1) similar to that induced upon viralinfection. This response was shown to participate in cancer cellresistance to radiation or chemotherapy.This observation provides one example of a growing appreci-ation of the similarities between sEVs and enveloped viruses(Assil et al., 2015 ). Indeed, enveloped viruses have recentlybeen shown to carry a nucleotide-based compound, cGAMP,which can reach the cytosol of infected cells and induce an inter-feron response ( Bridgeman et al., 2015; Gentili et al., 2015 ). InGentili et al., we observed that cGAMP was present in non-viralsEVs, which could also transfer this signal to recipient cells, butonly if they bore a fusogenic viral protein. This observation raisesquestions about the molecular mechanism involved in fusion of
tumor sEVs with recipient cells: what surface molecules allowfusion with the membrane of recipient cells for delivery of theRNA or small-molecule content into the cytosol? Or can other
tumor sEVs with recipient cells: what surface molecules allowfusion with the membrane of recipient cells for delivery of theRNA or small-molecule content into the cytosol? Or can othermechanisms contribute, such as formation of channels betweenthe apposed membranes of an EV and the recipient cell? Thesequestions will be important to address.ConclusionsWith the functional implications proposed for EVs, it is now vitalto understand these vesicles themselves. As mentioned above,most studies published so far analyze mixed EV populations,and we think that some of the most important steps the ﬁeldmust take are to comprehensively compare the different sub-types of EVs and to determine whether some of their functionsare speciﬁc or prominent in a given subtype, e.g., exosomes,but not other EVs. This knowledge is necessary to identify whichEVs should be targeted for any therapeutic approach. Indeed, EVresearch is now at the stage where the immunology ﬁeld was in
the 1950s. At that time, researchers could only claim that circu-lating white blood cells were capable of very different functions,such as killing other cells or making antibodies, simply becausethere were no means to distinguish what we know now as Bversus T lymphocytes! For EVs, a recent article reported a calcu-lation that the number of copies of a given miRNA present perEV, in a mixed sEV preparation, is below one ( Chevillet et al.,2014 ), suggesting that either very few miRNA molecules are pre-sent within each sEV or, more likely, that only a restricted sub-type of EVs contain signiﬁcant amounts of miRNA moleculesand thus are capable of transferring miRNA-based information.This situation may apply to other transfer functions of EVs,whether they involve mRNA or proteins: if only a minor subtypeof EVs carries the relevant activity, its actual efﬁciency will be
difﬁcult to detect, as it will be undermined by an abundance ofnon-functional EVs present in the same preparation. One ofthe challenges is therefore to re-deﬁne methods that allowdiscrimination between sEVs, exosomes, and other EVs. It isimpossible to distinguish them on the basis of a single property,such as size, structure, buoyant density, or presence of agiven protein, and the community is seeking novel methods ofisolation leading to better enrichment of a speciﬁc subtype. Forthis, however, better knowledge of speciﬁc markers of EV sub-types is required. We have recently performed a quantitativecomparison of the protein composition of several subtypesof EVs secreted simultaneously by human primary dendriticcells, which were separated by a combination of differentialultracentrifugation, ﬂoatation in a density gradient, and im-muno-isolation ( Kowal et al., 2016 ). Although a large majorityof the proteins were shared between all isolated EV subtypes,
including some generally used as ‘‘exosome markers’’ (e.g.,heat shock proteins, ﬂotillins, major histocompatibility complexmolecules), we are able to propose a few new speciﬁc markersof medium and large EVs (e.g., actinins), of endosome-derived1230 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
exosomes (co-expressing three tetraspanins CD9/CD63/CD81and including TSG101 and syntenin-1), and of non-endosomalsEVs (some ITGs), whose validity as speciﬁc markers can betested in all EV sources, which will hopefully enable furtherfunctional studies. Indeed, knowing which EV markers to followwill eventually allow identiﬁcation of molecular tools to specif-ically affect secretion of a given subtype of EVs and thus under-stand the patho/physiological function of a particular subtype.We hope that the near future will thus provide the necessarytechnical advances and subsequent understanding of thevarious and fundamental roles of each type of EV. The potentialdevelopment of these delivery packets for efﬁcient therapeuticstrategies in cancer and in many other diseases depends onthese next steps.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSBecause of space restriction, only a few recent publications were discussed in
this Review; we apologize to all our colleagues whose work has not been citedhere. We thank Joanna Kowal, Claire Hivroz, and Lionel Navarro for criticalreading of the manuscript. This work has received support under the program‘‘Investissements d’Avenir’’ launched by the French Government and imple-mented by ANR with the references ANR-11-LABX-0043 and ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL and by Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer throughSL220120605293 grant to C.T. and post-doctoral grant to M.T.REFERENCESAlexander, M., Hu, R., Runtsch, M.C., Kagele, D.A., Mosbruger, T.L., Tolma-chova, T., Seabra, M.C., Round, J.L., Ward, D.M., and O’Connell, R.M.(2015). Exosome-delivered microRNAs modulate the inﬂammatory responseto endotoxin. Nat. Commun. 6, 7321 .Assil, S., Webster, B., and Dreux, M. (2015). Regulation of the Host AntiviralState by Intercellular Communications. Viruses 7, 4707–4733 .Basu, S., and Bhattacharyya, S.N. (2014). Insulin-like growth factor-1 prevents
miR-122 production in neighbouring cells to curtail its intercellular transfer toensure proliferation of human hepatoma cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 7170–7185 .Bobrie, A., Krumeich, S., Reyal, F., Recchi, C., Moita, L.F., Seabra, M.C.,Ostrowski, M., and The ´ry, C. (2012). Rab27a supports exosome-dependentand -independent mechanisms that modify the tumor microenvironment andcan promote tumor progression. Cancer Res. 72, 4920–4930 .Boelens, M.C., Wu, T.J., Nabet, B.Y., Xu, B., Qiu, Y., Yoon, T., Azzam, D.J.,Twyman-Saint Victor, C., Wiemann, B.Z., Ishwaran, H., et al. (2014). Exosometransfer from stromal to breast cancer cells regulates therapy resistance path-ways. Cell 159, 499–513 .Bridgeman, A., Maelfait, J., Davenne, T., Partridge, T., Peng, Y., Mayer, A.,Dong, T., Kaever, V., Borrow, P., and Rehwinkel, J. (2015). Viruses transferthe antiviral second messenger cGAMP between cells. Science 349, 1228–1232 .
1232 .Buck, A.H., Coakley, G., Simbari, F., McSorley, H.J., Quintana, J.F., Le Bihan,T., Kumar, S., Abreu-Goodger, C., Lear, M., Harcus, Y., et al. (2014). Exo-somes secreted by nematode parasites transfer small RNAs to mammaliancells and modulate innate immunity. Nat. Commun. 5, 5488 .Caballero, J.N., Frenette, G., Belleanne ´e, C., and Sullivan, R. (2013). CD9-pos-itive microvesicles mediate the transfer of molecules to Bovine Spermatozoaduring epididymal maturation. PLoS ONE 8, e65364 .Chevillet, J.R., Kang, Q., Ruf, I.K., Briggs, H.A., Vojtech, L.N., Hughes, S.M.,Cheng, H.H., Arroyo, J.D., Meredith, E.K., Gallichotte, E.N., et al. (2014). Quan-titative and stoichiometric analysis of the microRNA content of exosomes.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 14888–14893 .Clancy, J.W., Sedgwick, A., Rosse, C., Muralidharan-Chari, V., Raposo, G.,
Method, M., Chavrier, P., and D’Souza-Schorey, C. (2015). Regulated deliveryof molecular cargo to invasive tumour-derived microvesicles. Nat. Commun. 6,6919 .Colombo, M., Raposo, G., and The ´ry, C. (2014). Biogenesis, secretion, and
6919 .Colombo, M., Raposo, G., and The ´ry, C. (2014). Biogenesis, secretion, andintercellular interactions of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles. Annu.Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 255–289 .Corrigan, L., Redhai, S., Leiblich, A., Fan, S.J., Perera, S.M., Patel, R., Gandy,C., Wainwright, S.M., Morris, J.F., Hamdy, F., et al. (2014). BMP-regulatedexosomes from Drosophila male reproductive glands reprogram femalebehavior. J. Cell Biol. 206, 671–688 .Costa-Silva, B., Aiello, N.M., Ocean, A.J., Singh, S., Zhang, H., Thakur, B.K.,Becker, A., Hoshino, A., Mark, M.T., Molina, H., et al. (2015). Pancreatic cancerexosomes initiate pre-metastatic niche formation in the liver. Nat. Cell Biol. 17,816–826 .de la Fuente, A., Alonso-Alconada, L., Costa, C., Cueva, J., Garcia-Caballero,T., Lopez-Lopez, R., and Abal, M. (2015). M-Trap: Exosome-Based Capture ofTumor Cells as a New Technology in Peritoneal Metastasis. J. Natl. CancerInst. 107, djv184 .
Gentili, M., Kowal, J., Tkach, M., Satoh, T., Lahaye, X., Conrad, C., Boyron, M.,Lombard, B., Durand, S., Kroemer, G., et al. (2015). Transmission of innate im-mune signaling by packaging of cGAMP in viral particles. Science 349, 1232–1236 .Hoshino, D., Kirkbride, K.C., Costello, K., Clark, E.S., Sinha, S., Grega-Larson,N., Tyska, M.J., and Weaver, A.M. (2013). Exosome secretion is enhanced byinvadopodia and drives invasive behavior. Cell Rep. 5, 1159–1168 .Hoshino, A., Costa-Silva, B., Shen, T.L., Rodrigues, G., Hashimoto, A., TesicMark, M., Molina, H., Kohsaka, S., Di Giannatale, A., Ceder, S., et al. (2015).Tumour exosome integrins determine organotropic metastasis. Nature 527,329–335 .Hsu, C., Morohashi, Y., Yoshimura, S., Manrique-Hoyos, N., Jung, S., Lauter-bach, M.A., Bakhti, M., Grønborg, M., Mo ¨bius, W., Rhee, J., et al. (2010). Regu-lation of exosome secretion by Rab35 and its GTPase-activating proteinsTBC1D10A-C. J. Cell Biol. 189, 223–232 .
Kowal, J., Arras, G., Colombo, M., Jouve, M., Morath, J.P., Primdal-Bengtson,B., Dingli, F., Loew, D., Tkach, M., and The ´ry, C. (2016). Proteomic comparisondeﬁnes novel markers to characterize heterogeneous populations of extracel-lular vesicle subtypes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E968–E977 .Lai, C.P., Mardini, O., Ericsson, M., Prabhakar, S., Maguire, C.A., Chen, J.W.,Tannous, B.A., and Breakeﬁeld, X.O. (2014). Dynamic biodistribution ofextracellular vesicles in vivo using a multimodal imaging reporter. ACS Nano8, 483–494 .Lai, C.P., Kim, E.Y., Badr, C.E., Weissleder, R., Mempel, T.R., Tannous, B.A.,and Breakeﬁeld, X.O. (2015). Visualization and tracking of tumour extracellularvesicle delivery and RNA translation using multiplexed reporters. Nat. Com-mun. 6, 7029 .Le, M.T., Hamar, P., Guo, C., Basar, E., Perdigao-Henriques, R., Balaj, L., and
Lieberman, J. (2014). miR-200-containing extracellular vesicles promotebreast cancer cell metastasis. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 5109–5128 .Lo¨tvall, J., Hill, A.F., Hochberg, F., Buza ´s, E.I., Di Vizio, D., Gardiner, C., Gho,Y.S., Kurochkin, I.V., Mathivanan, S., Quesenberry, P., et al. (2014). Minimalexperimental requirements for deﬁnition of extracellular vesicles and theirfunctions: a position statement from the International Society for ExtracellularVesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 3, 26913 .Luga, V., Zhang, L., Viloria-Petit, A.M., Ogunjimi, A.A., Inanlou, M.R., Chiu, E.,Buchanan, M., Hosein, A.N., Basik, M., and Wrana, J.L. (2012). Exosomesmediate stromal mobilization of autocrine Wnt-PCP signaling in breast cancercell migration. Cell 151, 1542–1556 .Melo, S.A., Sugimoto, H., O’Connell, J.T., Kato, N., Villanueva, A., Vidal, A.,
Qiu, L., Vitkin, E., Perelman, L.T., Melo, C.A., et al. (2014). Cancer exosomesperform cell-independent microRNA biogenesis and promote tumorigenesis.Cancer Cell 26, 707–721 .Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 1231
Nolte-’t Hoen, E.N., Buermans, H.P., Waasdorp, M., Stoorvogel, W., Wauben,M.H., and ’t Hoen, P.A. (2012). Deep sequencing of RNA from immune cell-derived vesicles uncovers the selective incorporation of small non-codingRNA biotypes with potential regulatory functions. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,9272–9285 .Ostrowski, M., Carmo, N.B., Krumeich, S., Fanget, I., Raposo, G., Savina, A.,Moita, C.F., Schauer, K., Hume, A.N., Freitas, R.P., et al. (2010). Rab27a andRab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway. Nat. CellBiol. 12, 19–30, 1–13 .Palma, J., Yaddanapudi, S.C., Pigati, L., Havens, M.A., Jeong, S., Weiner,G.A., Weimer, K.M., Stern, B., Hastings, M.L., and Duelli, D.M. (2012).MicroRNAs are exported from malignant cells in customized particles. NucleicAcids Res. 40, 9125–9138 .Pegtel, D.M., Cosmopoulos, K., Thorley-Lawson, D.A., van Eijndhoven, M.A.,Hopmans, E.S., Lindenberg, J.L., de Gruijl, T.D., Wu ¨rdinger, T., and Middel-
dorp, J.M. (2010). Functional delivery of viral miRNAs via exosomes. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 6328–6333 .Peinado, H., Ale /C20ckovi /C19c, M., Lavotshkin, S., Matei, I., Costa-Silva, B., Moreno-Bueno, G., Hergueta-Redondo, M., Williams, C., Garcı ´a-Santos, G., Ghajar,C., et al. (2012). Melanoma exosomes educate bone marrow progenitor cellstoward a pro-metastatic phenotype through MET. Nat. Med. 18, 883–891 .Ridder, K., Keller, S., Dams, M., Rupp, A.-K., Schlaudraff, J., Del Turco, D.,Starmann, J., Macas, J., Karpova, D., Devraj, K., et al. (2014). Extracellularvesicle-mediated transfer of genetic information between the hematopoieticsystem and the brain in response to inﬂammation. PLoS Biol. 12, e1001874 .Ridder, K., Sevko, A., Heide, J., Dams, M., Rupp, A.-K., Macas, J., Starmann,J., Tjwa, M., Plate, K.H., Su ¨ltmann, H., et al. (2015). Extracellular vesicle-medi-ated transfer of functional RNA in the tumor microenvironment. OncoImmunol-ogy 4, e1008371 .
Sharma, U., Conine, C.C., Shea, J.M., Boskovic, A., Derr, A.G., Bing, X.Y., Bel-leannee, C., Kucukural, A., Serra, R.W., Sun, F., et al. (2016). Biogenesis andfunction of tRNA fragments during sperm maturation and fertilization in mam-mals. Science 351, 391–396 .Sung, B.H., Ketova, T., Hoshino, D., Zijlstra, A., and Weaver, A.M. (2015).Directional cell movement through tissues is controlled by exosome secretion.Nat. Commun. 6, 7164 .Thery, C., Amigorena, S., Raposo, G., and Clayton, A. (2006). Isolation andcharacterization of exosomes from cell culture supernatants and biologicalﬂuids. Curr. Protoc. Cell. Biol. Chapter 3 , Unit 3.22 .Tosar, J.P., Ga ´mbaro, F., Sanguinetti, J., Bonilla, B., Witwer, K.W., andCayota, A. (2015). Assessment of small RNA sorting into different extracellularfractions revealed by high-throughput sequencing of breast cell lines. NucleicAcids Res. 43, 5601–5616 .Trajkovic, K., Hsu, C., Chiantia, S., Rajendran, L., Wenzel, D., Wieland, F.,
Schwille, P., Bru ¨gger, B., and Simons, M. (2008). Ceramide triggers buddingof exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes. Science 319, 1244–1247 .Van Deun, J., Mestdagh, P., Sormunen, R., Cocquyt, V., Vermaelen, K., Van-desompele, J., Bracke, M., De Wever, O., and Hendrix, A. (2014). The impactof disparate isolation methods for extracellular vesicles on downstream RNAproﬁling. J. Extracell. Vesicles 3, 24858 .Vickers, K.C., Palmisano, B.T., Shoucri, B.M., Shamburek, R.D., and Remaley,A.T. (2011). MicroRNAs are transported in plasma and delivered to recipientcells by high-density lipoproteins. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 423–433 .Webber, J.P., Spary, L.K., Sanders, A.J., Chowdhury, R., Jiang, W.G., Stead-man, R., Wymant, J., Jones, A.T., Kynaston, H., Mason, M.D., et al. (2015).Differentiation of tumour-promoting stromal myoﬁbroblasts by cancer exo-somes. Oncogene 34, 290–302 .Wilson, R.C., and Doudna, J.A. (2013). Molecular mechanisms of RNA interfer-
ence. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 42, 217–239 .
Wilson, R.C., and Doudna, J.A. (2013). Molecular mechanisms of RNA interfer-ence. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 42, 217–239 .Yue, S., Mu, W., Erb, U., and Zo ¨ller, M. (2015). The tetraspanins CD151 andTspan8 are essential exosome components for the crosstalk between cancerinitiating cells and their surrounding. Oncotarget 6, 2366–2384 .Zhang, L., Zhang, S., Yao, J., Lowery, F.J., Zhang, Q., Huang, W.-C., Li, P., Li,M., Wang, X., Zhang, C., et al. (2015). Microenvironment-induced PTEN lossby exosomal microRNA primes brain metastasis outgrowth. Nature 527,100–104 .Zhou, W., Fong, M.Y., Min, Y., Somlo, G., Liu, L., Palomares, M.R., Yu, Y.,Chow, A., O’Connor, S.T.F., Chin, A.R., et al. (2014). Cancer-secreted miR-105 destroys vascular endothelial barriers to promote metastasis. CancerCell 25, 501–515 .Zomer, A., Maynard, C., Verweij, F.J., Kamermans, A., Scha ¨fer, R., Beerling,
E., Schiffelers, R.M., de Wit, E., Berenguer, J., Ellenbroek, S.I., et al. (2015).In vivo imaging reveals extracellular vesicle-mediated phenocopying of meta-static behavior. Cell 161, 1046–1057 .1232 Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
