Contents lists available at ScienceDirectJournal of Controlled Releasejournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jconrelImmunomodulatory properties of MSC-derived exosomes armed with highaﬃnity aptamer toward mylein as a platform for reducing multiple sclerosisclinical scoreFazileh Hosseini Shamilia, Mona Alibolandib, Houshang Rafatpanahc, Khalil Abnousb,d,Mahmoud Mahmoudie, Mahmoudreza Kalantarif, Seyed Mohammad Taghdisig,h,Mohammad Ramezanib,h,⁎aDepartment of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IranbPharmaceutical Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IrancImmunology Research Center, In ﬂammation and In ﬂammatory Diseases Division, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IrandDepartment of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
eImmunology Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IranfDepartment of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IrangTargeted Drug Delivery Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IranhDepartment of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Pharmacy, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IranARTICLE INFOKeywords:Multiple sclerosis (MS)Mesenchymal stem cellExosome, aptamerLJM-3064RemyelinationABSTRACTMesenchymal stem cell-derived exosome is a safe and eﬀ ective delivery platform with a potential capacity toexert immunomodulation eﬀ ect and peripheral tolerance toward auto-reactive cells viabearing regulatory andtolerogenic molecules. In ﬂammation and neurodegeneration are the clinical manifestation of multiple sclerosis
(MS). In order to ﬁght against MS, the eﬃcient choices are the ones, which prevent inﬂ ammation and induceremyelination.In this regard, the previously reported LJM-3064 aptamer which showed considerable a ﬃnity toward myelinand demonstrated remyelination induction was employed as both targeting ligand and therapeutic agent. Thus,in the current study, the carboxylic acid-functionalized LJM-3064 aptamer was covalently conjugated to theamine groups on the exosome surface through EDC/NHS chemistry.The obtained results showed that the aptamer-exosome bioconjugate could promote the proliferation ofoligodendroglia cell line (OLN93) in vitro. Moreover, in vivo administration of the prepared aptamer-exosomebioconjugate in female C57BL/6 mice as a prophylactic measure produced a robust suppression of in ﬂammatoryresponse as well as lowered demyelination lesion region in CNS, resulting in reduced in vivo severity of thedisease.
disease.The prepared platform employing exosome-based nanomedicine as a novel approach for managing MS wouldhopefully pave the way to introduce a versatile approach toward an e ﬀective clinical reality.1. IntroductionOne of the well-known classes of secreted biological nanovesicles isexosomes, which are released by di ﬀerent cells. These vesicles play animportant role in intercellular communication by delivering di ﬀerentmolecules such as proteins, RNAs and micro RNAs [ 1–3]. Althoughsynthetic drug delivery systems have been used for many years, exo-somes as natural lipid-based carriers have potentially great innateproperties for delivery of molecules either in vitro orin vivo. Theirconsiderable advantages over other platforms are their low im-munogenicity, their ability to be loaded with biological materials suchas proteins, they are well-tolerated in vivo and possess high deliveryeﬃciency [ 4–6]. Recent studies represent exosomes as an ideal drug
delivery system with desirable properties [ 4].Sun et al. reported that exosomal formulation of curcumin led tomore blood stability and improved anti-in ﬂammatory activity of cur-cumin [ 5].It was demonstrated that upon i.v. injection of exosomes, they were
more blood stability and improved anti-in ﬂammatory activity of cur-cumin [ 5].It was demonstrated that upon i.v. injection of exosomes, they werehttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.02.032Received 24 October 2018; Received in revised form 18 February 2019; Accepted 21 February 2019⁎Corresponding author at: Pharmaceutical Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.E-mail address: ramezanim@mums.ac.ir (M. Ramezani).Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164Available online 23 February 20190168-3659/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.T
rapidly taken up by the reticuloendothelial system (RES) and are ac-cumulated in liver and spleen, which is similar to biodistribution pat-tern of other nanoparticles.In another study, Tian et al. developed surface functionalized exo-somes which had capability of crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB)and entering the brain [ 7]. In this regard, it was reported that exosomescould cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) and deliver their cargo as anew diagnostic tool in CNS diseases such as ischemia and neurode-generative disease [ 8].Exosomes are secreted from diverse cells and exhibited speci ﬁc in-herent characteristics, depending on the cell type and their secretedorigin. Various studies have shown that MSC-derived exosomes, similarto their origin (MSC), exhibit immunomodulatory properties.In this regard, the capability of MSC-derived exosomes to decreaseapoptosis and lymphocyte in ﬁltration, to inhibit auto-reactive lym-
phocyte proliferation and to promote anti-in ﬂammatory cytokines se-cretion, has been reported. Additionally, it has been demonstrated thatthey could potentially induce peripheral tolerance and immune re-sponses modulation [ 9,10].Some studies indicated that MSC secretome could be a capabletherapeutic agent for the in ﬂammatory and degenerative diseases suchas MS and rheumatoid arthritis [ 11].All MS medications help modify the disease progression or suppressthe immune system. The goal of an e ﬀective MS therapy must includethe promotion of the remyelination process to protect axons whileprolonging their survival.Recent MS therapy approaches comprising transplantation of oli-godendrocytes (OLs), administration of intravenous immunoglobulin(IVIG) and recombinant human IgM therapy resulted in acceptableclinical outcome. All aforementioned strategies provide the possibilityof remyelination and subsequent successful therapy of MS patients
suﬀered from a long-lasting disability [ 12–14].Nastasijevic et al. reported a myelin-speci ﬁc DNA aptamer (LJM-3064 aptamer) which is smaller and more robust than IgM monoclonalantibodies with a potential e ﬀect on promoting the remyelinationprocess in mice [ 15].In the current study, we isolated and implemented the exosomes-derived MSC as a potent carrier to deliver therapeutic LJM-3064 ap-tamer. Therefore, we evaluated the e ﬀects of MSC-derived exsosomesdecorated with LJM-3064 aptamer on remeylination processes andimmunomodulatory activity in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein(MOG35-55)-induced mouse multiple sclerosis model (EAE).2. Materials and methods2.1. MaterialsFemale C57BL/6 mice (10 –13 weeks) and OLN93 cell line werepurchased from Pasteur Institute of Iran (Tehran, Iran). LJM-3064 ap-tamer (5 ′-GGGTCGGCGGGTGGGGTGGGAGGTGGTCTTGTCTCTGGGT-3 ′) was purchased from Microsynth (Balgach, Switzerland).
Depleted-exosome FBS and Exoquick TC kit were obtained from SystemBioscience (SBI, Palo Alto, USA). Dulbecco's modi ﬁed Eagle's medium,RPMI 1640, horse serum and fetal bovine serum (FBS), EDC (1-ethyl-3-[3-dimethylamino-propy] carbodiimide hydrochloride) and NHS (N-hydroxysuccinimide) were supplied by GIBCO (Darmstadt, Germany).Ultra-ﬁltration membrane was purchased from Merck Millipore(Darmstadt, Germany). APC anti-mouse CD63, and PE anti-mouse CD9,APC anti-mouse CD63, and PE anti-mouse CD9, APC Rat IgG2a, Kisotype control and PE Rat IgG2a, K isotype control were bought fromBio Legend (San Diego, USA). Ki67 (Master Diagnostica, Spain), NG2(Abcam;USA), peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody and DABchromogen (Master Diagnostica, Spain), aldehyde/sulfate latex beads(4μm) were purchased from Invitrogen (California, USA). EAE induc-tion kit was obtained from Hooke Laboratories, Inc. (Lawrence, USA).2.2. MSC isolation
Two female C57BL/6 mice (6 –8 weeks old) were sacri ﬁced by cer-vical dislocation, and the hind limbs were dissected. Then bones werestored on ice in DMEM supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
vical dislocation, and the hind limbs were dissected. Then bones werestored on ice in DMEM supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin.In the next stage, the marrow cells were ﬂushed and collected until thebones became white.The harvested cells were cultured in low glucose DMEM supple-mented with heat-inactivated FBS and horse serum (7.5%, 7.5%), glu-tamine (2 mM), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) for72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. To remove non-adherent cells, the mediumwas aspirated and replaced with complete fresh medium. The culturemedium was changed every 3 days and MSCs at passage 3 –5 were usedfor exosome isolation [ 16,17].2.3. Exosome isolationThe MSCs of passage 3– 5 were plated into a T-75 ﬂask and cultureduntil they reached 70% con ﬂuency. Cells were rinsed several times withPBS and cultured in low glucose DMEM supplemented with commercialexosome-depleted FBS (10%) for 72 h followed by the collection of the
conditioned medium. The harvested conditioned medium was ﬁlteredthrough 0.22 μm pore size membrane by vacuum ﬁltration and sub-jected to three continuous centrifugations at 300 g(10 min), 1200 g(30 min), and 10,000 g(45 min). Then, the cleared conditioned mediawere concentrated by using Amicon centrifugal ﬁlter device (cut o ﬀ100-kDa). Exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick-TC kit according tothe manufacturer's protocol. In brief, the conditioned medium wasmixed with ExoQuick-TC reagent at the ratio of 1:5, mixed well byﬂicking the tube then incubated overnight at 4 °C. Then, it was cen-trifuged at 1500 gfor 30 min and the supernatant was discarded. Then,the pelleted exosomes were resuspended in PBS and BCA assay wasemployed (Thermo Scienti ﬁc, Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit) to de-termine the exosome isolation yield based on protein content [ 18].2.4. Exosome characterization2.4.1. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and particle size analysis
Diluted exosomes in PBS were deposited on a clean glass slide andthen dried at room temperature overnight. The prepared sample wasimaged in the air by semi-contact method using ACT cantilever with ascanning atomic force microscope (Nano Wizard II Nanoscience AFM,JPK Instruments Inc., Germany). The scanned area was500 nm × 500 nm [ 19]. The size and zeta potential of exosomes weremeasured by using dynamic light scattering. Brie ﬂy, exosomes (1 μg)were resuspended in 1 ml ﬁltered PBS, pH 7.4. The particle size wasobtained by DLS Nano Sizer (Nano-ZS; Malvern, UK).2.4.2. Flow cytometry analysis of exosome markersExosomes were incubated in 100 μlo f4 μm aldehyde/sulfate latexbeads at room temperature (RT) for surface adsorption. Then, the beadswere washed with PBS and stained with ﬂuorescein-conjugated anti-bodies speci ﬁc for exosomal membrane markers, CD9 and CD63 orappropriate isotype control and the mixture was incubated at 4 °C for
1 h. Next, the stained beads were resuspended in 100 μl of FACS bu ﬀerand analyzed by BD FACSCalibur ﬂow cytometer (California, USA). Thedata were analyzed using FlowJo Software [ 20].2.4.3. Western blot analysisThe protein content of exosomes was analyzed for either CD63, theexosomal membrane marker, or cytochrome C as negative marker byWestern blot analysis. Either exosome or cell lysate was mixed with 5×Laemmlibuﬀer and boiled at 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were separatedthrough running 12% SDS-acrylamide gel electrophoresis and thentransferred to a PVDF membrane (Bio-Rad, USA). Membranes wereblotted with either primary anti-cytochrome C antibody (Abcam, UK)F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164150
and incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Goat anti-Rabbit IgG H&L (HRP), Abcam) and visualized by enhanced chemilu-minescence substrate (Super Signal West Dura Extended DurationSubstrate, Pierce).2.5. Conjugation of aptamer to exosomesThe 5′ modiﬁed COOH LJM-3064 aptamer (40 nt) was used in orderto conjugate the LJM-3064 aptamer to the surface of exosomes.Activation of aptamer carboxyl groups was conducted through EDC/NHS chemistry to covalently conjugate the aptamer to the amine-con-taining molecules on the exosomes surface as follow: N-hydro-xysuccinimide (35 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1 equivalent) and 1-ethyl-3-(3-car-bodiimide dimethylaminopropyl) (46 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1 equivalent) wereseparately dissolved in 1 ml of PBS, and then both solutions weremixed. Four microliters of the aforementioned solution were added to100μlo f5 ′modiﬁed COOH LJM-3064 aptamer (5 μM stock solution),and then added to 450 μl of PBS pH 7.4 and stirred for 4 h.
In the next stage, exosome solution was added to the activated ap-tamer at 5% w/w ratio of aptamer/exosome and incubated for 24 h atroom temperature while stirring.Finally, the reaction mixture was poured into the Amicon cen-trifugal ultra- ﬁlter (cut o ﬀ= 100 kDa) and centrifuged at 9000 gfor10 min, to remove free aptamer from exosome-bound aptamers (Exo-APT).2.6. Flow cytometry and gel retardation assay of Exo-APT conjugateTo evaluate the successful conjugation of exosomes and aptamer, anATTO-labeled aptamer was used. Then, unreacted free aptamers wereremoved using 100 kDa Amicon ﬁlter. Afterward, the reaction mixturewas resuspended in double ﬁltered PBS and analyzed by FACSCaliburﬂow cytometer using the FL-4 channel. Data were analyzed using theFlowJo software.Moreover, the stability of the exosome –aptamer conjugate wasevaluated by gel retardation assay. The samples (n = 3) were electro-phoresed on 2% agarose gel in TAE bu ﬀer at 80 V for 90 min, followed
by imaging using Gel Doc (Alliance 4.7 UK).2.7. Myelin binding a ﬃnity analysis of LJM-3064 aptamer and Exo-APTconjugate using ﬂow cytometryTo con ﬁrm the myelin a ﬃnity of ATTO-labeled 3064 aptamer-exosome conjugate (Exo-APT), OLN93 cells as myelin basic proteinproducing cells were trypsinized, harvested and co-cultured with theprepared Exo-APT.In this regard, cells (2 × 106) were counted and washed three timeswith PBS pH 7.4. The cells pellet was re-suspended in assay bu ﬀer(DPBS supplemented with MgCl 25 mM solution) and blocking step wasperformed by incubation in assay bu ﬀer containing FBS 5% at 4 °C for1 h, followed by washing with PBS pH 7.4 and re-suspending in thebinding bu ﬀer (DPBS supplemented with MgCl22.5 mM and sodiumazide, 0.2% w/v). Then, the sample was divided into three tubes andeither ATTO-labeled 3064 aptamer-exosome (1 ml, 1 mM) or library(1 ml, 1 mM) was added to each tube while one tube was used as un-
stained control sample. The reaction mixtures were incubated for 1 h onice while stirring. After that, cells were washed three times with PBSpH 7.4, re-suspended in binding bu ﬀer and analyzed by FACSCaliburﬂow cytometer. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software.2.8. In vitro proliferation assay of Oln93 cellsCell proliferation was quanti ﬁed by BrdU cell proliferation assay ofOLN93 cells to con ﬁrm the e ﬀect of 3064 aptamer-exosome conjugate(Exo-APT) on proliferation of oligodendroglia cell line (OLN93). TheOln93 cells were seeded at a density of 5000 cells/well into 96-wellplates. Either Exo or Exo-APT was suspended in culture medium. Eachwell was treated with 0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 400, 800, 1600 and 3200 μgof either Exo or Exo –APT, and incubated at 37 °C for 72 h.The BrdU labeling solution (10 μl of 0.5 mg/ml stock solution) wasadded to wells and incubated at 37 °C for 12 h. Then, the plates werecentrifuged, the medium was removed, and the plates were dried. In the
next stage, 200 μlo fﬁx/denature solution was added to each well and
next stage, 200 μlo fﬁx/denature solution was added to each well andkept at 25 °C for 30 min and then solutions were decanted. Afterward,100μl of anti-BrdU was added to each well, and incubated at 25 °C for90 min. After solution removal, plates were washed 3 times with tween20/PBS solution followed by the addition of 100 μl of substrate. Thenplates were incubated at 25 °C for 30 min. Finally, the reaction wasterminated by addition of H2SO4(25μl of 2 N solution). The absorbancewas measured at 450 nm using a Tecan Microplate Reader (TECANinﬁnite M200, Switzerland). Data were presented as means oftriplicates ± SEM.2.9. Induction and evaluation of experimental autoimmuneencephalomyelitis (EAE)EAE induction was performed using Hooke Laboratories EAE in-duction kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. Brie ﬂy, theFemale C57BL/6 mice were actively immunized by injection of anemulsion of MOG35-55 and complete Freund's adjuvant subcutaneouslyin each ﬂank.
in each ﬂank.Also, 250 ng pertussis toxin was injected intraperitoneally at thetime of induction and 48 h later. All mice were daily weighed andmonitored for clinical manifestations of EAE and their scores were re-corded using a scale ranging from 0 to 7, in conformity with the fol-lowing system: grade 0, no obvious clinical symptom; grade 1, partialloss of tail tonicity; grade 2, complete paralysis of tail; grade 3, ab-normal gait with ﬂaccid tail; grade 4, paralysis of hind legs; grade 5,hind limb palsy with partial immobility of hind body; grade 6, hind andforelimb paralysis; and grade 7, death or moribund. At the end of thestudy, each group was analyzed for the onset day of disease, maximummean clinical score (MMCS), and cumulative disease index, and thedata were compared with those observed in the control group.2.10. In vivo evaluation of Exo-APT conjugate: study designFemale C57BL/6 mice (10 –13 weeks) were obtained from the
Pasteur Institute (Tehran, Iran) and maintained according to the in-structions of Institutional Ethical Committee and Research Advisory ofMashhad University of Medical Sciences. Mice were a ﬀorded easieraccess to food and water when they were displaying signs of paralysis.To investigate the e ﬀect of Exo and Exo-APT on EAE in vivo,. we de-signed two models of administration in EAE-induced mice: prophylacticand therapeutic models.Mice were randomly divided into ﬁve groups (n = 5 per group). Toestablish a prophylactic model, 200 μg of either Exo or Exo-APT wassuspended in 0.2 ml PBS and injected through the tail vein (day 1, 3, 6post immunization).In the therapeutic model, the time of injection to mice was post-poned until clinical symptoms started to appear with an equal dose(according to prophylactic model) on day 12, 15, 18 post immuniza-tion. Untreated mice with induced EAE were used as control. Mice weremonitored daily by measuring their weight and clinical scores were
recorded for 28 days. At the end of the study, all mice were sacriﬁ cedand immunomodulation e ﬀect, CNS in ﬂammation and demyelination ofCNS were evaluated.2.11. Histopathological assessmentTo investigate the degree of in ﬂammation and demyelination, bothHematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) and Luxol fast blue (LFB) staining wereused. In this regard, at the end of the study (on day 28 post EAEF. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164151
induction), mice were euthanized by intraperitoneal injection of keta-mine-xylazine cocktail (ketamine, 200 mg/kg and xylazine, 20 mg/kg)and spleen, brain and spinal cord were removed.Paraﬃn-embedded brain, and spinal cord were prepared and 5 μmsections of each sample (cross sectional for brain and both cross sec-tional and longitudinal for spinal cord) were prepared and used for H&Eand Luxol fast blue staining. Then, the prepared slides were in-vestigated to determine cell in ﬁltration in a blinded manner. In thisregard, scoring for in ﬂammation was performed according to the fol-lowing system; 0, no in ﬂammation; 1, few in ﬂammatory cells; 2, cellinﬁltration in perivascular region; and 3, spreading of cellular inﬁ ltra-tion into the parenchyma. Moreover, demyelination was scored as fol-lows: 0, no demyelination lesion; 1, rare foci; 2, few sections of de-myelination; and 3, large sections of demyelination [ 21,22].
Furthermore, additional pathological staining, Bielschowsky silver im-pregnation was performed to assess axonal pathology.2.12. ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry was performed using the following anti-bodies: Ki67 (proliferation marker; Master Diagnostica, Spain), NG2(oligodendroglial marker, Abcam; USA) and immunostaining was vi-sualized by peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody and DAB chro-mogen (Master Diagnostica, Spain) according to the manufacturer'sprotocols and then counter-stained with hematoxylin solution (Sigma-Aldrich).2.13. Flow cytometry analysis of regulatory T cells (Treg) populationTo evaluate the e ﬀect of Exo and Exo-APT treatments on regulatoryT cells, the mouse regulatory T cell staining kit was employed accordingto the manufacturer's protocol (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and Tregpercentage was evaluated through ﬂow cytometry.Brieﬂy, isolated splenocytes from the treated mice (1 × 106) were
6) werewashed by staining bu ﬀer and stained with appropriate concentrationof speci ﬁc monoclonal antibodies as follows: FITC anti-CD4 and PEanti-CD25 antibodies incubated with cells at 4 °C for 30 min followed bywashing steps. Afterward, cells were ﬁxed and permeabilized for in-tracellular staining of Foxp3 marker using PE-Cy5 anti-Foxp3 (FJK-16s)antibody.Finally, cells were washed three times with PBS pH 7.4, re-sus-pended in binding bu ﬀer and analyzed by FACSCalibur ﬂow cytometerand the obtained data were analyzed using FlowJo software.2.14. Th1/Th2/Th17 detection by ﬂow cytometry and enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay (ELISA)Splenocyte suspensions were harvested from immunized mice ineach treatment group and cultured in 24-well plates at density of2×1 06cells/well in RPMI-1640 medium. Then, cells were re-stimu-lated with 20 μg MOG and incubated for 72 h at 37 °C. Next, for in-tracellular cytokine staining, cells were stimulated on the presence of a
cell activator cocktail (Biolegend, USA) for 6 h followed by a secondwash step in staining bu ﬀer. Cell Fixation was performed in cold BDCytoﬁx™buﬀer. Afterward, cells were washed and incubated in per-meabilization bu ﬀer. At last, cells were stained for intracellular cyto-kines with Th1/Th2/Th17 cocktail antibodies (BD Pharmingen,California, USA) containing anti-CD4 PERCP-CY5.5 (Clone: RM4-5),anti-IL-17A PE (Clone: TC11-18H10.1), anti-IFN-GMA FITC (Clone:XMG1.2) and anti-IL-4 APC (Clone: 11B11) for 30 min at 4 °C in dark.Allﬂow cytometric analyses were accomplished with suitable isotypecontrols according to the manufacturer's protocol. Data were acquiredon a FACSCalibur and further analyzed using FlowJo software.To determine the in vivo response, the blood samples from EAE miceon day 28-post immunization were collected and serum isolation was
performed. After that, cytokine levels were measured by ELISA kits forIL-4, IL-17A and IFN- γ(Biolegend, USA) according to the manufac-turer's instruction.2.15. RNA extraction and real-time PCR (qPCR)
turer's instruction.2.15. RNA extraction and real-time PCR (qPCR)To evaluate the e ﬀects of Exo and Exo-APT treatments on Th1/Th2/Th17 polarization, the mRNA expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 transcrip-tion factors (T-bet, ROR- γt and GATA3) and cytokines (IL17, IL4, IFN)were determined by qPCR. The spleen cells were harvested from EAEmice treated with either Exo or Exo-APT, and stored in a tube con-taining TRIzol solution (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim,Germany), at −20 °C. Then, total RNA was isolated using TRIzol re-agent in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA wassynthesized using oligo-dT primers on 1 μg of total RNA using FirstStrand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermantase, Germany) according to themanufacturer's instructions. Quantitative real time PCR was performedon the Rotor-Gene 6000 system (Corbett, Australia) using SYBR GreenSuperMix Universal (TAKARA, Japan) with appropriate sequences(Table 1). The ampli ﬁcation of a single product for each primer set was
conﬁrmed by electrophoresis using 2% agarose gel and melting curve inreal-time PCR.Serial dilution standard curves were prepared for target and re-ference genes to relatively quantify the copy number of each singlegene. The Rotor-Gene 6000 machine and its software were used toanalyze the standards and the unknown mRNA copy number. The re-lative quantity of each mRNA was normalized to the relative quantity ofβ2M mRNA. Then, the relative expression levels of either cytokines ortranscription factors for each sample were calculated by the followingequation: Cytokines Normalized Index = copy number of gene of in-terest (cytokines)/copy number of reference gene ( β2M).2.16. Morphometric analysis and preparation of semi thin sections of spinalcordPre-ﬁxed mouse spinal cord samples, were processed in Aral-diteresin and used for preparation of semi-thin cross sectional slides (One-micrometer-thick) cutting with an ultramicrotome by glass knives
(LEICA ULTRACUT R). Next, toluidine blue staining smears were pre-pared and the optical images from random, non-overlapping ﬁeldswithin each lesion, were acquired using an Olympus Provis microscope.The higher total intact myelinated ﬁber and thicker myelin sheathswithin lesions were judged as remyelination response. The thickness ofthe myelin sheaths (g-ratios) and total ﬁber in each group were de-termined using quantitative assessment of remyelination and axonalinjury in a blinded manner.The Image J software was implemented in order to overlay the gridsonto the images and then the number of ﬁbers in alternate squares,diameter and perimeter of axon and myelinated ﬁbers (minimum of 100individual ﬁbers per mouse) were measured. The g-ratios was calcu-lated using the following equation = :Gratioaxonperimetermyelinatedfiberperimeter[15,23]:Table 1The sequences of primers which were used in real-time PCR (PCR).Genes Sequence (5 ′toward 3 ′)MOUSE -GATA3 F1 GTTCGGATGTAAGTCGAG
MOUSE -GATA3 F1 GTTCGGATGTAAGTCGAGMOUSE -GATA3 R1 CAGGCATTGCAAAGGTAGMOUSE -ROR γ-F1 CTGAGGCCATTCAGTATGMOUSE -ROR γ-R1 CTGCACATTCTGACTAGGMOUSE -IL-17A-F1 GCTGACCCCTAAGAAACCMOUSE -IL-17A-R1 GTGGAGGGCAGACAATTCMOUSE -IL-4-F1 GTCCTCACAGCAACGAAGMOUSE -IL-4-R1 GCAGCTCCATGAGAACACMOUSE -INFg-F1 GAATGTGTCAGGTAGTAAMOUSE -INFg-R1 AATGAGCGAGTTATTTGTF1: Forward sequence primers, R1: Revrse sequence primer.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164152
=Axon perimeterMyelinated fiber perimeterGratio= Gratioaxonperimetermyelinatedfiberperimeter2.17. Statistical analysisThe statistical analyses were performed using the Graph pad prism 6software. The statistical signi ﬁcance was determined by the Two-wayanalysis of variance (ANOVA) or non-parametric test. Thereafter, forthe signi ﬁcance of di ﬀerence among groups, post hoc test performed andp value was determined. P values of ≤0.05 were considered signi ﬁcant.Results are reported as the mean ± SEM.3. Results3.1. Exosome isolation and characterizationThe size, morphology and homogeneity of MSC-derived exosomeswere evaluated using AFM analysis. Fig. 1 A illustrates the homogenousFig. 1. Characterization of exosomes isolated from murine MSCs. AFM images of exosome (A); the presence of CD63 and CD9 protein markers on the surface of the
exosomes (n = 3) evaluated by ﬂow cytometry (B); and Western blot analysis of cytochrome C as negative marker of exosome (C).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164153
spherical nanoparticles between 50 and 100 nm. DLS analysis was de-monstrated that the MSC-derived vesicles are 100.8 nm in size which isin agreement with the data obtained from AFM experiment ( Fig. 1 B).For further characterization, we analyzed the presence of cyto-chrome C expression (as negative marker) in both MSCs and MSC-de-rived exosomes using Western blot experiment. Subsequently, the pre-sence of CD63 and CD9 protein markers on the surface of the exosomeswas evaluated by ﬂow cytometry. The obtained results indicated thatboth markers were present on the surface of the isolated exosomes(Fig. 1C). The results of Western blot analysis demonstrated expressionof cytochrome C in MSC cells but the absence of cytochrome C in MSC-derived exosomes, as negative marker, con ﬁrming the speci ﬁc char-acteristics of exosomes as extracellular vesicles ( Fig. 2).3.2. Synthesis of Exo-APT bio-conjugateTo verify that the LJM-3064 aptamer was covalently conjugated to
the surface of the exosomes, two experiments were conducted. First, theATTO-labeled LJM-3064 aptamer was co-incubated with exosomes inthe presence of EDC and NHS, and then the ﬂuorescence intensity wasanalyzed by ﬂow cytometry.Fig. 3A demonstrated a right shift of MFI for ATTO-labeled-aptamer-conjugated exosome in comparison with plain exosome by ﬂow cyto-metry.The second experiment was agarose gel electrophoresis analysiswhich indicated successful aptamer conjugation on exosomes as theaptamer-conjugated exosomes did not show any mobility on agarose geldue to their ultra-high molecular weight ( Fig. 1B).The obtained results proved that the linkage between aptamer andexosomes was formed by the addition of EDC/NHS as catalysts, and theaptamers were stably attached to the exosomes through a covalentbond.According to the DLS results, the size of plain exosome was de-termined to be 100.8 nm, which increased to 133 ± 15 nm after ap-
tamer conjugation for Exo-APT bio-conjugate presumably because ofthe presence of the LJM-3064 aptamers on the exosomes surface.On the other hand, the zeta potential measurements showed a sig-niﬁcant surface charge decline for Exo-APT in comparison with plainexosome ( −40.8 mV versus−25.4 mV) which is attributed to the pre-sence of additional negative charge of DNA aptamers on the surface ofExo-APT bio-conjugate.Fig. 2. Sizes of Exo (A) and Exo-APT conjugate (B); Zeta potential of exosome (C) and Exo-APT conjugate (D).Fig. 3. Analysis of ATTO-labeled-aptamer-conjugated exosome (Exo-APT) by ﬂow cytometry (A); Agarose gel 12% electrophoresis evaluation of aptamer-conjugatedexosome (B).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164154
3.3. Binding a ﬃnity and proliferative eﬀ ect of Exo-APT on Oln93 cellsFlow cytometry results revealed that ATTO-labeled LJM-3064 ap-tamer-conjugated exosomes (Exo-APT) could attach to the Oln93 cellsurface and display higher ﬂuorescent intensity in comparison with li-brary ( Fig. 4B), which demonstrated the LJM-3064 aptamer a ﬃnity formyelin because Oln93 cells produced the basic myelin protein.The mitogenic e ﬀect of either Exo or Exo-APT on Oln93 cells wasinvestigated through BrdU cell proliferation assay after 72 h co-cultureof Oln93 cells with either Exo or Exo-APT.The obtained results demonstrated that the Exo-APT at 200 μgconcentration (based on protein concentration) signi ﬁcantly increasedproliferation of OLN93 cells in comparison with untreated cells or thosetreated with Exo ( P= .0152).On the other hand, the proliferation experiment con ﬁrmed that thehigher doses of Exo-APT (> 200 μg) including 400, 800, 1600 and
3200 μg showed the same proliferative e ﬀect on OLN93 cells as ob-served with 200 μg concentration.3.4. Analysis of clinical manifestation of EAE in both Exo and Exo-APTtreated miceIn the current study, the e ﬀect of both Exo and Exo-APT on EAEmodel in vivo was evaluated viaprophylactic and therapeutic ap-proaches.As depicted in Fig. 5, the ﬁrst sign of clinical manifestation of EAE incontrol group was began with tail paresis on day 11.50 ± 0.7, reachinga maximum mean clinical score (MMCS) of 5.5 ± 0.28 on day 15(Fig. 5A). In contrast, when mice received Exo as a prophylacticstrategy, disease onset took place on day 12.50 ± 0.7 and disease se-verity lessen on day 15 in comparison with control, with a mean clinicalscore (MCS) of 3.625 ± 0.55 ( Fig. 5A, Table 2), while maximum meanclinical score (MMCS) reached 5.16 ± 0.16 on day 22.In this regard, in mice receiving Exo-APT with an equal dose ofexosome as a prophylactic measure, disease onset started on
12.50 ± 1.29 and disease severity was signi ﬁcantly reduced, with amean clinical score (MCS) of 2.25 ± 0.75 on day 15 in comparisonwith control ( P= .038). TWO-way ANOVA statistical evaluation wasperformed between treatment groups and control, which was re-presented in Table 2. Non-signi ﬁcant di ﬀerences were observed be-tween all treatments groups except the Exo-APT-PR, which wassigniﬁcantly di ﬀerent from Exo-PR.It should be noted that the maximum mean clinical score (MMCS) ofmice receiving prophylactic Exo-APT was 3.8 ± 0.31 on day 20showed a signi ﬁcant decrease compared to that of control group(P=.028) ( Fig. 5 andTable 2 ).At the end of the study, the cumulative disease index (CDI) of Exo-APT group signi ﬁcantly decreased in comparison with control and Exoreceiving mice (CDI of control group 77.25 ± 3.81, CDI of Exo asprophylaxis 72.12 ± 2.45 and CDI of Exo-APT as prophylaxis49.63 ± 8.65; P= .02).In mice treated with the therapeutic protocol where the adminis-
tration of Exo and Exo-APT was done in mice with developed MS,disease severity was reduced on day 15 with mean clinical score (MCS)of 3.87 ± 0.96 and 4.0 ± 0.35 for Exo and Exo-APT treated mice,respectively. In addition, the peak of clinical score of mice was delayeduntil day 17, in comparison with control group showing the peak ofclinical score on day 15. It should be noted that the maximum meanclinical scores (MMCS) of mice receiving either Exo or Exo-APT on day17 were 4.75 ± 1.09 and 4.62 ± 0.25, respectively ( P> .05).At the end of the study, the cumulative disease index (CDI) in micetreated with either Exo or Exo-APT decreased in comparison withcontrol but there was no statistically signi ﬁcant di ﬀerence between Exoand Exo-APT-treated mice (CDI of control group: 77.25 ± 3.81, CDI ofExo: 64.25 ± 8.73 and CDI of Exo-APT: 60.63 ± 1.06).Fig. 5C, D, illustrates the weight loss of mice after treatment with
either Exo or Exo-APT in either prophylactic or therapeutic manner atequal doses. The obtained results demonstrated that both treatment
either Exo or Exo-APT in either prophylactic or therapeutic manner atequal doses. The obtained results demonstrated that both treatmentstrategies did not cause any weight loss as a sign of systemic toxicityduring the experiment up to 28 days.3.5. Histopathological evaluation of in ﬂammatory cells in brain and spinalcordAt the end of the study (on day 28 post EAE induction), mice treatedwith either prophylactic or therapeutic protocol were euthanized andthen brain and spinal cord were removed.To evaluate in ﬂammatory cell in ﬁltration, the spinal cord and brainsections were stained with H&E. Pathological assessment of micetreated with either Exo or Exo-APT in a prophylactic manner indicateddecreased in ﬁltration of in ﬂammatory cells into the CNS in comparisonwith control. Fewer mononuclear cell in ﬁltration cells and
Fig. 4. In vitro evaluation of proliferative eﬀ ect of Exo and Exo-APT on Oln93 cells using Brdu assay (Proliferation assay performed in triplicate repetitions) (A);Binding a ﬃnity of ATTO647N-labeled aptamer (LJM3064, and library) to the surface of the OLN93 (MBP producing cell) cells implementing ﬂow cytometry analysis.The shift of ﬂuorescence intensity in FL4 channel for the LJM3064 aptamer exhibited its high a ﬃnity for OLN93 cells (B).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164155
inﬂammation foci were observed in the brain and spinal cord of Exo-APT-treated group as compared to control group ( P= .004). However,in therapeutic model, high in ﬂammation and cell in ﬁltration were ob-served in both Exo-T and Exo-APT-T compared to Exo-APT-PR treat-ment group ( Figs. 6A and 7).Moreover, analysis of Luxol fast blue staining of brain and spinalcord sections showed high demyelination areas in the brain of mice inboth Exo-treated and control groups. However, mice receiving Exo-APTas prophylactic measure, demonstrated signi ﬁcant reduction in de-myelination of the brain region in comparison with control groupFig. 5. EAE disease course in C57BL/6 mice after treatment with either Exo or Exo-APT. All mice were monitored for clinical manifestation of EAE, and the resultswere presented as the mean clinical scores (A, B); the mean body weight of treated mice during the experiment up to 28 days (C, D). Data were presented asmean ± SEM.
mean ± SEM.Table 2Clinical aspects of EAE in mice receiving either Exo or Exo-APT in both prophylactic and therapeutic manners.Groups Incidence Day of onset Day of peak Peak day score Last day score CDIExo-PR 100 12.50 ± 0.7 22 5.16 ± 0.16 5.16 ± 0.60 72.12 ± 2.45Exo-APT-PR 100 12.50 ± 1.29 20 3.8 ± 0.31⁎3.37 ± 0.82 49.63 ± 8.65⁎Exo-T 100 11.50 ± 0.7 17 4.75 ± 1.09 4 ± 0.45 64.25 ± 8.73Exo-APT-T 100 11.50 ± 0.7 17 4.62 ± 0.25 3.8 ± 0.31 60.63 ± 1.06Control 100 11.50 ± 0.7 15 5.5 ± 0.28 4.5 ± 0.35 77.25 ± 3.81Data were represented as the mean ± SEM.CDI, cumulative disease index, is based on the sum of clinical scores over the entire disease course. Exo-PR, prophylactic treatment with Exo.Exo-APT-PR, prophylactic treatment with exosome conjugated with aptamer.Exo-T, therapeutic treatment with exosome.Exo-APT-T, therapeutic treatment with exosome conjugated with aptamer.Statistical evaluation was performed between treatment groups and control.
⁎p< .05.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164156
(P= .005) ( Figs. 6 B and 8). Bielschowsky silver impregnation showedreduced density of axons in comparison with control group. Frag-mented and distorted axons and reduction of axon density could bedetected in all treated groups while in Exo-APT-PR the density of axonsis obviously higher than those of control in accordance with H&E andLFB staining results ( Fig. 9). Immunohistochemistry for NG2 (oligo-dendroglial marker) and Ki67 (proliferation marker), revealed thatnumerous NG2+ and Ki67+ cells were present in the white matter ofFig. 6. Inﬂammatory cell inﬁ ltration into CNS and demyelination assessment after administration of Exo and Exo-APT. (A) Reduced in ﬂammatory cell inﬁ ltrationinto CNS after prophylactic administration of Exo-APT. Semi-quantitative scoring of mean in ﬂammation region in CNS as described in the Materials and methodssection. (B) Semi-quantitative scoring of mean demyelination area formed in CNS (n = 5). Data were presented as mean ± SEM.
Fig. 7. Histopathological evaluation of spinal cord sections of mice after administration of Exo and Exo-APT in either prophylactic or therapeutic treatment incomparison with control. Illustration of H&E staining of spinal cord sections foci or disseminated in ﬂammatory cells in brain sections.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164157
spinal cords of Exo-APT-PR group (Fig. S1).3.6. Flow cytometry analysis of regulatory T cellsIn order to evaluate the possible e ﬀect of either Exo or Exo-APTadministration on Treg cell population in treated mice, CD4+ CD25+Foxp3+ T cells (Treg subsets) were analyzed in isolated splenocytesfrom dissected spleen through staining of CD4, CD25, and Foxp3 usingﬂuorescence-tagged antibodies.At the next stage, the percentages of Tregs in splenocytes of eachgroup were evaluated by ﬂow cytometry. The results indicated thatprophylactic treatment with Exo-APT signi ﬁcantly increased the per-centage of CD4+, CD25+and Foxp3+T cells (Treg) in splenocytes incomparison with control group (8.255 ± 0.22% in Exo-APT group vs3.34 ± 0.462% in control group; P= .0286). However, Treg percen-tage in prophylactic exosome-treated mice was 3.56 ± 0.14% which
Fig. 8. Assessment of demyelination in Luxol fast blue staining of spinal cord sections showed high demyelination areas in the spinal cord sections of mice afteradministration of Exo and Exo-APT in either prophylactic or therapeutic treatment in comparison with control. (For interpretation of the references to colour in thisﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 9. Bielschowsky silver impregnation of spinal cord sections of mice after administration of Exo and Exo-APT in either prophylactic or therapeutic treatment incomparison with control.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164158
was not statistically signi ﬁcant in comparison with control group. Intherapeutic model, treatment with either Exo or Exo-APT increased thenumber of Treg cells although it was not signi ﬁcant compared to con-trol group (3.93 ± 0.53% in Exo vs3.84 ± 0.143% in Exo-APT-treated group vs3.34 ± 0.462% in control group; P= .54) ( Fig. 10).3.7. E ﬀects of Exo and Exo-APT on CD4+T cells polarization in EAE micein both prophylactic and therapeutic modelsTo analyze the polarization of T helper subsets in Exo and Exo-APT-treated mice, the CD4+ T cell subsets in splenocyte were evaluated byﬂow cytometry experiment after in vitro re-stimulation by MOG35 –55peptide and intracellular cytokine staining for Th1/Th2/Th17.Obtained results revealed that in prophylactic Exo-APT-treated mice,the percentage of IL-17 producing CD4+T cells (Th17) signi ﬁcantlydecreased ( P= .0001). Furthermore, a signi ﬁcant decrease in the per-centage of IFN- γproducing CD4+T cells (Th1) in splenocytes of mice
receiving prophylactic Exo-APT was observed ( P= .001).On the other hand, a marginal increase was observed in IL-4 pro-ducing T cells (Th2) in mice treated with either Exo-APT or Exo(therapeutic model) in comparison with control and other treatmentsgroups although these di ﬀerences were not statistically signi ﬁcant(P= .149) ( Fig. 11).Furthermore, to assess Th1/Th2/Th17 polarization at the mRNAlevel, the relative mRNA expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 transcriptionfactors including T-bet (Th1), ROR- γt (Th17), GATA3 (Th4) and theirsignature cytokines (IL17, IL4, IFN- γ) were determined by qPCR.The Exo-APT-PR treatment resulted in reduced expression of IFN- γand IL-17 and signi ﬁcant increase in the expression of IL-4 ( P= .0003).Moreover, Exo-APT-PR treated mice exhibited a signi ﬁcant decrease inthe transcription of ROR- γt and T-bet in the spleen. In addition, ele-
vated expression of GATA3 was detected in Exo-APT-PR treated groupin comparison with control group ( P= .05).To determine the in vivo response and T helper polarization at theserum level, speci ﬁci nﬂammatory mediators such as IL-4, IL-17 andIFN-γwere measured in serum of treated mice on day 28 post im-munization. Obtained results indicated that IFN- γlevel signi ﬁcantlydecreased in prophylactic Exo-APT-treated mice compared to controlgroup (0.0286).On the other hand, the serum level of IL-17 in all treatment groupswas identical to that of control group while the plasma level of IL-4 wasfound to increase in prophylactic Exo-APT treated mice and therapeuticExo-APT and Exo-treated mice compared to control group ( Fig. 12).The aforementioned results suggest that prophylactic treatmentwith Exo-APT changed the balance of Th1/Th2 by decreasing the pro-duction of IFN- γ(Th1) and increasing the production of IL-4 (Th2 cy-tokine) in EAE model.
tokine) in EAE model.Exo-APT-PR treatment resulted in reduced expression of IFN andIL17 and signi ﬁcant increased expression of IL-4 ( P= .0003).Furthermore, Exo-APT –PR treated mice exhibited a signi ﬁcant decreasein the transcription of ROR- γt and T-bet in the spleen. In addition,elevated expression of GATA3 ( Fig. 13,) was observed compared tocontrol ( P= .05).3.8. Morphometric analysis and preparation of semi-thin sections of spinalcordTo assess the e ﬃcacy of the designed treatment in stimulatingmyelination and remyelination processes, we initially determined thefrequency and total ﬁber number within lesion in each group. Thus, thethickness of the myelin sheaths and g-ratios were assessed.Obtainedresults ( Fig. 14) revealed that in prophylactic manner, thenumber of ﬁbers within lesion in Exo-APT-PR treatment group wassigniﬁcantly higher than those in untreated control group. Additionally,in therapeutic strategy, the number of neuronal ﬁbers within lesion in
either Exo –T and Exo-APT-T groups were signi ﬁcantly higher than
in therapeutic strategy, the number of neuronal ﬁbers within lesion ineither Exo –T and Exo-APT-T groups were signi ﬁcantly higher thanFig. 10. Number of regulatory T cells in splenocytes following antibody treatment with anti-CD4 FITC, anti-CD25 PE, and anti-Foxp3 PE-CY5 (n = 5). Lymphocyteswere gated by forward, and side scatter and they were gated for CD4+cells, and the quadrant marker was set on CD25+ Foxp3+ lymphocytes.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164159
those in untreated control group ( p< .0001). On the other hand, g-ratios calculation showed the thickness of the myelin sheaths for Exo-APT-prophylactic manner treated group and both Exo –T and Exo-APT-Ttreated groups (in therapeutic manner) were signi ﬁcantly higher incomparison with untreated control group ( p< .0001).4. DiscussionThe incentive behind this study was interesting features of MSC-derived exosomes including inherent stem cell origin properties, neuronprotectivity and the ability to cross BBB [ 24,25].On the other hand, exosomes could be employed as promisingagents in drug delivery for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases[26–28]. In this regard, exosome as a biological carrier, has excellentbiocompatibility, low toxicity and low immunogenicity [ 29,30]. Pre-viously it has been demonstrated that exosome was pro ﬁcient in sys-temic and local regulation of immune cells [ 29]. Moreover, numerous
impacts of human mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes on dif-ferentiation, activation and function of lymphocyte subsets were re-ported [ 31].In the present study, we functionalized the surface of the bonemarrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes with LJM-3064Fig. 11. Flow cytometry analysis of intracellular cytokine staining for evaluation of the eﬃciency of Exo and Exo-APT treatment on the polarization of CD4 + Thcells (Th1/THh2/Th17) in EAE mice in both prophylactic and therapeutic models. Splenocytes were ﬁxed and permeabilized followed by staining with Th1/Th2/Th17 cocktail antibodies from BD Pharmingen (IL-17, IFN- γ, and IL-4), and then cells were stained with anti-CD4. Lymphocytes were gated by forward and sidescatter, then the quadrant marker was set on CD4+IL-17+, CD4+IFN-γ+and CD4+IL-4+. Results were expressed as mean ± SEM compared with control (n = 5).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164160
aptamer to survey its immunomodulatory and remyelination e ﬀects inthe experimental model of multiple sclerosis (MS) in mice.It should be noted that LJM-3064 aptamer demonstrated idealproperties comprising biophysical characteristics, structural stability,favorable thermodynamic, versatile BBB penetration, myelin a ﬃnityand induction of remyelination [ 15,32].To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report in which exo-some surface was functionalized with aptamer (Exo-APT) and used forEAE treatment.In this regard, we hypothesized that co-delivery of LJM-3064 ap-tamer and exosome as a novel therapeutic modality could e ﬃcientlyaﬀect the immune modulating activity and remyelination processes inMOG-induced EAE in C57BL/6 mice.The in vitro concentration of exosomes and Exo-APT was selectedbased on preliminary results of in vitro assessment of exosome and Exo-APT e ﬀect on proliferation of oligodendroglia cell line (OLN93) at
various concentrations. We found out that the OLN93 proliferation atthe concentration of 200 μg of Exo-APT was signi ﬁcantly di ﬀerent fromthat of control and non-functionalized exosomes. However, increasingthe Exo-APT concentration (> 200 μg) did not show similar pro-liferative impact on OLN93 cells. The aforementioned observationcould be attributed to the saturation of aptamer receptors on OLN93cell surfaces treated with higher concentrations of Exo-APT bio-con-jugate.A previous study in our lab demonstrated that biological pro ﬁciencyof exosome treatment is dose-dependent [ 33]. To investigate the e ﬀectof Exo and Exo-APT on animal model of multiple sclerosis (EAE), wedesigned two experimental EAE models including prophylactic andtherapeutic strategies. Our results revealed that exosome could delayand decrease clinical manifestation of EAE when administered as pro-phylaxis (12 –19 days) in comparison with control group but at the end
of the study (day 28), clinical manifestation of EAE for mice in treat-ment group receiving exosome as prophylaxis was identical to that ofcontrol group.In the current study, it was demonstrated that exosome has theability to exert some e ﬀects on the manifestation of EAE, which oc-curred in the early days when clinical symptoms in control group ap-peared. Both non-functionalized exosome and Exo-APT signi ﬁcantlydecreased severity of clinical score of disease 12 to 19 days after EAEinduction. In addition, both non-functionalized exosome and Exo-APTcould delay the peak day of disease.The present study indicated some di ﬀerences in mice treated withnon-functionalized exosome and those receiving Exo-APT as prophy-laxis. In mice receiving Exo-APT, the disease severity (mean clinicalscores), MMCS and CDI were signi ﬁcantly reduced in comparison to
control (MCS P value: 0.038, MMCS P value: 0.028, CDI P value: 0.02).In addition, we found that mice treated with either non-functionalizedexosome or Exo-APT in a therapeutic manner, displayed a delay in thepeak of disease and decreased mean clinical scores compared to control.The obtained results suggest the positive e ﬀect of conjugated ap-tamer on clinical manifestation of EAE in both prophylaxis and ther-apeutic strategies when compared to bare exosome. Thus, it could beconcluded that the LJM-3064 aptamer possessed therapeutic andcurative e ﬀect on MS in mice.Inthe aforementioned system, exosomes act as a vehicle for theaptamer and consequently aptamer enhances the therapeutic responsein EAE model.There are several reports explaining the relationship between in-ﬂammation and neurodegeneration in MS [ 34–36]. These ﬁnding sug-gested that in EAE context, both in ﬂammation and neurodegenerationcontribute to MS in a cascade through which they augmented the e ﬀect
of each other. In this regard, each agent is capable of breaking thecascade of demyelination and neurodegeneration, thereby successfullyhelping the prevention of further demyelination and axonal loss [ 37].
cascade of demyelination and neurodegeneration, thereby successfullyhelping the prevention of further demyelination and axonal loss [ 37].We con ﬁrmed that exosome exerts immunomodulation e ﬀect inmice receiving prophylactic treatment when EAE is not completelyestablished thereby successfully delaying the peak day of disease andreducing the disease severity in comparison to control.Moreover, the greater e ﬃciency of Exo-APT than non-functiona-lized exosome could be attributed to the remyelination e ﬀect of LJM-3064 aptamer. Thus, it seems that Exo-APT exerts both im-munomodulation and remyelination e ﬀects in mice receiving prophy-lactic treatment as described earlier.Our current understanding of MS pathogenesis is concerned aboutthe critical role of the immune system in disease onset. The immunecells polarization to Th1, Th17 or Th2 subsets can considerably a ﬀectautoimmunity and its clinical manifestation [ 38]. Polarized CD4+
(Th1) and Th17 cells can in ﬁltrate the CNS parenchyma and be im-plicated in MS. They could contribute to the formation of demyelinationarea and CNS in ﬂammation [ 39]. In contrast, Th2 cells subset has aprominent therapeutic in ﬂuence on clinical manifestation of disease byinducing Th2-type cytokines production [ 38,40].We have shown that either prophylactic or therapeutic treatmentgenerates some changes in immune cell pro ﬁle of splenocytes in com-parison with control. Intra-cell cytokine assessments in Exo-APT treat-ment group showed an increase of IL-4 level and enhanced Treg po-pulation in murine splenocytes. Surprisingly, MSC-derived exosomessuppressed IFN- γand IL-17 production in MOG re-stimulated spelno-cytes. In parallel with these results, our study also showed increasedlevel of IL-4 and suppression of IFN- γproduction in mouse blood.In parallel to cytokine assay result, our study at mRNA level showed
signiﬁcant increase in GATA-3 expression in murine splenocyte anddecreased relative mRNA expression of T-bet and ROR- γt. The up-reg-ulation of GATA3 induces secretion of Th2 cytokines and thusFig. 12. The serum level of IFN- γ(A), IL-4 (B) and IL-17 (C) in EAE mice in both prophylactic and therapeutic strategies was evaluated using ELISA. Results wereexpressed as mean ± SEM compared with control (n = 3).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164161
diﬀerentiation to Th2 subsets. In addition, down-regulation of relativemRNA expression of T-bet and ROR- γt and subsequent suppression ofIFN-γand IL-17 production accompanied by an increase in IL-4 andTreg population enhanced the regulatory function and diminished theseverity of EAE. These results are in accordance with CDI and EAEscores observed in Exo-APT group (prophylactic treatment) whencompared to control. The immunomodulatory e ﬀects of exosomes in thecurrent study are in agreement with the previously published study inwhich MSC-derived exosomes a ﬀected Th1/Th2 paradigm, suppressingthe pro-in ﬂammatory cytokine secretion, reducing the di ﬀerentiationinto Th17 cells, modulating the auto-reactive cells and increasing thelevel of regulatory T cells [ 41,42].Histological evaluation showed lower in ﬂammatory cell in ﬁltrationinto the CNS, reduced demyelination region and brain damage in Exo-APT (prophylaxis) treated group.
APT (prophylaxis) treated group.Morphometric measurements of toluidine blue staining of spinalcord sections suggested that the Exo and Exo-APT treatments are cap-able of producing changes in the number of local ﬁbers and the myelinsheaths thickness (g-ratios).The aforementioned neuro-protectivity and immunomodulatory ef-fect of Exo and Exo-APT together, especially in early phase of EAE in-duction improved functional disability in EAE model.Fig. 13. Expression of (Th1/Th2/Th17) transcription factors (T-bet, GATA3 and ROR- γt) and their signatures cytokines in the spleen of mice with EAE. Splenocyteswere isolated from animal on day 28 post immunization. Total RNA was extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA. Equal quantities of cDNA from each samplewere analyzed by qPCR using β2 microglobulin as the internal control. mRNA expression levels of cytokines (A-C-E) and transcription factors in the spleen (B-D-F) of
mice were represented. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 5, qPCR performed in triplicate).F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164162
5. ConclusionIn the current study, MSC-derived exosomes exhibited im-munomodulatory properties and when administrated as prophylactictreatment, reduced the MS clinical score.Additionally, our results demonstrated that surface functionaliza-tion of exosomes with LJM-3064 aptamer produced synergistic im-munomodulatory properties and remyelination e ﬀect.In this regard, it was con ﬁrmed that prophylactic administration ofExo-APT signi ﬁcantly decreased the ameliorating disease severity byreducing Th1 response and increasing Treg population leading to thelowest in ﬂammation and recruitment of in ﬂammatory cells into theCNS.The obtained results were further supported by signi ﬁcant reductionin demyelination and pathological scores.The prepared bio-conjugated as a therapeutic and curative platformindicated neuroprotective properties as evidenced by increase in thenumber of total ﬁbers and improvement in the thickness of the myelinsheaths (g-ratios).
sheaths (g-ratios).Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.02.032 .AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the Mashhad University of MedicalSciences, Mashhad, Iran. We would like to gratefully acknowledge thecompetent assistance of Dr. Sara Amel Farzad at PharmaceuticalResearch Center. This study was partly based on the PhD thesis ofFazileh Hosseini Shamili.References[1]C. Théry, L. Zitvogel, S. Amigorena, Exosomes: composition, biogenesis and func-tion, Nat. Rev. Immunol 2 (2002) 569 .[2]M. Colombo, G. Raposo, C. Théry, Biogenesis, secretion, and intercellular interac-tions of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30(2014) 255 –289.[3]S.A. Melo, H. Sugimoto, J.T. O'Connell, N. Kato, A. Villanueva, A. Vidal, L. Qiu,E. Vitkin, L.T. Perelman, C.A. Melo, Cancer exosomes perform cell-independentmicroRNA biogenesis and promote tumorigenesis, Cancer Cell 26 (2014) 707 –721.
[4]R.C. Lai, R.W.Y. Yeo, K.H. Tan, S.K. Lim, Exosomes for drug delivery —A novelapplication for the mesenchymal stem cell, Biotechnol. Adv. 31 (2013) 543 –551.[5]D. Sun, X. Zhuang, X. Xiang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, C. Liu, S. Barnes, W. Grizzle, D. Miller,H.-G. Zhang, A novel nanoparticle drug delivery system: the anti-in ﬂammatoryactivity of curcumin is enhanced when encapsulated in exosomes, Mol. Ther. 18(2010) 1606 –1614 .[6]L. Lattanzi, M. Federico, A strategy of antigen incorporation into exosomes: com-paring cross-presentation levels of antigens delivered by engineered exosomes andby lentiviral virus-like particles, Vaccine 30 (2012) 7229 –7237 .[7]T. Tian, H.-X. Zhang, C.-P. He, S. Fan, Y.-L. Zhu, C. Qi, N.-P. Huang, Z.-D. Xiao, Z.-Fig. 14. Morphometric evaluation and toluidine blue staining of spinal cord slides in EAE mice treated with either prophylactic or therapeutic protocol (n = 5). The
magni ﬁcation is 10 (A); Thickness of the myelin sheaths (g-ratios) in both prophylactic and therapeutic treated groups was calculated by image J software (B). (Forinterpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)F. Hosseini Shamili, et al. Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164163
H. Lu, B.A. Tannous, Surface functionalized exosomes as targeted drug deliveryvehicles for cerebral ischemia therapy, Biomaterials 150 (2018) 137 –149.[8]K.M. Kanninen, N. Bister, J. Koistinaho, T. Malm, Exosomes as new diagnostic toolsin CNS diseases, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1862 (2016) 403 –410.[9]M. Maumus, C. Jorgensen, D. Noël, Mesenchymal stem cells in regenerative med-icine applied to rheumatic diseases: role of secretome and exosomes, Biochimie 95(2013) 2229 –2234 .[10] A. Mokarizadeh, N. Delirezh, A. Morshedi, G. Mosayebi, A.-A. Farshid, K. Mardani,Microvesicles derived from mesenchymal stem cells: potent organelles for inductionof tolerogenic signaling, Immunol. Lett. 147 (2012) 47 –54.[11] C. Yang, P.D. Robbins, Immunosuppressive exosomes: a new approach for treatingarthritis, Int. J. Rheum 2012 (2012) .[12] F. Fazekas, F. Deisenhammer, S. Strasser-Fuchs, G. Nahler, B. Mamoli, A.I.i.M.S.S.Group, Randomised placebo-controlled trial of monthly intravenous im-
munoglobulin therapy in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, Lancet 349 (1997)589–593.[13] A.E. Warrington, A.J. Bieber, B. Ciric, L.R. Pease, V. Van Keulen, M. Rodriguez, Arecombinant human IgM promotes myelin repair after a single, very low dose, J.Neurosci. Res. 85 (2007) 967 –976.[14] A.E. Warrington, K. Asakura, A.J. Bieber, B. Ciric, V. Van Keulen, S.V. Kaveri,R.A. Kyle, L.R. Pease, M. Rodriguez, Human monoclonal antibodies reactive tooligodendrocytes promote remyelination in a model of multiple sclerosis, Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. 97 (2000) 6820 –6825 .[15] B. Nastasijevic, B.R. Wright, J. Smestad, A.E. Warrington, M. Rodriguez, L.J. MaherIII, Remyelination induced by a DNA aptamer in a mouse model of multiplesclerosis, PLoS One 7 (2012) e39595 .[16] M. Soleimani, S. Nadri, A protocol for isolation and culture of mesenchymal stemcells from mouse bone marrow, Nat. Protoc. 4 (2009) 102 –106.
[17] M. Baddoo, K. Hill, R. Wilkinson, D. Gaupp, C. Hughes, G.C. Kopen, D.G. Phinney,Characterization of mesenchymal stem cells isolated from murine bone marrow bynegative selection, J. Cell. Biochem. 89 (2003) 1235 –1249 .[18] R.J. Lobb, M. Becker, S.W. Wen, C.S. Wong, A.P. Wiegmans, A. Leimgruber,A. Möller, Optimized exosome isolation protocol for cell culture supernatant andhuman plasma, J. Extracell Vesicles 4 (2015) .[19] M. Ebrahimian, M. Hashemi, M. Maleki, K. Abnous, G. Hashemitabar, M. Ramezani,A. Haghparast, Induction of a balanced Th1/Th2 immune responses by co-deliveryof PLGA/ovalbumin nanospheres and CpG ODNs/PEI-SWCNT nanoparticles asTLR9 agonist in BALB/c mice, Int. J. Pharm. 515 (2016) 708 –720.[20] S. El-Andaloussi, Y. Lee, S. Lakhal-Littleton, J. Li, Y. Seow, C. Gardiner, L. Alvarez-Erviti, I.L. Sargent, M.J. Wood, Exosome-mediated delivery of siRNA in vitro and invivo, Nat. Protoc. 7 (2012) 2112 –2126 .
vivo, Nat. Protoc. 7 (2012) 2112 –2126 .[21] L. Horstmann, H. Schmid, A.P. Heinen, F.C. Kurschus, H.B. Dick, S.C. Joachim,Inﬂammatory demyelination induces glia alterations and ganglion cell loss in theretina of an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model, J.Neuroin ﬂammation 10 (2013) 888 .[22] S. Sloka, L.M. Metz, W. Hader, Y. Starreveld, V.W. Yong, Reduction of microglialactivity in a model of multiple sclerosis by dipyridamole, J. Neuroin ﬂammation 10(2013) 855 .[23] S. Mi, R.H. Miller, W. Tang, X. Lee, B. Hu, W. Wu, Y. Zhang, C.B. Shields, Y. Zhang,S. Miklasz, Promotion of central nervous system remyelination by induced di ﬀer-entiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells, Ann. Neurol. O ﬀ. J. Am. Neurol. Assoc.Child Neurol. Soc 65 (2009) 304 –315.[24] J. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Wang, G. Yang, Exosome mediated delivery of miR-124 promotes neurogenesis after ischemia, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 7 (2017)
278–287.[25] D. Ha, N. Yang, V. Nadithe, Exosomes as therapeutic drug carriers and deliveryvehicles across biological membranes: current perspectives and future challenges,Acta Pharm. Sin. B 6 (2016) 287 –296.
Acta Pharm. Sin. B 6 (2016) 287 –296.[26] A. Jarmalavi čiūtė, A. Pivori ūnas, Neuroprotective properties of extracellular ve-sicles derived from mesenchymal stem cells, Neural Regen. Res. 11 (2016) 904 .[27] H. Xin, Y. Li, Z. Liu, X. Wang, X. Shang, Y. Cui, Z.G. Zhang, M. Chopp, MiR-133bpromotes neural plasticity and functional recovery after treatment of stroke withmultipotent mesenchymal stromal cells in rats via transfer of exosome-enrichedextracellular particles, Stem Cells 31 (2013) 2737 –2746 .[28] T. Katsuda, R. Tsuchiya, N. Kosaka, Y. Yoshioka, K. Takagaki, K. Oki, F. Takeshita,Y. Sakai, M. Kuroda, T. Ochiya, Human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stemcells secrete functional neprilysin-bound exosomes, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013) 1197 .[29] J.L. Williams, N.N. Gatson, K.M. Smith, A. Almad, D.M. McTigue, C.C. Whitacre,Serum exosomes in pregnancy-associated immune modulation and neuroprotectionduring CNS autoimmunity, Clin. Immunol. 149 (2013) 236 –243.
[30] I. Selmaj, M.P. Mycko, C.S. Raine, K.W. Selmaj, The role of exosomes in CNS in-ﬂammation and their involvement in multiple sclerosis, J. Neuroimmunol. 306(2017) 1 –10.[31] R. Blazquez, F.M. Sanchez-Margallo, O. de la Rosa, W. Dalemans, V. Álvarez,R. Tarazona, J.G. Casado, Immunomodulatory potential of human adipose me-senchymal stem cells derived exosomes on in vitro stimulated T cells, Front.Immunol. 5 (2014) 556 .[32] W. Li, X. Lan, Aptamer oligonucleotides: novel potential therapeutic agents in au-toimmune disease, Nucleic Acid Ther 25 (2015) 173 –179.[33] F.H. Shamili, H.R. Bayegi, Z. Salmasi, K. Sadri, M. Mahmoudi, M. Kalantari,M. Ramezani, K. Abnous, Exosomes derived from TRAIL-engineered mesenchymalstem cells with e ﬀective anti-tumor activity in a mouse melanoma model, Int. J.Pharm. 549 (2018) 218 .[34] D. Centonze, L. Muzio, S. Rossi, R. Furlan, G. Bernardi, G. Martino, The link be-tween in ﬂammation, synaptic transmission and neurodegeneration in multiple
sclerosis, Cell Death Di ﬀer. 17 (2010) 1083 .[35] L. Haider, C. Simeonidou, G. Steinberger, S. Hametner, N. Grigoriadis, G. Deretzi, G.G. Kovacs, A. Kutzelnigg, H. Lassmann, J.M. Frischer, Multiple sclerosis deep greymatter: the relation between demyelination, neurodegeneration, in ﬂammation andiron, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, (2014) (jnnp-2014-307712).[36] H. Lassmann, J. van Horssen, The molecular basis of neurodegeneration in multiplesclerosis, FEBS Lett. 585 (2011) 3715 –3723 .[37] L.K. Peterson, R.S. Fujinami, In ﬂammation, demyelination, neurodegeneration andneuroprotection in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis, J. Neuroimmunol. 184(2007) 37 –44.[38] H. Hofstetter, R. Gold, H. Hartung, Th17 cells in MS and experimental autoimmuneencephalomyelitis, Int. MS J 16 (2009) 12 –18.[39] Á.C. Murphy, S.J. Lalor, M.A. Lynch, K.H. Mills, In ﬁltration of Th1 and Th17 cellsand activation of microglia in the CNS during the course of experimental auto-
immune encephalomyelitis, Brain Behav. Immun. 24 (2010) 641 –651.[40] C.A. Dendrou, L. Fugger, M.A. Friese, Immunopathology of multiple sclerosis, Nat.Rev. Immunol 15 (2015) 545 .[41] W. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Han, L. Yu, Y. Li, Z. Lu, H. Li, Z. Liu, C. Shi, F. Duan,Immunomodulatory e ﬀects of mesenchymal stromal cells-derived exosome,Immunol. Res. 64 (2016) 831 –840.[42] A. Mokarizadeh, N. Delirezh, A. Morshedi, G. Mosayebi, A.-A. Farshid, B. Dalir-Naghadeh, Phenotypic modulation of auto-reactive cells by insertion of tolerogenicmolecules via MSC-derived exosomes, Vet. Res. Forum (2012) 257 Faculty ofVeterinary Medicine, Urmia University, Urmia, Iran.F. Hosseini Shamili, et al.Journal of Controlled Release 299 (2019) 149–164164
