452Review1364-6613/99/$ – see front matter © 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.      PII: S1364-6613(99)01403-5Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999The view that physical beauty is arbitrary, whimsical andunrelated to biological function has characterized much ofthe social scientific study of attractiveness and social com-mentary on the topic1. Evolutionary theory provides reasonsto be very skeptical of this view. Like other species, humanshave an evolutionary history during which selection-guidedphenotypic and genotypic changes occurred2–5. Although selec-tion is not the only cause of evolution, it isthe only cause of
adaptations. Like the rest of the body, the human brain is theresult of multiple adaptations, solutions to problems that in-fluenced the reproductive success (RS) of individuals over theevolutionary history of the species. One such problem was ob-taining a mate who would promote one’s own genetic survivalby reproducing successfully. Selection should have favoredpsychological features that (1) evaluated observable bodilytraits that varied with mate value (what an individual bringsto a relationship that affects the partner’s RS), and (2) foundattractive those traits connoting high mate value. Selectionfavors functionally specific adaptations rather than general-purpose ones, because only specialized mechanisms can solvethe specific problems that are the forces of selection (e.g. ob-taining a mate who has genes that promote offspring survival).When members of a species discriminate between potentialmates with regard to their physical appearance, as humans do,a reasonable working
appearance, as humans do,a reasonable working hypothesis is that the discriminationreflects special-purpose adaptations responsive to cues that hadmate value in evolutionary history
6. Recent evidence providesconsiderable support for this working hypothesis.Attractiveness as a health certificateFacial attractiveness assessments are more similar than dif-ferent across sexes and sexual orientations, ethnic groups, andages from infants to the elderly7–12, with correlations betweentwo raters’ judgments typically in the range 0.3–0.5. Evenwithin and between human groups with little or no contactwith Western standards of beauty, there is appreciable agree-ment in facial attractiveness ratings11. Naturally, differentsocieties do not place precisely the same value on all traits(and, as we indicate below, should not be expected to do sofrom an evolutionary perspective). However, the fact that hu-mans share views about what features are attractive suggeststhat there are species-typical psychological adaptations.Evolutionary psychologists studying physical attraction
and attractiveness have been inspired by Donald Symons’sbook, The Evolution of Human Sexuality , which presentedevidence that human attractiveness evolved because of matepreference for healthy and fertile mates13. Evenly colored,
evidence that human attractiveness evolved because of matepreference for healthy and fertile mates13. Evenly colored,
smooth, pliant skin, clear eyes and shiny hair are viewed asattractive, as well as signs of being disease-free. In its broadestsense, however, health status is not merely the presence orabsence of disease. Rather, it can be defined as ‘phenotypiccondition’ – the ability to acquire and allocate resources efficiently and effectively to activities that enhance survivaland reproduction (i.e. the ability to garner and convert energyinto returns in evolutionary fitness). By this view, twopathogen-free individuals who differ in metabolic efficiency(and, therefore, the fitness returns on energy expenditure)differ in health status. Moreover, two individuals who differ intheir ability to accrue and allocate energy effectively mightallocate similar resources to immune function and have simi-lar rates of disease, yet one could have a greater ability to con-vert energy into fitness returns and, therefore, have betterphenotypic condition (everything else being equal). Overallcondition can be
else being equal). Overallcondition can be affected by a number of factors, includingmutations, pathogens, toxins and other insults experiencedduring development. Because mutations and the ability toresist pathogens and toxins can be heritable, overall phenotypiccondition is also expected to be partly heritable.Facial attractiveness
Randy Thornhill and Steven W . Gangestad Humans in societies around the world discriminate between potential mates on the
basis of attractiveness in ways that can dramatically affect their lives. From anevolutionary perspective, a reasonable working hypothesis is that the psychologicalmechanisms underlying attractiveness judgments are adaptations that have evolved inthe service of choosing a mate so as to increase gene propagation throughoutevolutionary history. The main hypothesis that has directed evolutionary psychologyresearch into facial attractiveness is that these judgments reflect information aboutwhat can be broadly defined as an individual’s health. This has been investigated byexamining whether attractiveness judgments show special design for detecting cuesthat allow us to make assessments of overall phenotypic condition. This reviewexamines the three major lines of research that have been pursued in order to answerthe question of whether attractiveness reflects non-obvious indicators of phenotypiccondition. These are studies that have examined facial symmetry, averageness, andsecondary sex
facial symmetry, averageness, andsecondary sex characteristics as hormone markers.
R. Thornhill is at theDepartment ofBiology, University ofNew Mexico,Albuquerque,NM 87131-1091,USA.S.W. Gangestad is atthe Department ofPsychology, Universityof New Mexico,Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.tel: +1 505 277 2804fax: +1 505 277 0304email:rthorn@unm.edu;sgangest@unm.eduThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractiveness
Assessments of the phenotypic condition of others prob-ably affected individual RS in all types of social alliancesduring human evolutionary history, not just mate choices2.Accordingly, attractiveness assessments could reveal infor-mation about an individual’s phenotypic condition thatmatter in terms of decisions about nepotistic investment(e.g. whether to invest parental care in a particular offspring;attractive and healthy children receive more parental care2,10,14)and decisions about reciprocity. The term reciprocity refersto the consequences of one’s choice of friends and other non-mate social allies – unhealthy allies might not survive to reci-procate one’s aid2. Physical attractiveness shows consistencyacross the life cycle from childhood through to adulthood12,15,16
and, therefore, attractiveness at any age potentially predictshealth at later ages. As is expected from this view, the pre-diction that attractive people of all ages receive favorable treat-ment from others is upheld by the available evidence10,12,17,18.The hypothesis that beauty is associated with health hasbeen examined in a number of studies. In one recent largestudy, men’s and women’s attractiveness assessed during theteenage years was compared with health assessed years later19and no relationship was found. In another study, the resultsweakly supported a relationship20. Although these findings
20. Although these findingsmight appear to be damaging to the view that attractivenessperceptions have evolved as assessments of health, they are, infact, not directly relevant. Firstly, the concept of health statusconsidered here is a broad one, as noted above, not merelydisease incidence. Secondly, this perspective predicts thatattractiveness should have been related to phenotypic con-dition in environments of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA) –the evolutionary environments over the last several millionyears that were the selective forces that ultimately causedhuman-specific adaptations21–23. Because modern humanslive in environments replete with evolutionary novelty (e.g.modern contraception, modern medicine and middle-agedwomen who appear nubile because of nulliparity), facial attrac-tiveness and male and female RS might not be associated tothe same extent as previously.How, then, can scientists assess the hypothesis that attrac-
tiveness evolved as an assessment of phenotypic condition?One strategy is to examine health in human environmentsthat are most similar to the EEA. In the Ache Indians ofParaguay, a hunter-gatherer society, Hill and Hurtado24foundthat facially attractive women have 1.2 times the fertility ofwomen with average attractiveness (with age-controlledgroups). Interpretation of this result requires further investi-gation, as the impact of attractiveness on mating might haveaffected fertility; thus, this relationship might not be a resultof an association between health and attractiveness. The factthat, across many countries, attractiveness is most importantas a mate-choice criterion in areas where parasites are mostprevalent25is also consistent with attractiveness being a healthcertificate, but is indirect evidence.A second and more powerful strategy is to take an adapta-
tionist approach. The adaptationist attempts to answer ques-tions of the form ‘what is the function of this feature?’ by aprocess of reverse engineering22,26,27. Features that qualify asadaptations tend to exhibit special design. They possess el-ements that render them effective solutions to specific adap-tive problems. Reverse engineering shows that a feature pos-sesses special design as a solution for a particular adaptive
problem. Special design not only provides evidence that thefeature is an adaptation but also evidence of what the fea-ture is an adaptation for. To assess the hypothesis that facialattractiveness judgments evolved as assessments of overallphenotypic condition, the adaptationist asks whether thesejudgments possess elements revealing that they would havefunctioned as assessments of overall phenotypic conditionin historical environments.453Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999Review Thornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractivenessFour early experimental studies (Refs a–d) examined attractiveness ratings of symmetricalfaces created by aligning a hemi-face with its mirror reflection. [Mealey et al. (Ref. e)
used hemi-face composites to obtain symmetry judgments but did not rate them for at-tractiveness]. Figure 1 in the main article illustrates abnormalities in both face shapeoutline (size, width and width-to-height ratio, 4th row) and face-feature size (3rd and4th rows) in these chimaeric faces. In another study, Swaddle and Cuthill (Ref. f) com-bined original full facial images and their mirror images to construct symmetrical faces,whose attractiveness was compared with the asymmetric original faces. This procedurecan generate high numbers of skin blemishes in symmetrical faces (e.g. a face with a darkspot on one cheek combined with its mirror image yields paler spots on both cheeks)(Ref. g). Moreover, this study did not control facial expression and raters saw only internalfeatures of the face, not certain secondary sexual features (jaw, chin) that are potentiallyimportant in symmetry assessment (Ref. h)
In other studies, naturally varying asymmetry measured on digitized faces has beencorrelated with attractiveness judgments. In two studies, symmetry predicted attractiveness(Refs i,j) whereas others have yielded, on average, very small associations between sym-metry and attractiveness (Refs d,k,l). Although symmetry appears to contribute to facialattractiveness, its relative effect could be small, an issue that needs to be explored infuture research.A final approach compares ratings of facial symmetry with independent facial attrac-tiveness ratings (Refs h,m). Perceived symmetry and attractiveness covary, possiblybecause people often associate symmetry and beauty (Ref. n).ReferencesaLanglois, J.H. and Roggman, L.A. (1990) Attractive faces are only average Psychol. Sci. 1,115–121bLanglois, J.H., Roggman, L.A. and Musselman, L. (1994) What is average and what is notaverage about attractive faces? Psychol. Sci. 5, 214–219
cSamuels, C.A. et al. (1994) Facial aesthetics: babies prefer attractiveness to symmetry Perception23, 823–831dKowner, R. (1996) Facial asymmetry and attractiveness judgment in developmental perspectiveJ. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perf. 22, 662–675eMealey, L., Bridgstock, R. and Townsend, G.C. (1999) Symmetry and perceived facialattractiveness: a monozygotic co-twin comparison J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76, 157–165fSwaddle, J.P. and Cuthill, I.C. (1995) Asymmetry and human facial attractiveness: symmetrymay not always be beautiful Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 261, 111–116gPerrett, D.I. et al. Symmetry and human facial attractiveness Evol. Hum. Behav. (in press)hRhodes, G. et al. (1998) Facial symmetry and the perception of beauty Psychomet. Bull. Rev.5, 659–669iGrammer, K. and Thornhill, R. (1994) Human ( Homo sapiens ) facial attractiveness and sexualselection: the role of symmetry and averageness J. Comp. Psychol. 108, 233–242
jScheib, J.E., Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1999) Facial attractiveness, symmetry, and cuesof good genes Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 266, 1913–1917kJones, D. (1996) Physical Attractiveness and the Theory of Sexual Selection: Results From FivePopulations , Museum of Anthropology, University of MichiganlShackelford, T.K. and Larsen, R.J. (1997) Facial asymmetry as an indicator of psychological,
Populations , Museum of Anthropology, University of MichiganlShackelford, T.K. and Larsen, R.J. (1997) Facial asymmetry as an indicator of psychological,emotional, and physiological distress J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 72, 456–466mZebrowitz, L.A., Voinescu, L. and Collins, M.A. (1996) ‘Wide-eyed and crooked faced’:determinants of perceived and real honesty across the lifespan Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 22,1258–1269nThornhill, R. (1998) Darwinian aesthetics, in Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology: Ideas,Issues and Applications (Crawford, C. and Krebs, D. eds), pp. 543–572, Erlbaum Box 1. Other approaches to the study offacial symmetry
Review454Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999As we have seen, some attractive features clearly connotehealth. These include clear eyes and smooth skin, as well asnon-facial features such as average body mass index28. Thefact that people attribute greater health to attractive indi-viduals19,29,30is consistent with attractiveness being the resultof design that certifies health. But, as noted above, health isa broad notion in this context. Evolutionary psychologists haveattempted to address the adaptationist question of whetherattractiveness reflects less-obvious indicators of phenotypiccondition in three main contexts: the impact on ratings of attractiveness of (1) symmetry, (2) averageness and (3)non-average sexually dimorphic features.Facial symmetry
Fluctuating asymmetry (FA) is a departure from symmetry intraits that are symmetrical at the population level. It is thoughtto result from developmental instability (the inability to per-fectly express developmental design) and, therefore, reflectsmaladaptation31,32. The primary causes of FA include mu-tations, pathogens and toxins. The evolution of humans withtheir co-evolving antagonists, such as pathogens and toxins indietary plants, together with other coevolutionary antagonisms(e.g. conflicting interests between the sexes) and spontaneousmutations, accounts for genetic variation underlying devel-opmental stability33,34. Fluctuating asymmetry therefore partlyreflects the phenotypic and genetic condition of individuals.In Mayan men in Belize, FA is associated with incidence ofserious disease35. The hypothesis that attractiveness assessmentsare sensitive to facial symmetry has been tested in a numberof studies.One approach involves monozygotic co-twin compar-
One approach involves monozygotic co-twin compar-isons. Mealey et al.36compared the relative symmetry andattractiveness of faces of monozygotic (identical), young adulttwins. Co-twins are genetically, but not developmentally,identical. The image of the face of each individual of a twinpair was split vertically down the midline, and each hemi-faceduplicated, yielding left–left and right–right mirror-imagefacial depictions (‘chimaera’). Faces were rated by two groupsof observers. One group scored the similarity of mirror-imagedepictions of each twin while the other group were asked tojudge which twin in each pair was the more attractive, usingthe unaltered images. For both sexes, the twins with highersimilarity scores for their chimaera (i.e. those with moresymmetrical faces) than their co-twins were also rated as themore attractive.The approach of Mealey et al. was correlational, an im-
portant feature as the results might be particularly ecologicallyvalid because attractiveness ratings were made only on experi-mentally unaltered faces. However, because symmetry was notmanipulated in the faces that were judged for attractiveness,its effects could be due to covariation with other features.Early experimental studies found that natural, unaltered faceswere typically preferred over computerized symmetrical facesmade from them. However, more recent studies suggest thatthese effects are due to the nature of the manipulation usedto generate symmetrical faces (see Box 1).Two recent experimental studies have used improvedmethodology. Perrett et al.37used pairs of facial images com-
37used pairs of facial images com-prising an original face (Fig. 1, first row) and a more symmet-rical version of the original (Fig. 1, second row). Symmetricalfaces were rated as more attractive. In a second experiment,normal faces were also compared with the symmetrical facesfrom which they derived, but all faces contained the samefacial color. With texture and color symmetry thereby heldconstant, symmetrical faces were once again preferred. A thirdexperiment presented all faces in a haphazard order ratherthan in pairs to reduce the chances of raters’ awareness thatsymmetry was being manipulated. Again, the result thatsymmetrical faces were preferred was replicated.
Because faces are not actually perfectly symmetrical, ratersin these studies could have preferred symmetry as a result ofa preference for novelty rather than for symmetry per se . Toaddress this possibility, Rhodes et al.38created symmetricalThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractivenessFig. 1. Manipulations of facial symmetry. Symmetrical faces were created by averagingmore than 200 corresponding facial locations on the two sides of the face, and then remap-ping the original face to render it symmetrical. With this procedure, left–right asymmetriesin face color or texture remain in the symmetrical image, giving it ecological validity. Firstrow: original faces. Second row: symmetrical faces made from techniques in Perrett et al. (in
press). Third row: chimaeric faces made by combining the left side of the original face withits mirror reflection. Fourth row: same as third row except right side of original face wasused (see text for explanation). (Reproduced, with permission, from Ref. 37.)
455Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999Reviewfaces by combining mirror images and original face texturesbut, unlike Swaddle and Cuthill39(and see Box 1), removed the
artifact of double blemishes by retouching the images. A ques-tion of particular interest was whether people can detect subtledifferences in facial asymmetry, which then influence attrac-tiveness ratings. Four versions of each face were created: anormal face, a perfectly symmetrical face, a high-symmetryface (made by reducing the difference between the perfectlysymmetrical face and the normal face by 50%) and a low-symmetry face (made by increasing the difference by 50%).Raters assessed faces for attractiveness and for appeal as a long-term mate. The degree of symmetry affected both judgmentsfor both sexes. Moreover, attractiveness covaried with the de-gree of symmetry, a finding that cannot be explained by a pref-erence for novelty. There were no sex differences in the attrac-tiveness-rating of symmetry, but symmetry had greater effectson men’s preferences for long-term mates than on women’s.Whereas these experiments demonstrate the direct effects
of symmetry on attractiveness, other research suggests thatsymmetry can be associated with facial attractiveness for rea-sons other than direct effects of symmetry per se . In one study,Scheib et al.40asked women to rate for attractiveness either fullmale faces or half-faces (the other half was not shown). Half-faces contain little symmetry information, yet half-face attrac-tiveness covaried with measured facial symmetry just as highlyas full-face attractiveness. Facial symmetry covaried with acomposite of men’s lower face length and cheekbone promi-nence (with symmetrical men possessing longer lower facesrelative to total face length and greater cheekbone promi-nence), two features thought to be affected by male hormones(see below). These features also predicted men’s attractiveness.In summary, the amount of variance in facial attractivenessaccounted for by the direct effects of symmetry is not currentlyknown, but current evidence suggests that it could be small.Enquist and Arak
Enquist and Arak41and Johnstone42offered an alternativeto the ‘symmetry reflects condition’ account, arguing that sym-metry is more readily perceived by the visual system. Thus, thepreference for symmetry is not the result of special-purposedesign of the preference itself, but is merely a by-product of thedesign of the perceptual system. Perhaps the clearest evidenceagainst this view is that women also prefer the scent of sym-metrical men43–45. The symmetry measured in these studieswas body, not facial, symmetry; however, this is irrelevant inthe present context because, if symmetry were preferred as aby-product of the visual processing system, there would be noreason to expect an olfactory preference for symmetrical males.However, preference for correlated condition cues (e.g. scent)would not be surprising if symmetry were a cue for condition.Facial averagenessSymons13hypothesized that facial averageness is attractive be-
cause averageness is associated with above-average performancein tasks such as chewing and breathing. In other words, naturalselection has a stabilizing effect on facial features (i.e. favorsthe mean) and, therefore, averageness is associated with goodphenotypic condition. Thornhill and Gangestad2suggestedthat preference for average trait values in some facial features(not the secondary sex traits) could have evolved because, oncontinuously distributed, heritable traits the average denotesgenetic heterozygosity. Heterozygosity could signal an outbredmate or provide genetic diversity in defense against parasites.In fact, studies indicate that average faces are attractive but canbe improved upon by specific non-average features (Box 2).The handicap principle
In fact, studies indicate that average faces are attractive but canbe improved upon by specific non-average features (Box 2).The handicap principleThe perpetual ‘beauty contests’ of human evolutionary historywould be expected to have selected signal-receiving adaptationsas well as adaptations in the outgoing signals. Evolutionarypsychology addresses both the immediate workings of psycho-logical adaptations responsible for physical attractivenessjudgments, as well as adaptations that function to create,during development, the physical features that are judged.The most prominent evolutionary theory of social signals,
including sexual signals, is the handicap principle proposed byAmotz Zahavi in 1975 (Ref. 46). It explains the evolutionof extravagant, and thus costly, display traits as honest signalsof the ability to deal with environmental problems throughoutevolutionary history. A handicap is honest in the sense thatonly high-quality individuals can afford it. It ‘costs’ high-qualitypeacocks less to produce and carry around an extra inch of tailthan it ‘costs’ low-quality peacocks. Coevolution of the signal-ing trait and signal reception results in a situation in which itpays high-quality, but not low-quality, individuals to developfully the costly trait (paid for by the preferences of others,e.g. mate preferences47). Handicap traits usually signal both thephenotypic and genotypic quality of the bearer: conditionalmost always shows genetic variation among individuals(i.e. is heritable) and handicaps necessarily capture the geneticvariance in condition48.
48.Although some traits impose purely physiological costs(e.g. the energy costs of growing an extravagant peacock tail),some handicap traits have socially mediated costs. For exam-ple, a male who throws himself into the fray of competitionagainst other males can suffer fitness costs for doing so. Thosemales who are in best condition and who, therefore, are bestequipped to win intrasexual competitions, suffer fewer costs,which renders willingness to engage in such competitions anhonest signal of condition. In the Harris sparrow, males whopossess a larger chest badge enjoy a mating advantage. A largebadge itself might not be particularly costly to produce, exceptfor the fact that males who possess one are the targets of othermales’ aggression; in a sense, a large badge expresses a ‘will-ingness’ to engage in intrasexual competitions. Hence, a largebadge pays only for males who are intrasexually competitive,as it honestly signals condition49.Male facial sex-hormone markers
49.Male facial sex-hormone markersIn many species, including humans, testosterone productionand metabolism mobilizes resources for the efforts of males toattract and compete for mates49,50. It results in increased muscu-lature and energy utilization through muscular activity51and,accordingly, draws resources away from other activities, such asimmune function52. In men, testosterone levels increase aftercompetitive success, suggesting that its production is sensitive tocues about ability to compete with other males53. Testosteronemetabolism might be less costly for males who are better ableto win intrasexual competitions and, therefore, testosteroneand its phenotypic effects could be honest signals of condition.Testosterone affects a number of male facial features. Inpubertal males, facilitated by a high testosterone-to-estrogenThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractiveness
Review456Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999ratio, the cheekbones, mandibles and chin grow laterally, thebones of the eyebrow ridges and central face grow forward,and the lower facial bones lengthen4,34. Large size of these malesexually dimorphic facial traits is hypothesized to be an honestsignal of ability to engage in intrasexual confrontation2,34, andthey also contribute to men’s perceived facial dominance54.Testosterone levels in teenage boys (13 and 15 year olds)correlate positively with ratings of dominance based purelyon post-adolescence facial photographs55. However, any asso-ciations between adult circulating levels of testosterone itself,or its metabolites, and facial features remain unknown.Trade-offs in facial traitsStudies examining the associations between attractiveness andmasculine features yield mixed findings. Some show preferencefor masculine facial features56, whereas others find preference
56, whereas others find preferencefor near-average or feminized facial features57–59. Given the sig-naling theory just presented, what could be the reason for this?Although masculine features might honestly signal male intra-sexual competitive ability, they do not honestly signal all traitsvalued in a male mate. Women rate men with slightly feminizedfaces as more cooperative and honest, and as good parents57.Indeed, evidence suggests that these attributions are valid60andif all else is equal, these traits will be attractive to women61.The ‘multiple fitness model’ suggested by Cunninghamet al.7,59proposes that attractiveness varies across multiple di-
mensions, rather than a single dimension, with each featurepromising a different aspect of mate value. For example, somepromise dominance, others promise willingness to invest in arelationship. The multiple fitness model captures the notionthat different attractive features connote different fitness bene-fits, but does not specify the evolutionary and developmentalprocesses whereby different traits honestly express differentaspects of mate value. We suggest that masculine facial featuresprovide an honest signal of phenotypic and genetic quality asa result of the imposed costs of those features, some of whichare socially mediated. Men who are successful at attractingmates because they bear honest signals of good condition,however, could actually be less likely to invest time and otherresources in offspring, and less likely to exhibit fidelity. Menwith high symmetry (and developmental stability) do appearto invest less in romantic relationships than less symmetricalmen, a difference
than less symmetricalmen, a difference thought to underlie the trade-off faced bywomen in preferring such men; the same might be true of menwith masculine features
57,59,61–64. For this reason, women mightnot prefer men who possess honest signals of good conditionunder all mating conditions, but only under those conditionsin which the benefits of choosing such men outweigh theThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractivenessInitial evidence that averageness predicts attractiveness was pro-vided by Langlois, Roggman and Musselman (Refs a,b), whofound that average faces in each sex, created by compositing digi-tized faces, are more attractive than the majority of the individualfaces from which composites were made. Critics pointed to possibleconfounds of averageness in these composites with facial symmetryand smoothness of skin (Ref. c). Rhodes and Tremewan (Ref. d)used a computerized caricature generator to vary overall facialaverageness independent of other features caused by compositinga face, and also found average faces to be attractive. Caricaturingcan exaggerate facial asymmetries, however, and thus Rhodes and
Tremewan’s result could be due to asymmetry covarying withnon-averageness. Rhodes et al. (Ref. e) eliminated the potential
can exaggerate facial asymmetries, however, and thus Rhodes andTremewan’s result could be due to asymmetry covarying withnon-averageness. Rhodes et al. (Ref. e) eliminated the potentialconfound by independently manipulating averageness and symmetryand found effects for both; averageness affects attractiveness evenin perfectly symmetrical faces. Grammer and Thornhill(Ref. f) andJones (Ref. g) found that measured facial averageness covarieswith attractiveness. The strongest effects in Jones’s cross-culturalstudy came from the Ache, a hunter-gatherer group.Penton-Voak et al. (Ref. h) noted that self-similarity is con-
founded with averageness because the facial average is moresimilar to a person’s own face than is a randomly chosen face.Participants manipulated an opposite-sex facial image along acontinuum from a self-similar image (computer generated oppo-site sex ‘sibling’), through an average face shape, to a face withopposite facial traits. No preference for self-similar or oppositefaces was found.Although average faces are attractive, many attractive featuresare non-average. In addition to the secondary sex traits that wediscuss as hormone markers (see main article), large eyes andsmall noses are preferred in women (Refs g,i). These traits are notsecondary sex traits. Large eyes might advertise health, as largeclear whites-of-eyes can reflect an absence of infection. Studiesyield mixed results concerning men’s eye size (Refs j,k). Johnstonand Oliver-Rodriguez (Ref. k) suggest that large eyes might bemore attractive in women than in men because small eyes imply
brow ridge growth and large eyes the arrest of that growth. Thus,while eyes per se are not secondary sex traits, their appearancecould be affected by sex-typical sex hormones. Exactly what features contribute to the averageness effect remains unclear.ReferencesaLanglois, J.H. and Roggman, L.A. (1990) Attractive faces are onlyaverage Psychol. Sci. 1, 115–121bLanglois, J.H., Roggman, L.A. and Musselman, L. (1994) What isaverage and what is not average about attractive faces? Psychol.Sci. 5, 214–219cAlley, T.R. and Cunningham, M.R. (1991) Averaged faces areattractive, but very attractive faces are not average Psychol. Sci. 2,123–125dRhodes, G. and Tremewan, T. (1996) Averageness, exaggeration,and facial attractiveness Psychol. Sci. 7, 105–110eRhodes, G., Sumich, A. and Byatt, G. (1999) Are average facialconfigurations only attractive because of their symmetry? Psychol.Sci. 10, 52–58fGrammer, K. and Thornhill, R. (1994) Human ( Homo sapiens ) facial
attractiveness and sexual selection: the role of symmetry andaverageness J. Comp. Psychol. 108, 233–242gJones, D. (1996) Physical Attractiveness and the Theory of SexualSelection: Results From Five Populations , Museum ofAnthropology, University of MichiganhPenton-Voak, I.S., Perrett, D.I. and Peirce, J.W. Computer graphicstudies of the role of facial similarity in judgments ofattractiveness Curr. Psychol. (in press)iCunningham, M.R. (1986) Measuring the physical in physicalattractiveness: quasi-experiments on the sociobiology of femalefacial beauty J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 50, 925–935jCunningham, M.R., Barbee, A.P. and Pike, C.L. (1990) What do womenwant? Facialmetric assessment of multiple motives in the perceptionof male physical attractiveness J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 59, 61–72kJohnston, V.S. and Oliver-Rodriguez, J.C. (1997) Facial beauty andthe late positive component of event-related potentials J. Sex Res.34, 188–198Box 2. Facial averageness: empirical studies
457Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999Reviewcosts of that choice. Thus, a feminized lower face on a manmight honestly signal an individual who is willing to investtime and other resources in a relationship, and who willshow fidelity, because the bearer has limited opportunity toattract multiple mates or a woman with high-mate value.Such a man might be preferred by some women under manyconditions, as illustrated in the next section.Preference changes during the menstrual cycle
Preference changes during the menstrual cycleWomen’s preferences shift during the menstrual cycle. Thefirst such shift to be demonstrated involves the olfactory pref-erence that women have for the scent of symmetrical men(mentioned above). This preference is specific to normallyovulating women (those not using the contraceptive pill) dur-ing the high-fertility phase of their menstrual cycle (the mid-to-late follicular phase). Women do not exhibit this preferenceduring the low-fertility, luteal phase or when using a contra-ceptive pill43–45. This pattern makes sense if the costs and
43–45. This pattern makes sense if the costs andbenefits of sexual encounters with men of different character-istics also vary during the cycle. Women might possess a psy-chological adaptation for pursuing mates with good genes fortheir offspring (including by ‘extra-pair’ sex – that outside theirusual pair bond), particularly during the fertile phase of theircycle. However, as extra-pair sex can be costly and there is noopportunity for obtaining genetic benefits outside the fertilephase, this preference would not pay during the luteal phase.Subsequent research showed a similar pattern of shift inthe preference for facial features. Penton-Voak et al. used com-puter graphics to manipulate the masculinity or femininityof a composite male face by exaggerating or reducing theshape differences between male and female average faces,thereby manipulating the sexually dimorphic features affectedby testosterone and estrogen58. In one experiment in this study,
58. In one experiment in this study,normally ovulating Japanese women preferred more femi-nized faces of both Caucasian and Japanese men in the low-conception phases of their cycles58. By contrast, women inthe fertile phase preferred more masculine (in actuality, near-average) faces. Women using the contraceptive pill did notshow this preference shift. In a second experiment, UK womenselected their most attractive male face for short-term andlong-term relationships. For a short-term mate, womenshowed a preference shift towards greater masculinizationduring the high-fertility phase. For a long-term mate, womendid not show this shift. Again, these results make sense ifmasculinization is an honest signal of condition, albeit a signof less willingness to invest. Thus, selection could have de-signed preferences to shift when the relative costs and benefitsof mating with a male of best condition varied, particularlyin short-term, extra-pair relationships.
In a related electrophysiological study, Oliver-Rodriguezet al.65found that the size of the P300 response of the evokedpotential (a positive potential around 300 ms following pre-sentation of a stimulus, which covaries with the emotionalsalience of the stimulus) of women in the fertile phase of theircycle correlated with their rating of male facial attractiveness,but not their ratings of female beauty. During the infertilephase, women’s responses were undifferentiated and covariedwith both male and female attractiveness. This thereforeprovides additional evidence that women’s responses to malefaces change during the menstrual cycle.These results suggest that symmetry and honest signalsof quality associated with androgens could tap common traits.As noted, provisional evidence suggests an association betweensymmetry and certain male facial hormone markers40; however,
of quality associated with androgens could tap common traits.As noted, provisional evidence suggests an association betweensymmetry and certain male facial hormone markers40; however,more evidence is needed. The nature of the chemical signalin male sweat in relation to developmental stability is not yetunderstood. One possibility is that it is related to individualvariation in testosterone metabolism. Women’s reactions toandrogens in male sweat change during the menstrual cycle,with more favorable reactions near mid-cycle66.Individual differences in women’s preferences
66.Individual differences in women’s preferencesThe view that cues suggest multiple valued traits, which mightbe differentially valued in varying circumstances, could yieldpredictions about how other factors affect attractiveness judg-ments. For example, women vary in motivation for short-termmating relationships. These individual differences probablyreflect a conditional mating strategy, with women pursuingalternate mating tactics (i.e. short-term mating or long-termmating) depending on cues, because those cues, such as theamount of resources possessed by men67, or the absence of thefather during upbringing68, predicted the tactics’ effectivenessin evolutionary history. Women pursuing short-term matesvalue physical attractiveness more than those pursuing long-term mates64,69,70. Future research could address the hypothesis
that women disposed to engage in short-term relationshipsparticularly prefer honest facial signals of health and condi-tion, whereas women disposed to engage in long-term rela-tionships only have a particular preference for facial featuresassociated with willingness to invest.Other predictions are also possible. It might be thatwomen who differ in their need for protection from men, who,by sexual coercion, might circumvent the women’s mate pref-erences71, also differ in their standards of attractiveness as aresult of adaptation that adjusts these standards. The same maybe true for women who differ in mate value to men (owing toa differential in age or attractiveness, for example)72.Female facial sex-hormone markersEstrogen could be a handicapping sex hormone for women ina similar way that testosterone acts for men30. Estrogen signals
30. Estrogen signalsthe readiness of a woman to exert reproductive effort and istherefore a signal of fertility. Because estrogen can be expectedto draw resources away from other bodily functions (e.g.immune function or repair mechanisms), it could affect mor-tality. The signal value of estrogen as a fertility cue couldtherefore result in the evolution of estrogen displays and thecapacity to produce it beyond its fertility value.A high estrogen-to-testosterone ratio in pubertal femalesappears to cap the growth of the bony structures that are rela-tively large in typical male faces, just as it caps the growth of thelong bones of the body. It also results in enlargement of the lipsand upper cheek area by fat deposition, similar to the estrogen-mediated fat deposition in the thighs, buttocks and breasts30. Avariety of experimental methods have consistently shown thatthe most attractive female faces are associated with small ness in
the bony features of the lower face, a flat middle face, large lips,and width and height in the cheeks (see Box 3). These featuresappear to be estrogen-dependent, although more evidence onprecisely how they covary with estrogen levels is needed.Thornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractiveness
Review458Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999Youth is a salient aspect of facial attractiveness in bothsexes, but this preference is reputedly stronger in men becausethe effects of age on female fertility and reproductive valuemean that female mate value is more tightly linked to age11,13,73.For reasons not fully understood from life-history theory, theratio of female estrogen to androgen production changes withage and female faces masculinize with age. Female hormonemarkers are thus also age cues and are probably preferredpartly for that reason.Men are widely thought to place greater importance onphysical attractiveness cues than do women in mating andromance because of its value as an age cue13,74,75. The magni-
13,74,75. The magni-tude of any sex difference, however, must be evaluated in thelight of variation among women in conception risk and pursuitof short-term relationships. Women’s ratings of facial attrac-tiveness of men appear to be more variable than men’s ratingsof women70, perhaps because women’s ratings reflect personalcircumstances more than men’s (menstrual-cycle point, pur-suit of short- versus long-term relationships). It might alsoreflect variable willingness to trade off between physical attrac-tiveness (and thus heritable benefits from mate choice) andmaterial benefits (and willingness to provide those benefits)in mate choice.Mate-choice copying
Mate-choice copyingFemales and males can choose mates independently of othersame-sex individuals’ mate choices, or they can copy the matechoices of these individuals. There is now solid evidence thatfemales of certain species of birds and fish strategically copythe mate choice of conspecific females when discriminationbetween potential mates is based on less than reliable cues,and when other females have greater knowledge of males76,77.Human studies suggest that women also copy mate choices,and more so than men (perhaps because women base attrac-tiveness ratings on fallible cues of behavioral tendencies morethan men do)78. Future research could examine whether female
78. Future research could examine whether femalecopying possesses special design features; for example, is itparticularly strong when differences between potential matesare small and when potential and willingness to invest (traitsthat are not directly observed) are favored? Is copying lesspotent when genetic quality might be favored (in traits forwhich there could be more-reliable honest signals), for ex-ample, during the high-fertility phase of the menstrual cycleand in short-term mating contexts?Conclusions
The adaptationist examines traits for evidence of special design:specialized features that could reveal what function, if any,the trait served in evolutionary history and led to its selection.People make aesthetic judgments of others, which has animportant affect on mate and friendship choice. From anadaptationist perspective, it would be odd if the psychologicalfeatures responsible for these discriminations did not servesome function in humans’ evolutionary past. Adaptationistshave examined a number of hypotheses subsumed under thegeneral notion that facial-attractiveness judgments serve to dis-criminate an individual’s phenotypic condition and, broadlyspeaking, health status. This review has suggested that theseareas of research have been fruitful. Some areas have foundconsiderable support for particular hypotheses (e.g. that facialsymmetry increases attractiveness and an average face is at-tractive, even if not the most attractive). Other areas have ledresearchers to identify
Other areas have ledresearchers to identify interesting patterns of preferences thatare more complex than was initially anticipated (e.g. thatwomen’s preference for masculine features is not unconditionalThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractiveness
Cunningham and colleagues (Refs a,b) first showed the importance of sex-specific facial
Cunningham and colleagues (Refs a,b) first showed the importance of sex-specific facialhormone markers in attractiveness judgments by measuring features in facial photos withcalipers (also Ref. c). Johnston and Franklin (Ref. d) instructed American men to createtheir prototype of a beautiful adult female face using facial-feature options provided incomputer images. The beautiful faces had extreme secondary sex traits (e.g. full lips andhigh cheekbones). Johnston (Ref. e) has subsequently achieved the same results with menworldwide with access to the World Wide Web. Perrett et al. (Ref. f) used computer
techniques to exaggerate the difference between the features of a facial composite of alarge sample of women and the features of a composite made from faces of the attractivesubset of the same sample. In both the UK and Japan, the most attractive faces were morefeminine than average (Ref. g). Using measured features, Jones (Ref. h) found similar,but somewhat mixed, results in a number of human societies, including hunter-gathererswith limited Western contact (see also Refs i,j). Female fashion models and TV actresses,but not male models, have smaller lower faces than typical, and images of ‘normal’ femalefaces are more attractive when the lower face size is reduced (Refs h,k). Keating foundthat women rated as attractive tend to have full lips (Ref. l).Johnston and Oliver-Rodriguez (Ref. m) recorded event-related potentials, which reflect
neural responses, of men exposed to male and female facial depictions. Highly feminizedfemale facial features produced larger potentials than average female facial features, butmale faces produced larger responses when average. Although both sexes rate feminizedfacial features as more attractive in women, only men showed a large P300 response (asignal of emotional value) to highly feminized faces (Ref. n). Other research usingpositron emission tomography (PET) showed increased regional cerebral blood flow intwo left-frontal cortical areas while men assessed attractiveness of women’s faces (Ref. o).Attractiveness and unattractiveness provoked responses in different regions.ReferencesaCunningham, M.R. (1986) Measuring the physical in physical attractiveness: quasi-experimentson the sociobiology of female facial beauty J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 50, 925–935bCunningham, M.R., Barbee, A.P. and Pike, C.L. (1990) What do women want? Facialmetric
assessment of multiple motives in the perception of male physical attractiveness J. Pers. Soc.Psychol. 59, 61–72cMichiels, G. and Sather, A.H. (1994) Determinants of facial attractiveness in a sample of whitewomen Int. J. Adult Orthodont. Orthognath. Surg. 9, 95–103dJohnston, V.S. and Franklin, M. (1993) Is beauty in the eye of the beholder? Ethol. Sociobiol.14, 183–199eJohnston, V.S. (1999) Why We Feel: The Science of Human Emotions , PerseusfPerrett, D.I., May, K.A. and Yoshikawa, S. (1994) Facial shape and judgements of femaleattractiveness Nature 368, 239–242gPerrett, D.I. et al. (1998) Effects of sexual dimorphism on facial attractiveness Nature 394,884–887hJones, D. (1996) Physical Attractiveness and the Theory of Sexual Selection: Results From FivePopulations , Museum of Anthropology, University of MichiganiCunningham, M.R. et al. (1995) Their ideas of beauty are, on the whole, the same as ours:
consistency and variability in the cross-cultural perception of female physical attractiveness J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 68, 261–279jGrammer, K. and Thornhill, R. (1994) Human ( Homo sapiens ) facial attractiveness and sexualselection: the role of symmetry and averageness J. Comp. Psychol. 108, 233–242kFerrario, V.F. et al. (1995) Facial morphometry of television actresses compared with normalwomen J. Oral Maxillo-Facial Surg. 53, 1008–1015lKeating, C. (1985) Gender and the physiognomy of dominance and attractiveness Soc.Psychol. Q. 48, 61–70mJohnston, V.S. and Oliver-Rodriguez, J.C. (1997) Facial beauty and the late positive component
Psychol. Q. 48, 61–70mJohnston, V.S. and Oliver-Rodriguez, J.C. (1997) Facial beauty and the late positive componentof event-related potentials J. Sex Res. 34, 188–198nOliver-Rodriguez, J.C., Guan, Z. and Johnston, V.S. (1999) Gender differences in late positivecomponents evoked by human faces Psychophysiology 36, 176–185oNakamura, K. et al. (1998) Neuroanatomical correlates of the assessment of facial attractivenessNeuroReport 9, 753–757Box 3. Studies of facial hormone markers
459Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 1999Reviewbut rather shifts with women’s cycle-based fertility and that,generally, slightly feminine male faces are actually preferred).Charles Darwin’s and similar hypotheses for the evolutionof mate choice – that human sexual attraction is fully ex-plained as a means of obtaining a mate that will result in off-spring with a mating advantage because of their physical at-tractiveness alone – are difficult to sustain in light of theevidence accumulated in these areas of research. Likewise, thehypotheses that human facial preferences: (1) are incidentaleffects of sensory biases arising from psychological adaptationfor general object perception41,42or another task79, (2) arisefrom adaptations that function to limit mating to conspecifics(but not high-mate-value ones) and thereby prevent mal-adaptive matings with heterospecific hominids and otherapes80, or (3) function to secure a mate that is unambiguously
of the opposite sex81, appear unable to account for the data.Although many questions remain unresolved, the path totruthful answers could yet follow the adaptationist perspective,which views the psychological features responsible for attrac-tiveness judgments as special-purpose adaptations designedto discriminate the mate value of individuals throughouthuman evolutionary history.AcknowledgementsFor helpful comments on the paper, we thank V. Johnston, I. Penton-Voakand the anonymous referees.References1Wolf, N. (1992) The Beauty Myth: How Images of Beauty Are UsedAgainst Women , Anchor2Thornhill, R. and Gangestad, S.W. (1993) Human facial beauty:averageness, symmetry and parasite resistance Hum. Nat . 4, 237–2693Thornhill, R. (1998) Darwinian aesthetics, in Handbook of EvolutionaryPsychology: Ideas, Issues and Applications (Crawford, C. and Krebs, D.,eds), pp. 543–572, Erlbaum 4Symons, D. (1995) Beauty is in the adaptations of the beholder: the
evolutionary psychology of human female sexual attractiveness, inSexual Nature/Sexual Culture (Abramson, P.R. and Pinkerton, S.D., eds),pp. 80–118, University of Chicago Press5Etcoff, N.L. (1999) Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty ,Doubleday6Symons, D. (1987) If we’re all Darwinians, what’s the fuss about?, inSociobiology and Psychology: Ideas, Issues and Applications (Crawford,C., Smith, M. and Krebs, D., eds), pp. 121–146, Erlbaum 7Cunningham, M.R. et al. (1995) Their ideas of beauty are, on the whole,the same as ours: consistency and variability in the cross-culturalperception of female physical attractiveness J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 68,261–2798Langlois, J.H. and Roggman, L.A. (1990) Attractive faces are only averagePsychol. Sci. 1, 115–1219Langlois, J.H. et al. (1991) Facial diversity and infant preferences forattractive faces Dev. Psychol. 27, 79–8410Langlois, J.H. et al. (1995) Infant attractiveness predicts maternal
behaviors and attitudes Dev. Psychol. 31, 464–47211Jones, D. (1996) Physical Attractiveness and the Theory of SexualSelection: Results From Five Populations , Museum of Anthropology,University of Michigan12Zebrowitz, L.A. (1997) Reading Faces: Window to the Soul? , WestviewPress13Symons, D. (1979) The Evolution of Human Sexuality , Oxford UniversityPress14Mann, J. (1992) Nurturance and negligence: maternal psychology andbehavioral preferences among preterm twins, in The Adapted Mind:Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture (Barkow, J.H.,Cosmides, L. and Tooby, J., eds), pp. 367–390, Oxford University Press15Alley, T.R. (1993) The developmental stability of facial attractiveness:new longitudinal data and a review Merrill–Palmer Q. 39, 265–27816Zebrowitz, L.A., Olson, K. and Hoffman, K. (1992) Stability of babyfacenessand attractiveness across the lifespan J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 64, 453–46617Eagly, A.H. et al. (1991) What is beautiful is good, but…: a meta-
and attractiveness across the lifespan J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 64, 453–46617Eagly, A.H. et al. (1991) What is beautiful is good, but…: a meta-analysis review of research on the physical attractiveness stereotypePsychol. Bull. 110, 109–12818Jackson, L.A. (1992) Physical Appearance and Gender: Sociobiologicaland Sociocultural Perspectives , State University of New York Press19Kalick, S.M. et al. (1998) Does human facial attractiveness honestlyadvertise health? Longitudinal data on an evolutionary question.Psychol. Sci. 9, 8–1320Shackelford, T.K. and Larsen, R.J. (1999) Facial attractiveness andphysical health Evol. Hum. Behav . 20, 71–7621Tooby, J. and Cosmides, L. (1992) The psychological foundations ofculture, in The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and theGeneration of Culture (Barkow, J.H., Cosmides, L. and Tooby, J. eds),Oxford University Press22Thornhill, R. (1997) The concept of an evolved adaptation, in
Characterizing Human Psychological Adaptations (Bock, G.R. andCardew, G. eds), pp. 4–22, John Wiley & Sons23Daly, M. and Wilson, M.I. (1999) Human evolutionary psychology andanimal behaviour Anim. Behav . 57, 509–51924Hill, K.R. and Hurtado, A.M. (1996) Ache Life History: The Ecology andDemography of a Forest People , Aldine de Gruyter25Gangestad, S.W. and Buss, D.M. (1993) Pathogen prevalence andhuman mate preferences Ethol. Sociobiol . 14, 89–9626Dennett, D.C. (1995) Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and themeanings of life , Simon & Schuster27Williams, G.C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection , PrincetonUniversity Press28Tovée, M.J. et al. (1999) Visual cues to female physical attractivenessProc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 266, 211–21829Cunningham, M.R. (1986) Measuring the physical in physicalattractiveness: quasi-experiments on the sociobiology of female facialbeauty J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 50, 925–935
30Thornhill, R. and Grammer, K. (1999) The body and face of woman:one ornament that signals quality? Evol. Hum. Behav . 20, 105–12031Møller, A.P. and Swaddle, J.P. (1997) Asymmetry, DevelopmentalStability and Evolution , Oxford University Press32Møller, A.P. (1999) Asymmetry as a predictor of growth, fecundity, andsurvival Ecol. Lett.33Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1999) Individual differences indevelopmental precision and fluctuating asymmetry: a model and itsimplications J. Evol. Biol. 12, 402–41634Thornhill, R. and Møller, A.P. (1997) Developmental stability, diseaseand medicine Biol. Rev . 72, 497–528Thornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractivenessOutstanding questions• EEA-focused research is needed to clarify the relationships between
facial attractiveness and health. Is individual variation in facialasymmetry, facial averageness and putative hormone markers related tomeasures of immunocompetence and overall condition, as predicted bythe hypothesis that beauty is a health certificate?• How do measures of symmetry, averageness and hormone markers relateto one another, and how do olfactory preferences relate to visualpreferences? If they tap somewhat different aspects of condition, howdo these aspects differ?• How do specific facial features covary with behavioral traits (e.g. femininefacial features with willingness to invest), adult hormone levels and/ormetabolism?• Which specific sexually dimorphic male features do women preferdifferentially during the menstrual cycle? Do women’s preferences changeduring the cycle in other ways?• How do individual differences or life history variations affect attractivenessjudgments, and can these variations be understood from an adaptationistperspective?
• What are the details of the information processes that underlie facialattractiveness judgments, including how composite facial images areconstructed to track averageness4, relative processing of different facialfeatures (e.g. hormone markers versus other features), and additive versusnon-additive combining of information to produce a global impression48?
Review460Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 3, No. 12,  December 199935Waynforth, D. (1999) Fluctuating asymmetry and human male lifehistory traits in rural Belize Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 265, 1497–150136Mealey, L., Bridgstock, R. and Townsend, G.C. (1999) Symmetry andperceived facial attractiveness: a monozygotic co-twin comparison J.Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76, 157–16537Perrett, D.I. et al. Symmetry and human facial attractiveness Evol.Hum. Behav . (in press)38Rhodes, G. et al. (1998) Facial symmetry and the perception of beautyPsychomet. Bull. Rev . 5, 659–66939Swaddle, J.P. and Cuthill, I.C. (1995) Asymmetry and human facialattractiveness: symmetry may not always be beautiful Proc. R. Soc.London Ser. B 261, 111–11640Scheib, J.E., Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1999) Facial attractiveness,symmetry, and cues of good genes Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 266,1913–191741Enquist, M. and Arak, A. (1994) Symmetry, beauty and evolution Nature372, 169–172
372, 169–17242Johnstone, R.A. (1994) Female preference for symmetrical males as aby-product of selection for mate recognition Nature 372, 172–17543Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1998) Menstrual cycle variation inwomen’s preference for the scent of symmetrical men Proc. R. Soc.London Ser. B 265, 927–93344Thornhill, R. and Gangestad, S.W. (1999) The scent of symmetry: a humansex pheromone that signals fitness? Evol. Hum. Behav . 20, 175–20145Rikowski, A. and Grammer, K. (1999) Human body odour, symmetry andattractiveness Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B 266, 869–87446Zahavi, A. and Zahavi, A. (1997) The Handicap Principle: A Missing Pieceof Darwin’s Puzzle , Oxford University Press47Grafen, A. (1990) Biological signals as handicaps J. Theor. Biol . 144,517–54648Miller, G.E. and Todd, P.M. (1998) Mate choice turns cognitive TrendsCognit. Sci . 2, 190–19849Rohwer, S. and Rohwer, F.C. (1978) Status signalling in Harris sparrows:
experimental deceptions achieved Anim. Behav . 26, 1012–102250Ellison, P.T. and Panterbrick, C. (1996) Salivary testosterone levels amongtamang and kami males of central Nepal Hum. Biol. 68, 955–96551Bardin, C.W. and Catterall, J.F. (1981) Testosterone: a major determinantof extragenital sexual dimorphism Science 211, 1285–129452Grossmann, C.J. (1985) Interactions between the gonadal steroids andthe immune system Science 227, 257–26153Mazur, A. and Booth, A. (1998) Testosterone and dominance in menBehav. Brain Sci. 21, 353–38054Mueller, U. and Mazur, A. (1996) Facial dominance of West Point cadetsas a predictor of later military rank Soc. Forces 74, 823–85055Mazur, A., Halper, C. and Udry, J.R. (1994) Dominant-looking maleteenagers copulate earlier Ethol. Sociobiol . 15, 87–9456Cunningham, M.R., Barbee, A.P. and Pike, C.L. (1990) What do women
want? Facialmetric assessment of multiple motives in the perception ofmale physical attractiveness J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 59, 61–7257Perrett, D.I. et al. (1998) Effects of sexual dimorphism on facialattractiveness Nature 394, 884–88758Penton-Voak, I.S. et al. (1999) Menstrual cycle alters face preferenceNature 388, 741–74259Cunningham, M.R., Druen, P.B. and Barbee, A.P. (1997) Angels, mentors,and friends: trade-offs among evolutionary, social, and individualvariables in physical appearance, in Evolutionary Social Psychology(Simpson, J.A. and Kenrick, D.T., eds), pp. 109–140, Erlbaum 60Berry, D.S. and Wero, J.L. (1993) Accuracy of face perception: a view fromecological psychology J. Pers . 61, 497–50361Graziano, W.G. et al. (1997) Interpersonal attraction from an evolutionaryperspective: women’s reactions to dominant and prosocial men, inEvolutionary Social Psychology (Simpson, J.A. and Kenrick, D.T., eds),pp. 141–167, Erlbaum
pp. 141–167, Erlbaum 62Gangestad, S.W. (1993) Sexual selection and physical attractiveness:implications for mating dynamics Hum. Nat . 4, 205–23663Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1997) Human sexual selection and
62Gangestad, S.W. (1993) Sexual selection and physical attractiveness:implications for mating dynamics Hum. Nat . 4, 205–23663Gangestad, S.W. and Thornhill, R. (1997) Human sexual selection anddevelopmental stability, in Evolutionary Social Psychology (Simpson, J.A.and Kenrick, D.T., eds), pp. 169–195, Erlbaum 64Gangestad, S.W. and Simpson, J.A. The evolution of human mating:the role of trade-offs and strategic pluralism Behav. Brain Sci. (in press)65Oliver-Rodriguez, J.C., Guan, Z. and Johnston, V.S. (1999) Genderdifferences in late positive components evoked by human facesPsychophysiol . 36, 176–18566Grammer, K. (1993) 5- a-androst-16en-3 a-on: a male pheromone? Abrief report Ethol. Sociobiol . 14, 201–20867Cashdan, E. (1993) Attracting mates: effects of parental investment onmate attraction Ethol. Sociobiol . 14, 1–2468Thornhill, R. and Furlow, F.B. (1998) Stress and human behavior:
attractiveness, women’s sexual development, post-partum depression,and baby’s cry, in Advances in the Study of Behavior (Slater, P.J.B.,Milinski, M. and Møller, A., eds), pp. 319–369, Academic Press69Buss, D.M. and Schmitt, D.P. (1993) Sexual strategies theory: anevolutionary perspective on human mating Psychol. Rev. 100, 204–23270Wiederman, M.W. and Dubois, S.L. (1998) Evolution and sex differencesin preferences for short-term mates: results from a policy capturing studyEvol. Hum. Behav . 19, 153–17071Thornhill, R. and Palmer, C.T. A Natural History of Rape: Biological Basesof Sexual Coercion , MIT Press (in press)72Jennions, M.D. and Petrie, M. (1997) Variation in mate choice and matingpreferences: a review of causes and consequences Biol. Rev . 72, 283–32773Quinsey, V.L. et al. (1993) The phylogenetic and ontogenetic developmentof sexual age preferences in males: conceptual and measurement issues,in The Juvenile Sex Offender (Barbaree, H.E., Marshall, W.L. and Hudson,
S.M., eds), pp. 143–163, Guilford Press74Buss, D.M. (1989) Sex differences in human mate preferences:evolutionary hypotheses tested in 37 cultures Behav. Brain Sci. 12, 1–4975Feingold, A. (1990) Gender differences in effects of physical attractivenesson romantic attraction: a comparison across five research paradigms J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 59, 981–99376Nordell, S.E. and Valone, T.J. (1998) Mate choice copying as publicinformation Ecol. Lett. 1, 74–7677Witte, K. and Ryan, M.J. (1998) Male body length influences mate-choicecopying in the sailfin molly, Poecilia latipinna Behav. Ecol. 9, 534–53978Graziano, W.G. et al. (1993) Social influence, sex differences, andjudgments of beauty: putting the interpersonal back in interpersonalattraction J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 65, 522–53179Ryan, M. (1990) Sexual selection, sensory systems and sensory exploitationOxford Surveys in Evolutionary Biology 7, 157–19580Magro, A.M. (1999) Evolutionary-derived anatomical characteristics
and universal attractiveness Percept. Mot. Skills 88, 147–16681Williams, G.C. (1992) Natural Selection: Domains, Levels and Challenges ,Oxford University PressThornhill and Gangestad – Facial attractivenessLetters to the EditorLetters to the Editor concerning articles published in Trends in Cognitive Sciences are welcome. The authors ofthe article referred to are given an opportunity to respond to any of the points made in the letter. The Editorreserves the right to edit letters for publication. Please address letters to:Dr Peter Collins, Editor, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, Elsevier Science Lonodn, 84 Theobald’s Road, London, UK  WC1X 8RR, or e-mail: tics@current-trends.com
