REVIEWAging and induced senescence as factors in thepathogenesis of lung emphysemaStefan Karrascha,b, Olaf Holzc, Rudolf A. Jo ¨rresb,*aInstitute for Inhalation Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum M €unchen eGerman Research Center for Environmental Health,Neuherberg/Munich, GermanybInstitute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,Munich, GermanycHospital Großhansdorf, Center for Pneumology and Thoracic Surgery, Großhansdorf, GermanyReceived 16 December 2007; accepted 4 April 2008Available online 9 July 2008KEYWORDSp53;HDAC;HAT;Methylation;Acetylation;SIRT1SummaryClassically, the development of emphysema in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is be-lieved to involve inﬂammation induced by cigarette smoke and leukocyte activation, includingoxidant-antioxidant and protea se-antiprotease imbalances. While there is substantial evi-
dence for this, additional aspects have been suggested by a number of clinical and experimen-tal observations.Smokers exhibit signs of premature aging, particularly obvious in the skin. The link betweenaging and chronic disease is well-known, e.g., for the brain and musculoskeletal or cardiovas-cular system, as well as the clinical link between malnutrition and emphysema, and the exper-imental link to caloric restriction. Interestingly, this intervention also increases lifespan, inparallel with alterations in metabolism, oxidant burden and endocrine signaling.Of special interest is the observation that, even in the absence of an inﬂammatory environ-ment, lung ﬁbroblasts from patients with emphysema show persistent alterations, possibly basedAbbreviations: a1-AT, alpha-1-antitrypsin; Akt, serine-threonine-kinase, member of the protein kinase B (PKB) family; ALT, alternative
mechanisms of telomere lengthening; Bad, Bcl-2-associated death promoter, member of the B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family;Bax, member of the Bcl-2 family; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DHEAS, dehydroepiadros-terone sulphate; DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; FOXO, forkhead box O; GM-CSF, granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating factor; H2O2,hydrogen peroxide; HAT, histone acetyltransferase; HDAC, histone deacetylase; IL, interleukin; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; MMP,matrix metalloproteinase; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; pRb, retinoblastoma protein;PPAR- g, peroxisome proliferator-activated rec eptor gamma; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog, tyrosine and lipid phosphatase;RNA, ribonucleic acid; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SA- b-gal, senescence-associated b-galactosidase; SIPS, stress-induced proliferative
senescence; Sir2, silent information regulator 2; SIRT1, homolog of Sir2 in mammals; TNF- a, tumor necrosis factor alpha; mTOR, mammaliantarget-of-rapamycin kinase; UV, ultraviolet.* Corresponding author. Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupati onal, Social and Environmental M edicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Ziemssenstr. 1, Munich, Bavaria D-80336, Germany. Tel.: þ49 89 5160 2466; fax: þ49 89 5160 3957.E-mail address: rudolf.joerres@med.uni-muenchen.de (R.A. Jo ¨rres).0954-6111/$ - see front matter ª2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.013available at www.sciencedirect.comjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rmedRespiratory Medicine (2008) 102, 1215e1230
on epigenetic mechanisms. The importance of these mechanisms for cellular reprogramming andresponse patterns, individual risk proﬁle and therapeutic options is becoming increasingly recog-nized. The same applies to cellular senescence. Recent ﬁndings from patients and experimentalmodels open novel views into the arena of gene-environment interactions, including the role ofsystemic alterations, cellular stress, telomeres, CDK inhibitors such as p16, p21, pRb, PI3K,mTOR, FOXO transcription factors, histone modiﬁcations, and sirtuins.This article aims to outline this emerging picture and to stimulate the identiﬁcation of chal-lenging questions. Such insights also bear implications for the long-term course of the diseasein relation to existing or future therapies and the exploration of potential lung regeneration.ª2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.ContentsIntroduction ........................................................................ 1216
Aging and senescence: basic characteristics . . ............................................... 1216Aging as a contributor to chronic disease ................................................... 1217Aging and COPD . . . .............................................................. 1217Mechanisms of cellular senescence and evidence in COPD . . . .................................... 1218Telomere loss ................................................................... 1218Inflammation, role of proteases and oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction .................. 1219Major cell cycle regulators . ........................................................ 1219Role of PI3K and mTOR ............................................................ 1220Epigenetic mechanisms and senescence . . .............................................. 1221Sirtuins and FOXOs as integrators of multiple pathways . ................................... 1222
Links to energy metabolism/caloric restriction . . . ........................................ 1222Conclusion and outlook . ............................................................... 1224Conflict of interest ................................................................... 1224References ......................................................................... 1224IntroductionLung emphysema is a major phenotype of COPD1and repre-sents a signiﬁcant health burden. Even more so since nocausal therapy is available to restore lung architecture. A for-midable body of evidence has been accumulated regardingthe role of inﬂammatory factors in the pathogenesis of thedisease. It comprises the now classical concept of protease-antiprotease and oxidant-antioxidant imbalances.2,3Tissuedestruction driven by neutrophils and macrophages via thesecompounds undoubtedly plays an important role.4This is sup-ported by data for hereditary a1-antitrypsin (AT)-deﬁciency,
which typically leads to severe emphysema relatively earlyin life, particularly in the presence of noxious agents.5More-over, instillation of elastase into the lung is a well-knowntechnique for inducing experimental emphysema in animals.6Intimately linked to the protease-antiprotease disturbance,oxidative stress originating from compounds of cigarettesmoke or inﬂammatory cells can overcharge the antioxidativecapacity of pulmonary tissue and further diminish the anti-protease defense.7In combination with proinﬂammatory cytokine produc-tion and a host of other responses, these inﬂuences lead toapoptosis, necrosis, compensatory proliferation and animbalance in the maintenance of cells, ultimately resultingin alveolar destruction and airway remodeling. While theimportance of inﬂammation is undeniable, clinical and cellbiological observations suggest mechanisms beyondinﬂammation, albeit linked to it, to play a critical role as
well ( Fig. 1 ). These mechanisms include cellular senes-
well ( Fig. 1 ). These mechanisms include cellular senes-cence and epigenetic control, which appear of particularinterest in view of the observed systemic alterations andchronicity of the disease.The present article aims to provide the clinician witha comprehensive overview of the multiple facets presentingfrom the viewpoint of senescence and epigenetics, as wellas to delineate major mechanistic aspects of this novelview. In order to truly appreciate the complexity of themolecular networks involved we refer to specialized re-views. A large number of missing links still need to beidentiﬁed in this area, while the generation of clinicallytractable research questions remains an exciting challenge.Aging and senescence: basic characteristicsBiological aging involves a variety of cellular, molecular andstructural alterations based on several mechanisms.8Althoughnormally linked to chronologi cal age, biological aging can
occur earlier in life, being partially independent from an indi-vidual’s chronological age (premature aging). Interestingly,many markers that are used to describe biological aging arerelated to (chronic) inﬂammat ion, e.g., the serum levels ofIL-6, IL-1 bor TNF- a.9As a result, there seems to be no single,comprehensive or easily availa ble marker of biological age.In this article, the term ‘‘senescence’’ is used todescribe aging on the cellular level (cellular aging), which1216 S. Karrasch et al.
comprises a series of cell morphological and functionalalterations including the loss of proliferative activity inotherwise viable cells ( Table 1 ). This loss is observed in vi-tro10,11and is in all likelihood also of relevance in vivo .12,13To distinguish the cellular process from the aging of wholeorgans or organisms, it is denoted more speciﬁcally by‘‘proliferative/replicative senescence.’’ The cell arrestnot only occurs after exhausting the predetermined prolif-erative capacity (intrinsic senescence), but is also inducibleby external stressors administered in sublethal doses (ex-trinsic or stress-induced proliferative senescence, SIPS).14Thus, there are different routes leading to a senescentphenotype, though potentially sharing common signalingpathways. It should be kept in mind that senescence canbe interpreted as an evolutionary protective mechanismagainst tumor development15which is particularly relevantin pre-malignant cells.16It circumvents eventual irrevers-
ible structural losses due to apoptosis, while avoiding therisk associated with the generation of replacement cellsfrom aged, potentially damaged progenitors. This survivalstrategy, however, may still come at the price of impairedorgan function.Aging as a contributor to chronic diseaseAge represents a risk factor for the development of manydiseases, including cardiovascular and metabolic disorders.Moreover, if a chronic disease is already established, itconstitutes a factor contributing to mortality, e.g., in COPDand chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure.17Aging comprises the accumulation of damage from exoge-nous causes as well as intrinsic, systemic susceptibilitiesdetermining the responses. These factors also determine itsrelation to the development of chronic diseases. Aging is knownto be involved in neurodegenerative disorders18and cardiovas-cular diseases in which accelerated vascular aging and senes-cence of endothelial cells19seem to play a role through both
telomere-dependent (see belo w) and -independent mecha-nisms.20Osteoarthritis21and the impact of aging on bonemarrow-related therapies22are further examples. However,time-dependent losses might occur dissociated from age, asdemonstrated for periodontal disease as a chronic, age-relateddisorder,23again emphasizing the concept of biological versuschronological age.For a variety of diseases, mechanistic evidence alreadyexists which indicates a link to (induced) aging. Moreover,patients with diabetic nephropathy showed signs of aging ofskin ﬁbroblasts.24In COPD, some of the comorbidities25canbe considered as consequences of the lung disease,whereas others might be based on common susceptibilitytraits and linked to aging. COPD itself is a risk factor forother disorders including cardiovascular disease,26type IIdiabetes,27or cognitive and functional deteriorations,28all of which are age-related. Especially the association be-
tween arterial stiffness, osteoporosis and the severity ofairﬂow obstruction29has provided supportive evidence onpremature aging in COPD.30Moreover, reductions in lungfunction have been shown to be associated with systemicinﬂammation per se und thus potentially with aging, inaddition to smoking.31Aging and COPDStructure and function of the human lung show a variety ofalterations as part of the normal aging process ( Table 2 ).32,33Of particular interest seems to be the rariﬁcation of alveolarstructures that is known to occur in older never-smokers.34Although the structural changes of the senile lung32are con-sidered to be nondestructive35and are rather homogeneouscompared to the more focal alterations in emphysema, theoverall result appears to be similar with regard to the lossof tissue renewal and regenerative potential. Additionally,it should be noted that diffuse (senile) emphysema is difﬁcultto diagnose by lung function indices and its occurrence rate
might therefore be underestimated.
it should be noted that diffuse (senile) emphysema is difﬁcultto diagnose by lung function indices and its occurrence ratemight therefore be underestimated.Genetically modiﬁed mice have provided additional supportfor a relationship between aging and emphysema, while at thesame time demonstrating differences between phenotypes ofthe disease, e.g., homogeneous versus focal alterations.36Theinflammation cellular stresscellular senescenceorgan agingchronologicalagenutritionaldepletionlung emphysemacigarette smokeleukocyte soxidantsproteasescytokinesFigure 1 Diagram illustrating major factors of aging and se-nescence that are involved in the development of lung emphy-sema. The contribution originating as a more or less directresult of inﬂammation is summarized by the dashed line.Table 1 Major molecular and cellular mechanismsassociated with cellular senescence and agingMechanisms of agingTelomere attrition243Cumulative DNA damage244Impairment of DNA repair245
Impairment of DNA repair245Epimutations in nuclear DNA246Mutations in mitochondrial DNA112Increased rigidity of cytoskeleton247Increased cross-linking of extracellular matrix248Protein damage249,250Increased production of free radicals251Accumulation of waste products252For each of the listed factors, a reference is given that provideseither a comprehensive overview or an experimental example.Aging and lung emphysema 1217
parallel between both processes has been emphasized be-fore,37in view of defects in vascular maintenance in patientswith emphysema38and genetically modiﬁed rodents. Wheninterpreting the ﬁndings, particularly animal data, it seemsprudent to keep in mind that aging is a multi-faceted processinvolving many intimately interwoven factors ( Table 1 )a n dthat it might not be evaluated from a single aspect.37,39The major extrinsic factor in COPD is smoking, pro-moting alterations of tissue and organ architecture thatresemble those of aging. Prominent manifestations arecardiovascular or cerebrovascular diseases40and prematureskin aging41,42as compared to normal41or UV-inducedaging.43Skin aging includes skin wrinkling44which, interest-ingly enough, has been reported to exhibit a weak butsigniﬁcant association with pulmonary emphysema.45Italso involves an increased proportion of elastic ﬁbers,46,47associated with lung function impairment.48Intriguingly,
there are associations between COPD and periodontitis,49the latter also being a disease of connective tissue medi-ated by inﬂammation and promoted by smoking, as inCOPD. The association between periodontitis and age perseis not particularly strong,50but this seems to be analo-gous to the discrete alterations occurring in the senilelung in the absence of noxious agents.Cultured lung parenchyma ﬁbroblasts from patientswith emphysema also showed elevated expression of thesenescence-associated b-galactosidase (SA- b-gal) com-pared to control smokers.51SA-b-gal, a common markerof cellular senescence,52is regularly expressed in senes-cent cells, though probably as an indicator of stress ingeneral.53Corresponding to this ﬁnding, in vitro exposureof human cells to cigarette smoke extract led to increasedexpression of SA- b-gal,54,55similar to exposure of primarylung ﬁbroblasts.56Available data suggest that cellular se-
nescence is limited to lung ﬁbroblasts and not present inskin ﬁbroblasts of patients with lung emphysema,57whichmight underline the importance of local exposure levels.In addition, proliferation rate and capacity, as majormarkers of senescence, were reduced in parenchymal lungﬁbroblasts of patients with emphysema compared tocontrol smokers, although cells were grown under stan-dardized conditions in the absence of inﬂammation.51,58,59While in these experiments the culture medium containedserum and thus a mixture of growth factors, the responseto deﬁned stimulation by TGF- band IL-1 bwas also foundto be altered in emphysema.60Fibroblasts also showeda dysregulation of decorin production,61a moleculeinvolved in collagen assembly and related to aging.62Mechanisms of cellular senescence andevidence in COPDTelomere lossFor protective purposes, the ends of chromosomes carry
noncoding DNA repeats called telomeres. In each DNAreduplication, about 35 e100 base pairs are lost (endreplication problem) implying a countdown mechanismand loss of replicative potential as telomeres shorten.Telomere shortening is a major determinant of cellularsenescence, although currently it is not clear whether bythe shortest telomere or mean telomere length.63Many studies have demonstrated that telomere length ofhuman skin ﬁbroblasts64and blood leukocytes65decreaseswith age, with considerable variability inter- and intra-individually66e68and within cell populations.69The rate oftelomere erosion can also differ between organs or cellpopulations, such as lymphocytes,70as well as betweenmales and females.67Since telomere length appears to bea heritable trait,71it could be a key factor for the individualrate of aging and the disposition to develop age-related dis-eases.72Importantly, short telomeres can limit tissue re-
newal capacity73and thus are likely to affect themaintenance of organs. Based on this, telomeres rankamong the most suitable markers of biological age, whichintegrate both intrinsic and extrinsic aging.
maintenance of organs. Based on this, telomeres rankamong the most suitable markers of biological age, whichintegrate both intrinsic and extrinsic aging.In addition to the end replication problem and sporadictelomere deletion, telomeres can be directly damaged byfree radicals that target G-triplets74and induce singlestrand breaks. Apparently, oxidants enhance telomereloss primarily during mitosis75; it is not clear whether thisalso occurs in the absence of cell division.Immortalized cells often, though not always, show anincrease in the activity of telomerase, a ribonucleoproteinthat can restore telomeres.76,77Alternative mechanisms oftelomere lengthening (ALT) exist, and segments of telo-meres can be copied from neighboring DNA strands.77,78Moreover, proteins involved in chromosome recombinationwere detected in telomerase-negative tumor cells, whichobviously utilized this mechanism to gain unlimited replica-tice capacity. Conversely, senescent ﬁbroblasts often
though not always show shortened telomeres.79Regarding their association with disease, telomerelength in blood leukocytes has been found to be relatedto disease activity or chronicity e.g., in kidney diseases12including chronic renal insufﬁciency.80,81Their dysfunctionalso seems to be a predisposing factor for renal cancer.82Telomere dysfunction may also affect the immune system83and thus have implications beyond a single organ. It is alsoclosely linked to other mechanisms that control cellularaging (see below). As a result of premature aging inducedby external factors, telomere length can be reduced inresponse to accumulated stress, as shown for blood leuko-cytes and the oxidative stress of smoking,84or chronicpsychological stress.85Table 2 Changes in structure and function of the humanlung and respiratory system that occur with ageAge-related alterations of the lungRariﬁcation of alveolar architecture/enlargement of airspaces
spacesVascular remodelingAltered composition of extracellular matrixReduced strength of respiratory musclesImpaired respiratory mechanics/increased stiffness of chestwallReduction of lung function reserves (volumes, ﬂows)Heterogeneity of ventilationImpaired gas exchange capacityDetailed accounts of the functional aspects can be found inexcellent review articles.32,331218 S. Karrasch et al.
With speciﬁc regard to COPD, telomere length inalveolar type II cells and endothelial cells in situ has beenfound to differ between emphysema and control patients.86In contrast, cultured parenchymal lung ﬁbroblasts frompatients with emphysema did not show altered telomerelengths despite unequivocal signs of cellular senescence.51Thus, as a point calling for methodological caution, differ-ent mechanisms of senescence could be active in themajority of cells found in histological sections of lung pa-renchyma as opposed to cells obtained by outgrowthcultures from such samples. Hence, the contribution of lo-cal or cell-speciﬁc telomere shortening to senescence inemphysema is currently difﬁcult to quantify. It is also un-known whether telomere shortening is directly due to cel-lular stress and to what extent it is a consequence ofincreased cellular turnover due to inﬂammatory processes.Inﬂammation, role of proteases and oxidativestress, mitochondrial dysfunction
stress, mitochondrial dysfunctionAccording to the common view, protease-antiproteaseimbalances are involved in the development ofCOPD.2,3,87In line with this, smokers show upregulation ofthe ﬁbroblast collagenase MMP-1 in the skin88which canmediate the degradation of interstitial collagen. In additionto the observations in patients, exposures of animals andcell cultures provided valuable insights. The upregulationof MMP-1 could be mimicked by in vitro exposure tocigarette smoke89,90or UV light, inducing a senescent cellu-lar phenotype.91Cigarette smoke elicited further effects incultured human lung ﬁbroblasts, such as an increase in theactivity of MMP-2,92as well as induction of cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E 2synthase.93It also af-fected ﬁbroblasts in terms of their ability to contract94and deteriorated epithelial cell repair capacity,95leadingto the hypothesis that a disturbance in repair underlies
the development of emphysema.96There is a close link toaging in which prostanoids97,98are involved, as well asMMPs which are implicated, e.g., in the age-related remod-eling of vascular walls.99Age also implies a general de-crease in the ability for tissue repair, as demonstrated, inliver regeneration for example.100In addition to protease-antiprotease imbalance, oxida-tive stress originating from reactive oxygen species (ROS) isbelieved to drive chronic obstruction and emphysematouschanges.87,101Oxidants arise from cigarette smoke andfrom inﬂammatory cells which might be additionally stimu-lated by recurrent respiratory tract infections.102From invitro exposures, it is well established that oxidants suchas H 2O2can induce proliferative senescence in ﬁbro-blasts,103,104which is, however, not necessarily driven bytelomeres.105Parallel results have been obtained for ciga-rette smoke exposure, showing a reduction in proliferation
rate or capacity as one requisite of cellular senescence.106This can be induced in vitro by continuous or repeated,54oreven a single, temporary exposure of human primary lungﬁbroblasts.56Hence, there is evidence from various sourcesthat cigarette smoke-induced effects observed in vitro orinvivo resemble those of aging. Moreover, cigarette smokemight exert parallel effects in different organs, possiblyon the basis of an intrinsic susceptibility that differsbetween individuals, since only a minority of smokersdevelop clinically relevant emphysema.ROS or ultraviolet (UV) radiation are known to particu-larly affect DNA integrity107and DNA damage signaling cas-cades.108They can also induce multiple other changes,109including cellular reprogramming and epigenetic mecha-nisms. For example, oxidative stress can induce cellularsenescence via forkhead box O (FOXO) transcription factorsand the deacetylase SIRT1, but the balance in this responsecan also be turned towards apoptosis
110(see below). Nota-bly, systemic inﬂammation and oxidant-antioxidant imbal-
and the deacetylase SIRT1, but the balance in this responsecan also be turned towards apoptosis110(see below). Nota-bly, systemic inﬂammation and oxidant-antioxidant imbal-ance could favor changes in cellular phenotype throughoutthe organism, implying impaired maintenance in morethan one organ.Mitochrondrial dysfunction involves the production ofROS within the respiratory chain. These can directlydamage proteins, RNA, and genomic or mitochondrialDNA,111which is generally considered an important contrib-utor to aging.112Moreover, mitochondria exert indirecteffects on cell survival, e.g., by mediating apoptosis.Though considered particularly important in neurodegener-ative disorders, they are also probably involved in the agingof other organs, and accumulation of mutations in mito-chondrial DNA leads to a decline in respiratory chainfunction.113It is, however, not fully clear to what extent the loss ofmitochondrial ﬁdelity is causative for aging and to what
extent it results from a decline in other functions. A causalcontribution is suggested by the existence of mouse strainsbearing mutations of mitochondrial DNA and showing thephenotype of premature aging. Currently, there seem to beno detailed data regarding mitochondrial dysfunction inCOPD. Interestingly, in vitro exposure of lung epithelialcells to the supernatants from senescent lung ﬁbroblastsreduced their protective capacity against mitochondrialdysfunction and increased ROS production.114This suggeststhat senescent cells can exert detrimental effects on othercells, a ﬁnding which is underscored, for example, by theobservation that senescent ﬁbroblasts can enhance theformation of tumors in mice.115Major cell cycle regulatorsThe progress of the cell cycle is basically controlled viacyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) and their inhibi-tors, as well-known from tumor biology. Senescent dermalﬁbroblasts, and even more so lung ﬁbroblasts, exhibit
increased expression of the CDK inhibitor p16INK4aand theeffector protein pRb. During the normal cell cycle,p16INK4aseems to serve as a constant braking mecha-nism.116Prior to senescence, cells exhibit an increase inp21Cip1/Waf1expression, another important CDK inhibitor.This is controlled by the tumor suppressor and transcriptionfactor p53, which plays a major role in the induction of cel-lular senescence ( Fig. 2 ). When reaching senescence,p21Cip1/Waf1expression decreases, while that of p16INK4aincreases. In accordance with this, primarily p16INK4aandits pathway are considered to be responsible for the ﬁnalirreversible proliferation stop.117,118Thus, p21Cip1/Waf1can initiate senescence eprimarilytelomere-dependent ewhich is then maintained and estab-lished by p16INK4a. Additionally, pRb is involved in theAging and lung emphysema 1219
control of genes responsible for cell cycle progression andother functions, by recruitment of the histone deacetylase(HDAC) 1119and HDAC complexes120(see below). This isapparently related to heterochromatin formation as an epi-genetic mechanism that permanently suppresses crucialgrowth-promoting genes.121Conversely, suppression ofp16INK4aexpression can increase proliferative capacity,provided that cells contain functional p16INK4a.122Furtherregulators of p16INK4a, e.g., transcription factors,122canact directly on the p16INK4apromoter.Another protein controlling mitotic activity and encodedby the gene locus INK4a , ARF (p14ARF), can prevent p53degradation and act as a link between diverse pathwaysof senescence. Accordingly, enhanced expression ofp16INK4aand p14ARFwas found in aging mammals includinghumans,123e.g., in pancreas islands, kidney, spleen, skinand lung.121While playing a central role in senescence in-duction, INK4a itself is subject to various control mecha-
nisms, and there are links to metabolic status, sincecaloric restriction (see below) could, e.g., increase the ex-pression of another CDK inhibitor, p27kip1.124The involve-ment of p16INK4aand p53 in maintaining senescence isunderscored by the observation that pre-malignant lesionsshow a loss of these and other senescence markers whenturning into malignancy.125CDK inhibitors might well be involved in the develop-ment of cellular senescence in emphysema. Evidence onthis has been provided by the observation that endothelialcells and alveolar type II cells from patient lungs showedincreased expression of p16INK4aand p21Cip1/Waf1. Moreover,p16INK4aexpression was opposite to that of the proliferationmarker PCNA.86These markers were also linked to theimpairment of lung function, as a cumulative result ofdestruction and remodeling. Similar evidence arose fromexposures of mice in vivo and human cells in vitro to ciga-rette smoke causing increased expression of p21Cip1/Waf1.55
Cip1/Waf1.55The expression of p16INK4aand p21Cip1/Waf1could also beincreased by cigarette smoke extract in a human ﬁbroblastcell line.54Such effects might, however, not be speciﬁc tocigarette smoke, since e.g., alveolar epithelial type II cellsof rats exposed to bleomycin also exhibited signs of cellularsenescence, e.g., p21Cip1/Waf1and SA- b-gal expression.126Itmight be of interest that induced cellular senescence,probably by reperfusion ischemia, can also affect the func-tion of transplanted organs,127,128and increased expressionof p16INK4ahas been observed in transplanted kidneys.129Cellular senescence seems to be a part of many disorders,as underlined by the fact that bleomycin is establishedfor the induction of ﬁbrotic lesions but not emphysema.130It might be speculated that an overshooting injury repair af-ter bleomycin originates from a subpopulation of resistantcells which lack control by the other, now senescent, cells.
This also underlines a further important issue in studyingcellular senescence, namely the heterogeneity of cellpopulations.131Single cell analysis has revealed that cellpopulations exhibit a broad range of activities at a singletime point. Critical decisions, such as between apoptosisand senescence, depend on a balance between opposingfactors that is likely to result in stochastic behavior of cellswithin the population (see, e.g., the discussion on FOXOsbelow). Even more importantly, the known heterogeneityof pulmonary ﬁbroblasts132is likely to imply differentresponses to environmental stress.133It is therefore not un-expected that emphysema, as lung ﬁbrosis, often starts asa spatially heterogeneous disorder which only attainsa more homogeneous pattern of damage in later stages.134Heterogeneity in early stages might also have implicationsfor regenerative therapy by being linked to the reversibilityof structural changes.Role of PI3K and mTOR
of structural changes.Role of PI3K and mTORThroughout a wide range of cell types, including pulmonary
for regenerative therapy by being linked to the reversibilityof structural changes.Role of PI3K and mTORThroughout a wide range of cell types, including pulmonarycells, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) is one of thekey regulators of survival and mitosis. PI3K has stimulatedmuch interest, particularly in the understanding of tumordevelopment. It controls longevity and robustness byphosphorylating the proapoptotic enzyme Bax.135,136Corre-spondingly, apoptosis is inducible via inhibition of thePI3K/Akt pathway,137which is mediated by FOXO typetranscription factors (see below). A further level of controlis exerted by the proapoptotic Bad,138a relative of Bax,which is inﬂuenced by cytokines such as GM-CSF andTNF-a. Interestingly, in lung epithelial cells PI3K could beactivated by low concentrations of nicotine,139and the con-comitant anti-apoptotic effect might be linked to malignantneoplasia. Importantly, PI3K is antagonized by the phospha-
tase PTEN, acting as a tumor suppressor.140PI3K plays a central role in the increase in cell size thattypically precedes mitosis, and in cell cycle initiation.141Among the various effects of PI3K142those mediating thecombination of cellular hypertrophy and blocked mitoticactivity appear to be especially relevant for senescentcells.143In the absence of mitogenic signals cellular growthp53 p16CDK4 CDK6pRbCDK2E2FHDAC1cell cycle progressionp21Figure 2 Links between major cell cycle regulators involvedin cellular senescence, with emphasis on cyclin-dependentkinases (CDK) and their inhibitors such as p16 and p21. Detailson the multiple relationships and an explanation of abbrevia-tions can be found in the text.1220 S. Karrasch et al.
leads to cellular hypertrophy.144With regard to PI3K, therelation between senescence, aging and longevity is ex-tremely complex and might depend on the species studied.145It is, however, clear that cell cycle arrest and a senescentphenotype can be induced by PI3K inihibitors.146,147The Janus-faced position of PI3K in the control of mitosisis evident in the distinction between its anti-apoptoticaction potentially entailing abnormal mitotic activity andtumorigenesis, and the induction of cellular senescence ascharacterized by abolished mitotic activity. Thus, switchingof PI3K from metastable cellular states to opposing di-rections could also provide a link between senescence andtumorigenesis, particularly since cell populations are prob-ably more heterogeneous in the disease rather than thehealthy state.131This also appears interesting in view of theassociation between emphysema and lung cancer.148Moreover, since PI3K is activated via the insulin re-
ceptor,149it offers a direct link to cell metabolism and nu-trition which are known to be relevant factors inemphysema and COPD.150Interaction between the insulinpathway and PI3K or their homologs is essential for meta-bolic homeostasis.151,152PI3K also mediates mechanismsby which insulin adjusts the activity of FOXO transcriptionfactors153(see below), thereby affecting senescence induc-tion on many levels.154A further important player in growth and cell cyclecontrol is the kinase mTOR.155It is related to CDK inhibitors(see above), and its inhibition causes increased expressionof p16INK4a.156Of particular interest among its multiplefunctions seem to be its action on adipocyte differentiationvia the transcription factor PPAR- g157and its involvement incellular stress responses including ROS.158These mecha-nisms could provide links between local lung disease andsystemic alterations such as cachexia, a common phenome-non in emphysema.159Blocking of mTOR has been proposed
as a therapeutic option to attenuate age-related malfunc-tion,160but at present it is not clear whether this is feasiblein emphysema, or whether interference with such a centralenzyme results in signiﬁcant negative side-effects.Epigenetic mechanisms and senescenceEpigenetics is increasingly recognized as a key to theunderstanding of gene-environment interactions, includingthe ontogenetic and (partially) transgenerational memoryof gene expression patterns. The impact of epigeneticmechanisms on the senescent phenotype and alteredregulation of mitotic activity has not yet been illuminatedin much detail, but current evidence suggests that thisregulation might, at least in part, rely on such mechanisms.In its proper sense, the term ‘‘epigenetics’’ designatesheritable changes in gene expression without changes in DNAsequence. In a broader sense, it is often used to describea variety of regulatory mechanisms, basically including
histone modiﬁcations and DNA methylation irrespective oftheir degree of heritance. While DNA sequences areessentially identical in all cells of an individual, patterns ofepigenetic modiﬁcation occur in multiple variants, some ofthem short-lived, some of them long-lived, e.g., in thedetermination of cell type or in imprinting.161Much researchis currently devoted to a detailed understanding of thesemodes of control and the corresponding epigenetic codes.162There are different types and levels of epigeneticcontrol. On its lowest level, DNA methylation representsa mechanism of gene expression regulation163that is thoughtto be particularly important in tumor cells characterized byvirtually unlimited mitotic capacity. Correspondingly, inlung tumors suppression of p16INK4aexpression (see above)via methylation of the promotor DNA is regularly found.164DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation are intimately in-tertwined.165For example, silencing of p16INK4acould be re-
165For example, silencing of p16INK4acould be re-versed through cooperative action between histone
DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation are intimately in-tertwined.165For example, silencing of p16INK4acould be re-versed through cooperative action between histonedeacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and inhibitors of DNA methyl-ation,166and cell proliferation could be antagonized.167DNA is arranged on nucleosomes in a form resemblinga series of pearls on a bead. The building blocks ofnucleosomes are histones, while the entire chromatinscaffold comprises many other proteins. Each nucleosomeis an octamer assembled from histones H2A, H2B, H3 andH4. The DNA double-helix is wound around this histonecore, and nucleosomes are connected by so-called ‘‘linkerDNA.’’ The tails of the histones that protrude from theglobular nucleosome can be altered by post-translationalmodiﬁcations, such as acetylation, methylation, phosphor-ylation, and their multiple combinations.168Their complexlocal state controls the binding of regulator proteins and
the accessibility of DNA for transcription, probably beingthe key for short- and long-term gene regulation.169For example, acetylation of lysine residues in histonetails generally facilitates the access to DNA, while deace-tylation corresponds to a nonaccessible, silenced state.Speciﬁc enzymes mediate the different modiﬁcations, suchas histone acetyltransferases (HAT) and HDACs which canpartially control each other. According to the present view,histone acetylation represents a dynamic balance betweenHATs and HDACs, while it seems that certain methylationshave the greatest potential for mediating persistentalterations.170The involvement of histone modiﬁcations in inducedsenescence is currently not fully understood. Links areprovided by the ﬁnding that the expression of p16INK4aandp21Cip1/Waf1is, at least partially, controlled through histoneacetylation within promoter regions.171,172For example, in-creased p21Cip1/Waf1transcription through HDAC inhibition
is linked to increased H3 acetylation in that region.173e175Such effects are thought to play a role in the anti-tumoreffects of HDAC inhibitors, which are currently underinvestigation.176In addition to nucleosomes, there are further levels ofcontrol, such as chromatin remodeling machines andcomplexes,177which can interact with HAT complexes tomediate gene expression.178This also seems to play a rolein senescence by controlling both p16INK4aand p21Cip1/Waf1expression regardless of telomere shortening.178,179Regula-tion is also mediated by histone variants180substituting forother histones. All of these factors contribute to the parti-tioning between transcriptionally silent heterochromatinand transcriptionally competent, though not necessarily ac-tive, euchromatin. Silencing of DNA in cellular senescencecan even be recognized macroscopically in terms of con-densed, senescence-associated heterochromatic foci(SAHF) which comprise genes relevant for proliferation.181
181HDAC inhibitors arrest the cell cycle not as a result oftelomere shortening or uncapping. Their effect requiresAging and lung emphysema 1221
functional p16INK4a, but is hardly inﬂuenced by p53.182Possibly, stabilization of DNA damage signals underliesthis arrest. The reason is that telomere uncapping occursphysiologically in every mitosis, where it might induce tran-sient activation of DNA damage signals. These arecontrolled by histone acetylation and could be perpetuatedin the presence of HDAC inhibitors. In accordance with this,cells often resume proliferation after removal of the HDACinhibitor.Since various agents including cigarette smoke can inducea persistent cell cycle arrest associated with increasedacetylation, the high degree of reversibility of acetylationcalls for further lock-like mechanisms. While in vivo persis-tence might be supported through chronic inﬂammation,this would not explain increased acetylation in cultured cellsoutside the inﬂammatory environment.183It is currently notclear according to which timeframes senescence-relevantmodiﬁcations of histones take place and which of them sur-
vive the disassembly of nucleosomes upon DNA replication,thus being transmitted to daughter cells.Irrespective of these uncertainties, the involvement ofepigenetic memory mechanisms is strongly suggested bythe persistently altered gene expression proﬁles of exper-imental animals exposed to cigarette smoke184as well asairway of epithelial cells of ex-smokers.185Correspondingly,elevated global acetylation of H3 has been detected in thelung epithelium of ex-smokers with COPD and of H4 incurrent smokers,186speciﬁcally covering the IL-8 promoterregion in COPD.187The same is true for cultured lung ﬁbro-blasts of patients with emphysema.183These ﬁndings aresupplemented by data from rats after cigarette smoke ex-posure188and from cultured human lung ﬁbroblasts studiedimmediately after in vitro exposure to cigarette smokeextract,183although the acetylation had disappeared 2
days after exposure. At present, the observed patterns ofhistone modiﬁcations do not allow safe conclusions as towhether they represent an intermediate state and cellularsenescence is maintained by other mechanisms, or whetherthey basically underlie the persistence of senescence.Sirtuins and FOXOs as integrators of multiplepathwaysWithin the group of HDACs, sirtuins maintain a specialposition since they are structurally different from otherHDACs and are inhibited by different compounds.189Sirtuinsact on histones similarly to other HDACs thereby mediatinggene silencing. Of particular interest in mammals is SIRT1with its yeast homolog Sir2 that is known to deacetylate de-ﬁned lysines in histones for gene silencing.190,191Impor-tantly, SIRT1 also targets other proteins than histones,especially transcription factors. It can, for example,down-regulate p53-mediated senescence via deacetylationof p53.192Such effects seem relevant, since depletion of
192Such effects seem relevant, since depletion ofthe pool of renewable cells by p53-mediated apoptosisand senescence could contribute to organismal aging.193Deactivation of p53 by Sir2 was also capable of raising cel-lular resistance to oxidative stress. However, cells withoutfunctional p53 still showed increased resistance after Sir2activation, e.g., by resveratrol.194,195Obviously, there areseveral different mechanisms of stress response regulationcontrolled by sirtuins.Sirtuin action depends on NADþand is therefore coupledto the energy or redox state. This link might be relevant foremphysema, which is associated with metabolic imbalances.In addition to its supply function, NADH plays major regula-tory roles. This is reﬂected in the fact that its energy is notneeded for deacetylation, but probably spent for chromatinremodeling.196At present, the question remains openwhether NADþitself is decisive in the control of sirtuins, as
studies have not detected appreciable changes in theNADþ/NADH ratio in senescent cells or cells studied undervarious stress conditions.191Nicotinamide, a source of NADþmetabolism, is an inhibitor of Sir2, suggesting that possibly
þ/NADH ratio in senescent cells or cells studied undervarious stress conditions.191Nicotinamide, a source of NADþmetabolism, is an inhibitor of Sir2, suggesting that possiblythe overall put-through rate of NADþprocessing is crucial.189Among the most noteworthy recent ﬁndings appears tobe the link between SIRT1 and FOXO transcription factorswhich are key players in the determination of cell fate.Depending on the type of activation, FOXOs can exertdiverse, even opposite, effects including induction of cellcycle arrest, cell differentiation, removal of ROS, activa-tion of DNA repair, and induction of apoptosis.197,198FOXOsare negatively regulated by PI3K (see above), which acti-vates the kinase Akt that phosphorylates FOXOs. This isaccompanied by the export of FOXOs from the nucleusand loss of their transcriptional activity.199SIRT1 can re-duce FOXO3a and FOXO4 activity and their ability to induceapoptosis.198It intervenes with FOXO3a on different levels,
198It intervenes with FOXO3a on different levels,either indirectly suppressing the induction of proapoptoticgenes,197or directly by deacetylating histones at the pro-motor regions of FOXO3a target genes.198At the sametime SIRT1 can inhibit growth through p27kip1(see above)in connection with FOXO-induced stress responses, suchas induction of manganese superoxide dismutase.195Forthis reason, SIRT1 may occupy a critical position in switch-ing stress responses executed by FOXOs, ranging from upre-gulation of cellular defense through cell cycle arresttowards eventual apoptosis.197Pathways involving critical,possibly stochastic, decisions between divergent outcomesare of particular interest in COPD when considering the het-erogeneity of the disease within the lung and betweenpatients, as well as the systemic manifestations.Recent data have indicated a role for SIRT1 in theregulation of inﬂammatory cells, in particular macrophages,when exposed to components of cigarette smoke
200andSIRT1 activity in lung tissue has been found to be reducedin COPD and smokers.201Thus sirtuins, particularly SIRT1,are of great interest not only as general integrators of aging,longevity, stress responses, metabolic state, insulin signal-ing, and epigenetic mechanisms but also speciﬁcally due totheir altered expression in COPD. Moreover, their regulationby speciﬁc compounds ee.g., resveratrol202emight providean opportunity to move cells, and possibly organisms, intoa state of higher stress resistance and increased lifespan.The multiple links also suggest that sirtuins may be effectivecandidates for mediating the relationship between lung dis-order and systemic alterations, which are of major clinicalimportance.203Links to energy metabolism/caloric restrictionThe term ‘‘caloric restriction’’ designates reduced energyintake without malnutrition, a condition of great interest as1222 S. Karrasch et al.
it is linked to longevity, aging and disease development orprogression. At least in humans, however, the underlyingmolecular network is still far from being elucidated insufﬁcient detail to draw safe conclusions. Caloric restric-tion elicits multiple changes in terms of a regulatedresponse of cellular metabolism and signaling. Among othereffects, it leads to an increase in SIRT1 activity204andattenuates insulin or insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) sig-naling, while promoting longevity in many species includingprobably primates.205,206These effects are intimatelylinked to the action of FOXO transcription factors, PI3Kand Akt (see above, Fig. 3 ).207Conversely, enhanced insulinsignaling is thought to be associated with aging.208On the cellular level, caloric restriction is capable ofantagonizing the loss of replicative capacity that occurswith increasing age both in vivo and in vitro .209,210More-over, it can provide cellular protection by interfering with
basic mechanisms involved in senescence, such as oxidativedamage, telomere shortening, and changes in the hormonesystem.211However, the question, whether and underwhich conditions the effects of caloric restriction canenhance instead of attenuate those of cigarette smoke,has not yet been clariﬁed.Despite its ability to increase lifespan, caloric restrictionhas long been known to lead to alveolar rariﬁcation withina short time in rodents,212,213although it is not fully clear towhat extent this is equivalent to diffuse lung emphy-sema.213Remarkably, the ﬁndings in animals are in agree-ment with the CT-morphological rariﬁcation of pulmonarytissue reported in young patients with Anorexia nerv-osa.214,215Despite unresolved issues regarding the interpre-tation of this observation,216it remains challenging, since itdoes not easily ﬁt into the concept of the inﬂammatoryorigin of emphysema. Even more interesting is that the
emphysema-like alterations induced by caloric restrictionmay disappear in mice within a short time afterrefeeding.217The fact that caloric restriction can lead to reversibleemphysema in rodents emphasizes the distinction betweentemporary, potentially reversible and chronic, in all likelihood,irreversible effects. The similarity eat least superﬁcially ebetween pulmonary alterations in hunger and cigarettesmoke-induced emphysema raises the question about sharedversus divergent pathways. In humans, there are currently noc o m p a r a t i v ed a t ao nt h i s ;r e s u l t sf r o mm i c es u g g e s tt h a ta tleast elastase- and hunger-induced emphysema bear differentbiochemical and functional characteristics.218Intriguingly, thisdifference parallels that between cellular quiescence, as a re-versible state of cell arrest, and cellular senescence, under-stood as an irreversible state. One of the most challengingissues appears to be whether the quiescent state associated
with enhanced stress resistance can be converted into senes-cence by an unfortunate comb ination of external factorsincluding inﬂammation. Possibly, such conversion occurs inemphysema, thus turning a somewhat beneﬁcial responseinto a deleterious one. In addition, it might be that the inevi-table chronological aging facilitates the process, as indicatedby the observation that clinically relevant emphysema isgenerally a disease of the elderly.Although the progression of emphysema in humansseems to be accelerated under malnutrition,219the predic-tive power of body weight for mortality in severe COPD17,220primarily reﬂects the overall physical reserves. The same istrue for fat-free mass,221a phenomenological measure ofbody composition222,223that is associated with lung func-tion.224Cachexia is often viewed as a consequence of sys-temic processes including TNF- a-driven inﬂammation,225not as a factor which itself might promote lung destruction.
In advanced disease, it is certainly extremely difﬁcult to
temic processes including TNF- a-driven inﬂammation,225not as a factor which itself might promote lung destruction.In advanced disease, it is certainly extremely difﬁcult todisentangle the threads corresponding to cause and effect.In this regard, it is, however, striking that smokers withslightly elevated body weight have been reported to exhibita lower relative risk for developing COPD.226Energy deple-tion can be caused by starving or by wasting, and energyconsumption might be raised in smokers, at least duringlight activity.227The evidence on a raised total energy ex-penditure in COPD is mixed, but the wasting of skeletalmuscles and other tissues is likely to induce an imbalancebetween energy intake and need.228Sirtuins are more likelyto be induced by starving than by wasting. Under caloricrestriction, a reduction in cell cycle-inhibiting compoundscould counteract an extrinsically induced senescence butdifferentialregulationpulmonary emphysemasmokingcaloric
regulationpulmonary emphysemasmokingcaloricrestrictionaging telomere lossmitochondrialdysfunctionoxidative stressinflammation proteases > antiproteasesSIRT1 FOXOsantiproliferation > proliferationcellular senescencelongevitycellular turnover PI3K/Akt mTORinsulin signalingstress-induced premature senescencereplicativesenescenceFigure 3 Diagram providing details on the links between important regulators of cellular senescence. Information on speciﬁcinteractions and an explanation of abbreviations are given in the text.Aging and lung emphysema 1223
this mechanism seems to be secondary in the lung,123whichmight therefore be especially susceptible to the effects ofmalnutrition.Converse to caloric restriction, in overweight personsaccelerated aging and shortened telomeres have beendescribed,229potentially indicating an elevated rate of cellturnover. Among the factors linked to the metabolic (cata-bolic versus anabolic) state, especially in aging and disease,are dehydroepiadrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) and cortisollevels.230,231Particularly for DHEAS, multiple associationswith longevity and age-related changes have been re-ported.232,233The interplay between nutrition, body weight,aging and disease risk also seems to be manifest in the serumlevel of leptin, a multipotent adipokine.234Adipokines are ofinterest with regard to their pleiotropic effects beyonda single organ, and it is meanwhile recognized that adiposetissue can inﬂuence lifespan and aging through cell non-autonomous regulation.
autonomous regulation.235Noteworthy is that the differenti-ation and function of adipocytes is partially controlled bySIRT1,236and that adipocyte performance might behampered by cigarette smoke.237Conclusion and outlookIn recent years, aging and cellular senescence have comeinto focus as contributors to disease development andorgan dysfunction that could provide considerable insightinto the processes involved. The parallel between clinicalsigns of aging in smokers or patients with emphysema andﬁndings on the cellular and biochemical level is striking,although the database is still limited. Animal experimentsand in vitro exposure of human cells, including cells fromthe lung, have provided evidence that cigarette smokecompounds are capable of exerting effects that bear thesignature of cellular senescence. Corresponding ﬁndingsare available from immunohistological examinations ofsamples obtained from patients with emphysema, or from
the analysis of lung cells taken in culture. The altered ex-pression of key cell cycle regulators and mediators ofgrowth arrest or proliferative responses, and the reductionin proliferative capacity indicate multi-faceted changes inthe maintenance of cell and organ integrity. It is importantto acknowledge that the notion of cellular senescencecovers a multitude of causes and consequences, requiringa careful analysis in each individual condition.Although it is impossible to draw a coherent picture atpresent, the multiple links between aging, longevity, stressresponses, metabolic state, insulin signaling, sirtuins andepigenetic mechanisms render it likely that senescencebased on these factors adds to, if not even underlies thepathogenesis of emphysema. Owing to its integrative ca-pacity, the concept of senescence will substantially improvethe understanding of the development and progression ofthis chronic disease. This is especially true since there
seems to be a close link between senescence and epigeneticmechanisms. Such mechanisms are, among others, also ofeminent importance in lung cancer, whose risk is associatedwith COPD. It is also worth considering the potentialinterference between cellular senescence and the actionof pharmacological compounds. This should be one of thekeys for unravelling their impact on long-term structuralchanges in the lung. Recent work, for example, on the anti-inﬂammatory efﬁcacy of corticosteroids in relation to geneexpression control by histone acetylation238has the poten-tial to be extended in the direction of senescence and aging.This fascinating perspective is reinforced by the fact thatmultipotent molecular players are involved, providinga link between environment, individual disposition, locallung disease, and systemic alterations.These factors might also bear implications for theregenerative biology of the lung. Whether targeted
interference with cell cycle and differentiation control,
lung disease, and systemic alterations.These factors might also bear implications for theregenerative biology of the lung. Whether targetedinterference with cell cycle and differentiation control,either by activation of resident cells or by indirect effectsof stem cells, is a therapeutic option in lung emphysemaremains a topic for future investigations, particularly sinceadditional morphogenetic guidance is likely to be needed.Interventions involving epigenetic, senescence-relatedmechanisms might at least be an option to help slowdown the disease progression, and sirtuins are particularlyinteresting in view of their broad networking abilities. Ifregenerative therapies would be feasible in future, it islikely that the (partial) reconstitution of lung architecturehas to deal not only with unfavorable inﬂammatory,structural and mechanical239conditions in the diseased or-gan, but also with a potential inherent resistance of the
resident cells to support reconstitution. Some of these lim-itations might be of evolutionary origin and manifested asgenetic module-dependent ontogenetic constraints, andsome might be due to (induced) cellular senescence.That regeneration in terms of recallable complex morpho-genetic programs, in contrast to simple growth, is not en-tirely switched off in humans, is illustrated by thepossibility of nearly complete restoration of ﬁngertips inchildren, which also provides valuable insight into the con-trast between wound healing and regeneration.240It isnoteworthy that some species exhibit impressive persis-tent abilities of morphogenesis throughout much of theirlife, as demonstrated by the growth of antlers in deer,or of limbs241and even complete lung lobes in newts.242In this regard, it seems sensible to perform detailed com-parisons between the morphogenetic programs and regula-tory modules across species of different evolutionary
position. This could provide crucial information for the in-duction of regeneration in situ in humans and for the (ex-tracorporal) generation of replacement organs, as well asfor counteracting the constraints caused by cellularsenescence.Conﬂict of interestThe authors declare that none of them has any conﬂict ofinterest related to the article or the research described.References1. Rabe KF, Hurd S, Anzueto A, et al. Global strategy for the di-agnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructivepulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary. Am J RespirCrit Care Med 2007; 176:532e55.2. Barnes PJ, Shapiro SD, Pauwels RA. Chronic obstructivepulmonary disease: molecular and cellular mechanisms. EurRespir J 2003; 22:672e88.1224 S. Karrasch et al.
3. Shapiro SD. Proteinases in chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease. Biochem Soc Trans 2002; 30:98e102.4. Snider GL. Clinical relevance summary: collagen vs elastin inpathogenesis of emphysema; cellular origin of elastases;bronchiolitis vs emphysema as a cause of airﬂow obstruction.Chest 2000; 117:244Se6S.5. Mahadeva R, Lomas DA. Genetics and respiratory disease. 2.Alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁciency, cirrhosis and emphysema.Thorax 1998; 53:501e5.6. Senior RM, Tegner H, Kuhn C, Ohlsson K, Starcher BC,Pierce JA. The induction of pulmonary emphysema with hu-man leukocyte elastase. Am Rev Respir Dis 1977; 116:469e75.7. Wright JL, Churg A. Current concepts in mechanisms of em-physema. Toxicol Pathol 2007; 35:111e5.8. Balcombe NR, Sinclair A. Ageing: deﬁnitions, mechanisms andthe magnitude of the problem. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroen-terol 2001; 15:835e49.9. Johnson TE. Recent results: biomarkers of aging. Exp Geron-tol2006; 41:1243e6.
tol2006; 41:1243e6.10. Hayﬂick L. The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid cellstrains. Exp Cell Res 1965; 37:614e36.11. Hayﬂick L, Moorhead PS. The serial cultivation of humandiploid cell strains. Exp Cell Res 1961; 25:585e621.12. Famulski KS, Halloran PF. Molecular events in kidney ageing.Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2005; 14:243e8.13. Trueb RM. Aging of skin and hair. Ther Umsch 2005; 62:837e46.14. Toussaint O, Medrano EE, von Zglinicki T. Cellular and molec-ular mechanisms of stress-induced premature senescence(SIPS) of human diploid ﬁbroblasts and melanocytes. ExpGerontol 2000; 35:927e45.15. Campisi J. Senescent cells, tumor suppression, and organis-mal aging: good citizens, bad neighbors. Cell 2005;120:513e22.16. Collado M, Serrano M. The senescent side of tumor suppres-sion. Cell Cycle 2005; 4:1722e4.17. Budweiser S, Jo ¨rres RA, Riedl T, et al. Predictors of survival in
COPD patients with chronic hypercapnic respiratory failurereceiving noninvasive home ventilation. Chest 2007; 131:1650e8.18. Dro ¨ge W, Schipper HM. Oxidative stress and aberrant signalingin aging and cognitive decline. Aging Cell 2007; 6:361e70.19. Erusalimsky JD, Kurz DJ. Cellular senescence in vivo : its rele-vance in ageing and cardiovascular disease. Exp Gerontol2005; 40:634e42.20. Matthews C, Gorenne I, Scott S, et al. Vascular smooth musclecells undergo telomere-based senescence in human athero-sclerosis: effects of telomerase and oxidative stress. CircRes2006; 99:156e64.21. Aigner T, Soder S, Gebhard PM, McAlinden A, Haag J. Mecha-nisms of disease: role of chondrocytes in the pathogenesis ofosteoarthritis estructure, chaos and senescence. Nat ClinPract Rheumatol 2007; 3:391e9.22. Beausejour C. Bone marrow-derived cells: the inﬂuence of agingand cellular senescence. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2007:67 e88.23. Ship JA, Beck JD. Ten-year longitudinal study of periodontal
attachment loss in healthy adults. Oral Surg Oral Med OralPathol Oral Radiol Endod 1996; 81:281e90.24. Morocutti A, Earle KA, Rodemann HP, Viberti GC. Prematurecell ageing and evolution of diabetic nephropathy. Diabetolo-gia1997; 40:244e6.25. Fabbri LM, Rabe KF. From COPD to chronic systemic inﬂamma-tory syndrome? Lancet 2007; 370:797e9.26. Sin DD, Man SF. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease asa risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.Proc Am Thorac Soc2005; 2:8e11.27. Rana JS, Mittleman MA, Sheikh J, et al. Chronic obstructivepulmonary disease, asthma, and risk of type 2 diabetes inwomen. Diabetes Care 2004; 27:2478e84.28. Ozge C, Ozge A, Unal O. Cognitive and functional deteriora-tion in patients with severe COPD. Behav Neurol 2006; 17:121e30.29. Sabit R, Bolton CE, Edwards PH, et al. Arterial stiffness andosteoporosis in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am JRespir Crit Care Med 2007; 175:1259e65.
Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 175:1259e65.30. Vogelmeier C, Bals R. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease andpremature aging. A mJR e s p i rC r i tC a r eM e d 2007; 175:1217e8.
Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 175:1259e65.30. Vogelmeier C, Bals R. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease andpremature aging. A mJR e s p i rC r i tC a r eM e d 2007; 175:1217e8.31. Gan WQ, Man SF, Sin DD. The interactions between cigarettesmoking and reduced lung function on systemic inﬂammation.Chest 2005; 127:558e64.32. Janssens JP, Pache JC, Nicod LP. Physiological changes in re-spiratory function associated with ageing. Eur Respir J 1999;13:197e205.33. Sprung J, Gajic O, Warner DO. Review article: age-relatedalterations in respiratory function eanesthetic consider-ations. [Article de synthese: Les modiﬁcations de fonctionrespiratoire liees a l’age econsiderations anesthesiques].Can J Anaesth 2006; 53:1244e57.34. Pinkerton KE, Green FHY. Normal aging of the lung. In:Harding R, Pinkerton KE, Plooper CG, editors. The Lung:development, aging and the environment . San Diego: ElsevierAcademic Press; 2004.35. Verbeken EK, Cauberghs M, Mertens I, Clement J,
Lauweryns JM, Van de Woestijne KP. The senile lung. Compar-ison with normal and emphysematous lungs. 2. Functionalaspects. Chest 1992; 101:800e9.36. Sato A, Hirai T, Imura A, et al. Morphological mechanism ofthe development of pulmonary emphysema in klotho mice.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104:2361e5.37. Tuder RM, Yoshida T, Arap W, Pasqualini R, Petrache I. Stateof the art. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of alveolardestruction in emphysema: an evolutionary perspective.Proc Am Thorac Soc 2006; 3:503e10.38. Kasahara Y, Tuder RM, Cool CD, Lynch DA, Flores SC,Voelkel NF. Endothelial cell death and decreased expressionof vascular endothelial growth factor and vascular endothelialgrowth factor receptor 2 in emphysema. Am J Respir CritCare Med 2001;163:737e44.39. Teramoto S, Ishii M. Aging, the aging lung, and senile emphy-sema are different. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 175:197e8 [author reply 8].40. Bernhard D, Moser C, Backovic A, Wick G. Cigarette smoke e
an aging accelerator? Exp Gerontol 2007; 42:160e5.41. Aizen E, Gilhar A. Smoking effect on skin wrinkling in the agedpopulation. Int J Dermatol 2001; 40:431e3.42. Freiman A, Bird G, Metelitsa AI, Barankin B, Lauzon GJ. Cuta-neous effects of smoking. J Cutan Med Surg 2004; 8:415e23.43. Kennedy C, Bastiaens MT, Bajdik CD, Willemze R,Westendorp RG, Bouwes Bavinck JN. Effect of smoking andsun on the aging skin. J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120:548e54.44. Koh JS, Kang H, Choi SW, Kim HO. Cigarette smoking associ-ated with premature facial wrinkling: image analysis of facialskin replicas. Int J Dermatol 2002; 41:21e7.45. Patel BD, Loo WJ, Tasker AD, et al. Smoking related COPD andfacial wrinkling: is there a common susceptibility? Thorax2006; 61:568e671.46. Frances C, Boisnic S, Hartmann DJ, et al. Changes in the elas-tic tissue of the non-sun-exposed skin of cigarette smokers. BrJ Dermatol 1991; 125:43e7.47. Just M, Ribera M, Monso E, Lorenzo JC, Ferrandiz C. Effect of
smoking on skin elastic ﬁbres: morphometric and immunohis-tochemical analysis. Br J Dermatol 2007; 156:85e91.48. Just M, Monso E, Ribera M, Lorenzo JC, Morera J, Ferrandiz C.Relationships between lung function, smoking and morphol-ogy of dermal elastic ﬁbres. Exp Dermatol 2005; 14:744e51.49. Scannapieco FA, Ho AW. Potential associations betweenchronic respiratory disease and periodontal disease: analysisAging and lung emphysema 1225
of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III. J Pe-riodontol 2001; 72:50e6.50. Burt BA. Periodontitis and aging: reviewing recent evidence.J Am Dent Assoc 1994; 125:273e9.51. M €uller KC, Welker L, Paasch K, et al. Lung ﬁbroblasts from pa-tients with emphysema show markers of senescence in vitro .Respir Res 2006; 7:32.52. Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, et al. A biomarker that identiﬁessenescent human cells in culture and in aging skin in vivo.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995; 92:9363e7.53. Cristofalo VJ. SA beta Gal staining: biomarker or delusion. ExpGerontol 2005; 40:836e8.54. Nyunoya T, Monick MM, Klingelhutz A, Yarovinsky TO,Cagley JR, Hunninghake GW. Cigarette smoke induces cellularsenescence. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2006; 35:681e8.55. Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A. Cigarette smoke induces senes-cence in alveolar epithelial cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol2004; 31:643e9.56. Jo ¨rres RA, Kronseder A, Uhlmann S, et al. Replicative senes-
cence of lung ﬁbroblasts after exposure to hydrogen peroxideor cigarette smoke extract. Eur Respir J 2005; 26:102s.57. M €uller KC, Paasch K, Feindt B, et al. In contrast to lung ﬁbro-blasts eno signs of senescence in skin ﬁbroblasts of patientswith emphysema. Exp Gerontol ; 2008.58. Holz O, Z €uhlke I, Jaksztat E, et al. Lung ﬁbroblasts frompatients with emphysema show a reduced proliferation ratein culture. Eur Respir J 2004; 24:575e9.59. Nobukuni S, Watanabe K, Inoue J, Wen FQ, Tamaru N,Yoshida M. Cigarette smoke inhibits the growth of lung ﬁbro-blasts from patients with pulmonary emphysema. Respirology2002; 7:217e23.60. Noordhoek JA, Postma DS, Chong LL, et al. Different prolifer-ative capacity of lung ﬁbroblasts obtained from controlsubjects and patients with emphysema. Exp Lung Res 2003;29:291e302.61. Noordhoek JA, Postma DS, Chong LL, et al. Different modula-
tion of decorin production by lung ﬁbroblasts from patientswith mild and severe emphysema. COPD 2005; 2:17e25.62. Nomura Y. Structural change in decorin with skin aging.Connect Tissue Res 2006; 47:249e55.63. Graakjaer J, Bischoff C, Korsholm L, et al. The pattern ofchromosome-speciﬁc variations in telomere length in humans isdetermined by inheri ted, telomere-near factors and is main-tained throughout life. Mech Ageing Dev 2003; 124:629e40.64. Geigl JB, Langer S, Barwisch S, Pﬂeghaar K, Lederer G,Speicher MR. Analysis of gene expression patterns and chro-mosomal changes associated with aging. Cancer Res 2004;64:8550e7.65. Weng N. Interplay between telomere length and telomerasein human leukocyte differentiation and aging. J Leukoc Biol2001; 70:861e7.66. Baird DM, Rowson J, Wynford-Thomas D, Kipling D. Extensiveallelic variation and ultrashort telomeres in senescent humancells. Nat Genet 2003; 33:203e7.67. Cherif H, Tarry JL, Ozanne SE, Hales CN. Ageing and telo-
meres: a study into organ-and gender-speciﬁc telomere short-ening. Nucleic Acids Res 2003; 31:1576e83.68. Goronzy JJ, Fujii H, Weyand CM. Telomeres, immune agingand autoimmunity. Exp Gerontol 2006; 41:246e51.69. Baird DM. Telomere dynamics in human cells. Biochimie ;2007.70. Mariani E, Meneghetti A, Formentini I, et al. Different rates oftelomere shortening and telomerase activity reduction in CD8T and CD16 NK lymphocytes with ageing. Exp Gerontol 2003;38:653e9.71. Aviv A. Telomeres, sex, reactive oxygen species, and humancardiovascular aging. J Mol Med 2002; 80:689e95.72. Baird DM. Telomeres. Exp Gerontol 2006; 41:1223e7.73. Hao LY, Armanios M, Strong MA, et al. Short telomeres, even inthe presence of telomerase, limit tissue renewal capacity.Cell 2005; 123:1121e31.74. Midorikawa K, Hirakawa K, Kawanishi S. Hydroxylation ofdeoxyguanosine at 50site of GG and GGG sequences indouble-stranded DNA induced by carbamoyl radicals. FreeRadic Res 2002; 36:667e75.
Radic Res 2002; 36:667e75.75. Chen QM, Prowse KR, Tu VC, Purdom S, Linskens MH. Uncou-pling the senescent phenotype from telomere shortening in
Radic Res 2002; 36:667e75.75. Chen QM, Prowse KR, Tu VC, Purdom S, Linskens MH. Uncou-pling the senescent phenotype from telomere shortening inhydrogen peroxide-treated ﬁbroblasts. Exp Cell Res 2001;265:294e303.76. Reddel RR. Genes involved in the control of cellular prolifer-ative potential. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998; 854:8e19.77. Cerni C. Telomeres, telomerase, and myc. An update. MutatRes2000; 462:31e47.78. Neumann AA, Reddel RR. Telomere maintenance and cancer elook, no telomerase. Nat Rev Cancer 2002; 2:879e84.79. Ferenac M, Polancec D, Huzak M, Pereira-Smith OM, Rubelj I.Early-senescing human skin ﬁbroblasts do not demonstrateaccelerated telomere shortening. J Gerontol A Biol Sci MedSci2005; 60:820e9.80. Jimenez R, Carracedo J, Santamaria R, et al. Replicative se-nescence in patients with chronic kidney failure. Kidney IntSuppl 2005:S11 e5.81. Ramirez R, Carracedo J, Soriano S, et al. Stress-induced
premature senescence in mononuclear cells from patientson long-term hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45:353e9.82. Shao L, Wood CG, Zhang D, et al. Telomere dysfunction inperipheral lymphocytes as a potential predisposition factorfor renal cancer. J Urol 2007; 178:1492e6.83. Effros RB, Dagarag M, Spaulding C, Man J. The role of CD8 þT-cell replicative senescence in human aging. Immunol Rev2005; 205:147e57.84. Morla M, Busquets X, Pons J, Sauleda J, MacNee W, Agusti AG.Telomere shortening in smokers with and without COPD. EurRespir J 2006; 27:525e8.85. Epel ES, Blackburn EH, Lin J, et al. Accelerated telomereshortening in response to life stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2004; 101:17312 e5.86. Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A. Alveolar cell senescence inpatients with pulmonary emphysema. Am J Respir Crit CareMed 2006; 174:886e93.87. MacNee W. Pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-ease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005; 2:258e66. discussion 290,291.
88. Lahmann C, Bergemann J, Harrison G, Young AR. Matrixmetalloproteinase-1 and skin ageing in smokers. Lancet2001; 357:935e6.89. Yin L, Morita A, Tsuji T. Alterations of extracellular matrixinduced by tobacco smoke extract. Arch Dermatol Res 2000;292:188e94.90. Kim H, Liu X, Kohyama T, et al. Cigarette smoke stimulatesMMP-1 production by human lung ﬁbroblasts through theERK1/2 pathway. COPD 2004; 1:13e23.91. Debacq-Chainiaux F, Borlon C, Pascal T, et al. Repeated expo-sure of human skin ﬁbroblasts to UVB at subcytotoxic leveltriggers premature senescence through the TGF-beta1 signal-ing pathway. J Cell Sci 2005; 118:743e58.92. Ning W, Dong Y, Sun J, et al. Cigarette smoke stimulatesmatrix metalloproteinase-2 activity via EGR-1 in human lungﬁbroblasts. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2007; 36:480e90.93. Martey CA, Pollock SJ, Turner CK, et al. Cigarette smoke
induces cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E2synthase in human lung ﬁbroblasts: implications for lunginﬂammation and cancer. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol2004; 287:L981e91.94. Carnevali S, Nakamura Y, Mio T, et al. Cigarette smoke extractinhibits ﬁbroblast-mediated collagen gel contraction. Am JPhysiol 1998; 274:L591e8.1226 S. Karrasch et al.
95. Wang H, Liu X, Umino T, et al. Cigarette smoke inhibits humanbronchial epithelial cell repair processes. Am J Respir CellMol Biol 2001; 25:772e9.96. Rennard SI, Togo S, Holz O. Cigarette smoke inhibits alveolarrepair: a mechanism for the development of emphysema.Proc Am Thorac Soc 2006; 3:703e8.97. Chung HY, Sung B, Jung KJ, Zou Y, Yu BP. The molecular inﬂam-matory process in aging. Antioxid Redox Signal 2006; 8:572e81.98. Tang EH, Vanhoutte PM. Gene expression changes of prosta-noid synthases in endothelial cells and prostanoid receptorsin vascular smooth muscle cells caused by aging and hyperten-sion. Physiol Genomics ; 2007.99. Greenwald SE. Ageing of the conduit arteries. J Pathol 2007;211:157e72.100. Biondo-Simoes Mde L, Matias JE, Montibeller GR, Siqueira LC,Nunes Eda S, Grassi CA. Effect of aging on liver regenerationin rats. Acta Cir Bras 2006; 21:197e202.101. Jo ¨rres RA, Magnussen H. Oxidative stress in COPD. Eur RespirRev 1997; 7:131e5.
Rev 1997; 7:131e5.102. Repine JE, Bast A, Lankhorst I. Oxidative stress in chronicobstructive pulmonary disease. Oxidative Stress Study Group.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 156:341e57.103. Chen Q, Ames BN. Senescence-like growth arrest induced byhydrogen peroxide in human diploid ﬁbroblast F65 cells.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994; 91:4130e4.104. Chen JH, Stoeber K, Kingsbury S, Ozanne SE, Williams GH,Hales CN. Loss of proliferative capacity and induction ofsenescence in oxidatively stressed human ﬁbroblasts. J BiolChem 2004; 279:49439 e46.105. Matuoka K, Chen KY. Telomerase positive human diploid ﬁbro-blasts are resistant to replicative senescence but not prema-ture senescence induced by chemical reagents.Biogerontology 2002; 3:365e72.106. de Magalhaes JP. From cells to ageing: a review of models andmechanisms of cellular senescence and their impact onhuman ageing. Exp Cell Res 2004; 300:1e10.107. Molho-Pessach V, Lotem M. Ultraviolet radiation and cutane-
ous carcinogenesis. Curr Probl Dermatol 2007;35:14e27.108. Wang JY. Cellular responses to DNA damage. Curr Opin CellBiol 1998; 10:240e7.109. Mahmoudi M, Mercer J, Bennett M. DNA damage and repair inatherosclerosis. Cardiovasc Res 2006; 71:259e68.110. Giannakou ME, Partridge L. The interaction between FOXOand SIRT1: tipping the balance towards survival. Trends CellBiol 2004; 14:408e12.111. Orrenius S, Gogvadze V, Zhivotovsky B. Mitochondrial oxida-tive stress: implications for cell death. Annu Rev PharmacolToxicol 2007; 47:143e83.112. Huang H, Manton KG. The role of oxidative damage in mito-chondria during aging: a review. Front Biosci 2004; 9:1100e17.113. Chan DC. Mitochondria: dynamic organelles in disease, aging,and development. Cell 2006; 125:1241e52.114. Bartling B, Rehbein G, Silber RE, Simm A. Senescent ﬁbro-blasts induce moderate stress in lung epithelial cells in vitro .Exp Gerontol 2006; 41:532e9.
Exp Gerontol 2006; 41:532e9.115. Krtolica A, Parrinello S, Lockett S, Desprez PY, Campisi J.Senescent ﬁbroblasts promote epithelial cell growth and tu-morigenesis: a link between cancer and aging. Proc NatlAcad Sci USA 2001; 98:12072 e7.116. Collins CJ, Sedivy JM. Involvement of the INK4a/Arf genelocus in senescence. Aging Cell 2003; 2:145e50.117. Stein GH, Drullinger LF, Soulard A, Dulic V. Differential rolesfor cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21 and p16 in themechanisms of senescence and differentiation in humanﬁbroblasts. Mol Cell Biol 1999; 19:2109e17.118. Brookes S, Rowe J, Gutierrez Del Arroyo A, Bond J, Peters G.Contribution of p16( INK4a ) to replicative senescence ofhuman ﬁbroblasts. Exp Cell Res 2004; 298:549e59.119. Haddad MM, Xu W, Schwahn DJ, Liao F, Medrano EE. Activa-tion of a cAMP pathway and induction of melanogenesis corre-late with association of p16( INK4 ) and p27( KIP1) to CDKs, loss
of E2F-binding activity, and premature senescence of humanmelanocytes. Exp Cell Res 1999; 253:561e72.120. Harbour JW, Dean DC. The Rb/E2F pathway: expanding roles
of E2F-binding activity, and premature senescence of humanmelanocytes. Exp Cell Res 1999; 253:561e72.120. Harbour JW, Dean DC. The Rb/E2F pathway: expanding rolesand emerging paradigms. Genes Dev 2000; 14:2393e409.121. Sharpless NE. Ink4a/Arf links senescence and aging. ExpGerontol 2004; 39:1751e9.122. Satyanarayana A, Rudolph KL. p16 and ARF: activation ofteenage proteins in old age. J Clin Invest 2004; 114:1237e40.123. Krishnamurthy J, Torrice C, Ramsey MR, et al. Ink4a/Arfexpression is a biomarker of aging. J Clin Invest 2004; 114:1299e307.124. Eto I. Nutritional and chemopreventive anti-cancer agents up-regulate expression of p27 Kip1, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhib-itor, in mouse JB6 epidermal and human MCF7, MDA-MB-321 andAU565 breast cancer cells. Cancer Cell Int 2006; 6:20.125. Collado M, Gil J, Efeyan A, et al. Tumour biology: senescencein pre-malignant tumours. Nature 2005; 436:642.126. Aoshiba K, Tsuji T, Nagai A. Bleomycin induces cellular senes-
cence in alveolar epithelial cells. Eur Respir J 2003; 22:436e43.127. Chkhotua A, Shohat M, Tobar A, et al. Replicative senescencein organ transplantation emechanisms and signiﬁcance.Transpl Immunol 2002; 9:165e71.128. Chkhotua AB, Gabusi E, Altimari A, et al. Increased expressionof p16( INK4a ) and p27( Kip1 ) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitorgenes in aging human kidney and chronic allograft nephropa-thy. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 41:1303.129. Melk A, Schmidt BM, Vongwiwatana A, Rayner DC, Halloran PF.Increased expression of senescence-associated cell cycle inhib-itor p16 INK4a in deteriorating renal transplants and diseasednative kidney. Am J Transplant 2005; 5:1375e82.130. Moeller A, Ask K, Warburton D, Gauldie J, Kolb M. The bleo-mycin animal model: a useful tool to investigate treatmentoptions for idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis? Int J Biochem CellBiol; 2007.131. Bahar R, Hartmann CH, Rodriguez KA, et al. Increased cell-to-
cell variation in gene expression in ageing mouse heart. Na-ture 2006; 441:1011e4.132. Phipps RP, Penney DP, Keng P, et al. Characterization of twomajor populations of lung ﬁbroblasts: distinguishing morphol-ogy and discordant display of Thy 1 and class II MHC. Am JRespir Cell Mol Biol 1989; 1:65e74.133. Baglole CJ, Bushinsky SM, Garcia TM, et al. Differential induc-tion of apoptosis by cigarette smoke extract in primary humanlung ﬁbroblast strains: implications for emphysema. Am JPhysiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2006; 291:L19e29.134. Tuder RM, Yoshida T, Fijalkowka I, Biswal S, Petrache I. Roleof lung maintenance program in the heterogeneity of lung de-struction in emphysema. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2006; 3:673e9.135. Machida K, Inoue H, Matsumoto K, et al. Activation of PI3K-Aktpathway mediates anti-apoptotic effects of beta-adrenergicagonist in airway eosinophils. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Phys-iol2005; 288:L860e7.
iol2005; 288:L860e7.136. Xin M, Deng X. Nicotine inactivation of the proapoptotic func-tion of Bax through phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2005; 280:10781e9.137. Chen YL, Law PY, Loh HH. Inhibition of akt/protein kinase Bsignaling by naltrindole in small cell lung cancer cells. CancerRes2004; 64:8723e30.138. Finan PM, Thomas MJ. PI 3-kinase inhibition: a therapeutictarget for respiratory disease. Biochem Soc Trans 2004; 32:378e82.139. Guo J, Chu M, Abbeyquaye T, Chen CY. Persistent nicotinetreatment potentiates ampliﬁcation of the dihydrofolate re-ductase gene in rat lung epithelial cells as a consequence ofRas activation. J Biol Chem 2005; 280:30422 e31.Aging and lung emphysema 1227
140. Simpson L, Parsons R. PTEN: life as a tumor suppressor. ExpCell Res 2001; 264:29e41.141. Garcia Z, Kumar A, Marques M, Cortes I, Carrera AC. Phosphoi-nositide 3-kinase controls early and late events in mammaliancell division. Embo J 2006; 25:655e61.142. Matuoka K, Chen KY, Takenawa T. A positive role of phospha-tidylinositol 3-kinase in aging phenotype expression incultured human diploid ﬁbroblasts. Arch Gerontol Geriatr2003; 36:203e19.143. Wang Y, Meng A, Zhou D. Inhibition of phosphatidylinostol 3-kinase uncouples H2O2-induced senescent phenotype andcell cycle arrest in normal human diploid ﬁbroblasts. ExpCell Res 2004; 298:188e96.144. Johnston GC, Pringle JR, Hartwell LH. Coordination of growthwith cell division in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae .ExpCell Res 1977; 105:79e98.145. Babar P, Adamson C, Walker GA, Walker DW, Lithgow GJ.P13-kinase inhibition induces dauer formation, thermotoler-ance and longevity in C. elegans .Neurobiol Aging 1999; 20:513e9.
513e9.146. Collado M, Medema RH, Garcia-Cao I, et al. Inhibition of thephosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway induces a senescence-like arrest mediated by p27 Kip1 .J Biol Chem 2000; 275:21960e8.147. Tresini M, Mawal-Dewan M, Cristofalo VJ, Sell C. A phospha-tidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor induces a senescent-likegrowth arrest in human diploid ﬁbroblasts. Cancer Res1998; 58:1e4.148. Hanaoka N, Tanaka F, Otake Y, et al. Primary lung carcinomaarising from emphysematous bullae. Lung Cancer 2002; 38:185e91.149. Sen P, Mukherjee S, Ray D, Raha S. Involvement of theAkt/PKB signaling pathway with disease processes. Mol CellBiochem 2003; 253:241e6.150. Baldi S, Pinna GD, Crotti P, et al. Nutritional status and airﬂowobstruction: two independent contributors to CO diffusing ca-pacity impairment in COPD. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 2005; 63:13.151. Cheng CL, Gao TQ, Wang Z, Li DD. Role of insulin/insulin-likegrowth factor 1 signaling pathway in longevity. World J Gas-
troenterol 2005; 11:1891e5.152. Barbieri M, Bonafe M, Franceschi C, Paolisso G. Insulin/IGF-I-signaling pathway: an evolutionarily conserved mechanism oflongevity from yeast to humans. Am J Physiol EndocrinolMetab 2003; 285:E1064 e71.153. Nakae J, Kitamura T, Ogawa W, Kasuga M, Accili D. Insulin reg-ulation of gene expression through the forkhead transcriptionfactor Foxo1 (Fkhr) requires kinases distinct from Akt.Biochemistry 2001; 40:11768 e76.154. Courtois-Cox S, Genther Williams SM, Reczek EE, et al. A neg-ative feedback signaling network underlies oncogene-inducedsenescence. Cancer Cell 2006; 10:459e72.155. De Virgilio C, Loewith R. The TOR signalling network fromyeast to man. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2006; 38:1476e81.156. Gao N, Flynn DC, Zhang Z, et al. G1 cell cycle progression andthe expression of G1 cyclins are regulated by PI3K/AKT/mTOR/p70S6K1 signaling in human ovarian cancer cells. AmJ Physiol Cell Physiol 2004; 287:C281e91.
J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004; 287:C281e91.157. Kim JE, Chen J. Regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma activity by mammalian target ofrapamycin and amino acids in adipogenesis. Diabetes 2004;53:2748e56.158. Corradetti MN, Guan KL. Upstream of the mammalian targetof rapamycin: do all roads pass through mTOR? Oncogene2006; 25:6347e60.159. Schols AM. Pulmonary cachexia. Int J Cardiol 2002; 85:101e10.160. Blagosklonny MV. Aging and immortality: quasi-programmedsenescence and its pharmacologic inhibition. Cell Cycle2006; 5:2087e102.161. McLachlan JA, Burow M, Chiang TC, Li SF. Gene imprinting indevelopmental toxicology: a possible interface between phys-iology and pathology. Toxicol Lett 2001; 120:161e4.162. Benecke A. Chromatin code, local non-equilibrium dynamics,and the emergence of transcription regulatory programs. EurPhys J E Soft Matter 2006; 19:353e66.163. Urnov FD. Methylation and the genome: the power of a small
amendment. J Nutr 2002; 132:2450S e6S.164. Huschtscha LI, Reddel RR. p16( INK4a ) and the control of cel-
163. Urnov FD. Methylation and the genome: the power of a smallamendment. J Nutr 2002; 132:2450S e6S.164. Huschtscha LI, Reddel RR. p16( INK4a ) and the control of cel-lular proliferative life span. Carcinogenesis 1999; 20:921e6.165. Dobosy JR, Selker EU. Emerging connections between DNAmethylation and histone acetylation. Cell Mol Life Sci 2001;58:721e7.166. Matheu A, Klatt P, Serrano M. Regulation of the INK4a/ARFlocus by histone deacetylase inhibitors. J Biol Chem 2005;280:42433 e41.167. Nishida K, Komiyama T, Miyazawa S, et al. Histone deacety-lase inhibitor suppression of autoantibody-mediated arthritisin mice via regulation of p16 INK4a and p21( WAF1/Cip1 )expression. Arthritis Rheum 2004; 50:3365e76.168. Garcia BA, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF. Characterization ofhistones and their post-translational modiﬁcations by massspectrometry. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2007; 11:66e73.169. Jones PA, Martienssen R. A blueprint for a Human Epigenome
Project: the AACR Human Epigenome Workshop. Cancer Res2005; 65:11241 e6.170. Kiefer JC. Epigenetics in development. Dev Dyn 2007; 236:1144e56.171. Magdinier F, Wolffe AP. Selective association of the methyl-CpG binding protein MBD2 with the silent p14/p16 locus inhuman neoplasia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98:4990e5.172. Ocker M, Schneider-Stock R. Histone deacetylase inhibitors:signalling towards p21 cip1/waf1 .Int J Biochem Cell Biol2007; 39:1367e74.173. Li H, Wu X. Histone deacetylase inhibitor, Trichostatin A,activates p21 WAF1/CIP1 expression through downregulationof c-myc and release of the repression of c-myc from the pro-moter in human cervical cancer cells. Biochem Biophys ResCommun 2004; 324:860e7.174. Rebbaa A, Zheng X, Chu F, Mirkin BL. The role of histone acet-ylation versus DNA damage in drug-induced senescence andapoptosis. Cell Death Differ 2006; 13:1960e7.175. Sambucetti LC, Fischer DD, Zabludoff S, et al. Histone deace-
tylase inhibition selectively alters the activity and expressionof cell cycle proteins leading to speciﬁc chromatin acetyla-tion and antiproliferative effects. J Biol Chem 1999; 274:34940e7.176. Marks PA, Miller T, Richon VM. Histone deacetylases. CurrOpin Pharmacol2003; 3:344e51.177. Becker PB, Horz W. ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling.Annu Rev Biochem 2002; 71:247e73.178. Chai J, Charboneau AL, Betz BL, Weissman BE. Loss of thehSNF5 gene concomitantly inactivates p21 CIP/WAF1 andp16INK4a activity associated with replicative senescence inA204 rhabdoid tumor cells. Cancer Res 2005; 65:10192 e8.179. Oruetxebarria I, Venturini F, Kekarainen T, et al. P16 INK4a isrequired for hSNF5 chromatin remodeler-induced cellularsenescence in malignant rhabdoid tumor cells. J Biol Chem2004; 279:3807e16.180. Sarma K, Reinberg D. Histone variants meet their match. NatRev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6:139e49.181. Narita M, Nunez S, Heard E, et al. Rb-mediated heterochro-
matin formation and silencing of E2F target genes duringcellular senescence. Cell 2003; 113:703e16.182. Munro J, Barr NI, Ireland H, Morrison V, Parkinson EK. Histonedeacetylase inhibitors induce a senescence-like state in hu-man cells by a p16-dependent mechanism that is independentof a mitotic clock. Exp Cell Res 2004; 295:525e38.1228 S. Karrasch et al.
183. Kronseder A, Schulze C, Imhof A, et al. Effect of cigarettesmoke extract (CSE) on histone acetylation of lung ﬁbroblastsin vitro compared to histone acetylation in patients with lungemphysema. Eur Respir J 2006; 28:583s.184. Izzotti A, Cartiglia C, Longobardi M, et al. Alterations of geneexpression in skin and lung of mice exposed to light and ciga-rette smoke. FASEB J 2004; 18:1559e61.185. Spira A, Beane J, Shah V, et al. Effects of cigarette smoke onthe human airway epithelial cell transcriptome. Proc NatlAcad Sci USA 2004; 101:10143 e8.186. Szulakowski P, Crowther AJ, Jimenez LA, et al. The effect ofsmoking on the transcriptional regulation of lung inﬂamma-tion in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 174:41e50.187. Ito K, Ito M, Elliott WM, et al. Decreased histone deacetylaseactivity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl JMed 2005; 352:1967e76.
Med 2005; 352:1967e76.188. Marwick JA, Kirkham PA, Stevenson CS, et al. Cigarette smokealters chromatin remodeling and induces proinﬂammatorygenes in rat lungs. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2004; 31:633e42.189. Bitterman KJ, Anderson RM, Cohen HY, Latorre-Esteves M,Sinclair DA. Inhibition of silencing and accelerated aging bynicotinamide, a putative negative regulator of yeast sir2and human SIRT1. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:45099 e107.190. Imai S, Armstrong CM, Kaeberlein M, Guarente L. Transcrip-tional silencing and longevity protein Sir2 is an NAD-dependenthistone deacetylase. Nature 2000; 403:795e800.191. Buck SW, Gallo CM, Smith JS. Diversity in the Sir2 family ofprotein deacetylases. J Leukoc Biol 2004; 75:939e50.192. Langley E, Pearson M, Faretta M, et al. Human SIR2 deacety-lates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53-induced cellular senes-cence. Embo J 2002; 21:2383e96.193. Rodier F, Campisi J, Bhaumik D. Two faces of p53: aging andtumor suppression. Nucleic Acids Res ; 2007.
tumor suppression. Nucleic Acids Res ; 2007.194. Furukawa-Hibi Y, Yoshida-Araki K, Ohta T, Ikeda K,Motoyama N. FOXO forkhead transcription factors induceG(2)-M checkpoint in response to oxidative stress. J BiolChem 2002; 277:26729 e32.195. van der Horst A, Tertoolen LG, de Vries-Smits LM, Frye RA,Medema RH, Burgering BM. FOXO4 is acetylated uponperoxide stress and deacetylated by the longevity proteinhSir2(SIRT1). J Biol Chem 2004; 279:28873 e9.196. Moazed D. Enzymatic activities of Sir2 and chromatin silenc-ing. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2001; 13:232e8.197. Brunet A, Sweeney LB, Sturgill JF, et al. Stress-dependentregulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deace-tylase. Science 2004; 303:2011e5.198. Motta MC, Divecha N, Lemieux M, et al. Mammalian SIRT1represses forkhead transcription factors. Cell 2004; 116:551e63.199. Vogt PK, Jiang H, Aoki M. Triple layer control: phosphoryla-tion, acetylation and ubiquitination of FOXO proteins. CellCycle 2005; 4:908e13.
Cycle 2005; 4:908e13.200. Yang SR, Wright J, Bauter M, Seweryniak K, Kode A, Rahman I.Sirtuin regulates cigarette smoke-induced proinﬂammatorymediator release via RelA/p65 NF-kappaB in macrophages invitro and in rat lungs in vivo: implications for chronic inﬂam-mation and aging. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2007;292:L567e76.201. Rajendrasozhan S, Yang SR, Kinnula VL, Rahman I. SIRT1, ananti-inﬂammatory and anti-aging protein, is decreased inlungs of patients with COPD. Am J Respir Crit Care Med ; 2008.202. Howitz KT, Bitterman KJ, Cohen HY, et al. Small molecule ac-tivators of sirtuins extend Saccharomyces cerevisiae lifespan.Nature 2003; 425:191e6.203. Agusti AG. Systemic effects of chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005; 2:367e70 [discussion371,372].204. Wolf G. Calorie restriction increases life span: a molecularmechanism. Nutr Rev 2006; 64:89e92.205. Katic M, Kahn CR. The role of insulin and IGF-1 signaling in
longevity. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005; 62:320e43.206. Sinclair DA. Toward a uniﬁed theory of caloric restriction andlongevity regulation. Mech Ageing Dev 2005; 126:987e1002.
longevity. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005; 62:320e43.206. Sinclair DA. Toward a uniﬁed theory of caloric restriction andlongevity regulation. Mech Ageing Dev 2005; 126:987e1002.207. Murakami S. Stress resistance in long-lived mouse models.ExpGerontol 2006; 41:1014e9.208. Bartke A. Mini review: role of the growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor system in mammalian aging. Endocrinology2005; 146:3718e23.209. Pendergrass WR, Li Y, Jiang D, Fei RG, Wolf NS. Caloric restric-tion: conservation of cellular replicative capacity in vitroaccompanies lifespan extension in mice. Exp Cell Res 1995;217:309e16.210. Wolf NS, Penn PE, Jiang D, Fei RG, Pendergrass WR. Caloricrestriction: conservation of in vivo cellular replicative capac-ity accompanies lifespan extension in mice. Exp Cell Res1995; 217:317e23.211. Wolf NS, Pendergrass WR. The relationships of animal age andcaloric intake to cellular replication in vivo and in vitro: a re-view. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1999; 54:B502e17.
212. Sahebjami H. Effects of food deprivation on experimentalemphysema in obese rats. Exp Lung Res 1992; 18:675e86.213. Massaro D, Massaro GD. Hunger disease and pulmonaryalveoli. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170:723e4.214. Cook VJ, Coxson HO, Mason AG, Bai TR. Bullae, bronchiectasisand nutritional emphysema in severe anorexia nervosa. CanRespir J 2001; 8:361e5.215. Coxson HO, Chan IH, Mayo JR, Hlynsky J, Nakano Y,Birmingham CL. Early emphysema in patients with anorexianervosa. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170:748e52.216. Stanescu D, Pieters T. Anorexia nervosa and emphysema. AmJ Respir Crit Care Med 2005; 172:398 [author reply 9].217. Massaro D, Alexander E, Reiland K, Hoffman EP, Massaro GD,Clerch LB. Rapid onset of gene expression in lung, supportiveof formation of alveolar septa, induced by refeeding miceafter calorie restriction. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol2007; 292:L1313 e26.218. Harkema JR, Mauderly JL, Gregory RE, Pickrell JA. A compar-
ison of starvation and elastase models of emphysema in therat. Am Rev Respir Dis 1984; 129:584e91.219. Riley DJ, Thakker-Varia S. Effect of diet on lung structure,connective tissue metabolism and gene expression. J Nutr1995;125:1657S e60S.220. Hallin R, Gudmundsson G, Suppli Ulrik C, et al. Nutritional sta-tus and long-term mortality in hospitalised patients withchronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Respir Med2007; 101:1954e60.221. Vestbo J, Prescott E, Almdal T, et al. Body mass, fat-free bodymass, and prognosis in patients with chronic obstructive pul-monary disease from a random population sample: ﬁndingsfrom the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Am J Respir CritCare Med 2006; 173:79e83.222. Kyle UG, Morabia A, Schutz Y, Pichard C. Sedentarism affectsbody fat mass index and fat-free mass index in adults aged 18to 98 years. Nutrition 2004; 20:255e60.223. Kyle UG, Genton L, Gremion G, Slosman DO, Pichard C. Aging,
physical activity and height-normalized body compositionparameters. Clin Nutr 2004; 23:79e88.224. Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG, Whincup PH. Body fat distribu-tion, body composition, and respiratory function in elderlymen. Am J Clin Nutr 2005; 82:996e1003.225. Balasubramanian VP, Varkey B. Chronic obstructive pulmo-nary disease: effects beyond the lungs. Curr Opin Pulm Med2006; 12:106e12.226. Harik-Khan RI, Fleg JL, Wise RA. Body mass index and the riskof COPD. Chest 2002; 121:370e6.Aging and lung emphysema 1229
227. Hultquist CM, Meyers AW, Whelan JP, Klesges RC, Peacher-Ryan H, DeBon MW. The effect of smoking and light activityon metabolism in men. Health Psychol 1995; 14:124e31.228. Decramer M, De Benedetto F, Del Ponte A, Marinari S. Sys-temic effects of COPD. Respir Med 2005; 99(Suppl. B):S3 e10.229. Valdes AM, Andrew T, Gardner JP, et al. Obesity, cigarettesmoking, and telomere length in women. Lancet 2005; 366:662e4.230. Debigare R, Marquis K, Cote CH, et al. Catabolic/anabolicbalance and muscle wasting in patients with COPD. Chest2003; 124:83e9.231. Jankowska EA, Biel B, Majda J, et al. Anabolic deﬁciency inmen with chronic heart failure: prevalence and detrimentalimpact on survival. Circulation 2006; 114:1829e37.232. Valenti G, Denti L, Maggio M, et al. Effect of DHEAS on skele-tal muscle over the life span: the InCHIANTI study. J GerontolA Biol Sci Med Sci 2004; 59:466e72.233. Glei DA, Goldman N. Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS)
and risk for mortality among older Taiwanese. Ann Epidemiol2006; 16:510e5.234. Soares MJ, Piers LS, O’Dea K, Collier GR. Plasma leptin con-centrations, basal metabolic rates and respiratory quotientsin young and older adults. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord2000; 24:1592e9.235. Russell SJ, Kahn CR. Endocrine regulation of ageing. Nat RevMol Cell Biol 2007; 8:681e91.236. Picard F, Kurtev M, Chung N, et al. Sirt1 promotes fat mobili-zation in white adipocytes by repressing PPAR-gamma. Nature2004; 429:771e6.237. Machata B, Kronseder A, Lips K, et al. Effect of cigarettesmoke extract (CSE) on the differentiation and function ofadipocytes. Eur Respir J 2006; 28:585s.238. Barnes PJ, Adcock IM, Ito K. Histone acetylation and deacety-lation: importance in inﬂammatory lung diseases. Eur Respir J2005; 25:552e63.239. Bates JH, Davis GS, Majumdar A, Butnor KJ, Suki B. Linking pa-renchymal disease progression to changes in lung mechanical
function by percolation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 176:617e23.240. Illingworth CM. Trapped ﬁngers and amputated ﬁnger tips inchildren. J Pediatr Surg 1974; 9:853e8.241. Gilbert KA, Rannels DE. From limbs to lungs: a Newt perspec-tive on compensatory lung growth. News Physiol Sci 1999; 14:260e7.242. Solopaev BP. On the problem of regeneration of the lungs incaudate amphibia. Bull Exp Biol Med 1957; 44:1267e71.243. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss.Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26:562e5.244. von Zglinicki T, Burkle A, Kirkwood TB. Stress, DNA damageand ageing ean integrative approach. Exp Gerontol 2001;36:1049e62.245. Lou Z, Chen J. Cellular senescence and DNA repair. Exp CellRes2006; 312:2641e6.246. Fraga MF, Agrelo R, Esteller M. Cross-talk between aging andcancer: the epigenetic language. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007;1100 :60e74.247. Berdyyeva TK, Woodworth CD, Sokolov I. Human epithelialcells increase their rigidity with ageing in vitro: direct
measurements. Phys Med Biol 2005; 50:81e92.248. Bailey AJ. Molecular mechanisms of ageing in connectivetissues. Mech Ageing Dev 2001; 122:735e55.249. Friguet B. Oxidized protein degradation and repair in ageingand oxidative stress. FEBS Lett 2006; 580:2910e6.250. Stadtman ER. Protein oxidation and aging. Free Radic Res2006; 40:1250e8.251. Frisard M, Ravussin E. Energy metabolism and oxidativestress: impact on the metabolic syndrome and the agingprocess. Endocrine2006; 29:27e32.252. Terman A, Gustafsson B, Brunk UT. Autophagy, organelles andageing. J Pathol 2007; 211:134e43.1230 S. Karrasch et al.
