Contents lists available at ScienceDirectAutoimmunity Reviewsjournal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autrevReviewIntravenous Immunoglobulins as a new opportunity to treat discoid lupuserythematosusA case report and review of the literatureSara Tentia, Marta Fabbronia, Virginia Mancinib, Filomena Russoc, Mauro Galeazzia,Antonella Fioravantia,⁎aRheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, University of Siena, ItalybPathology Section, Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena, ItalycDermatology Section, Department of Clinical Medicine and Immunological Science, University of Siena, Siena, ItalyARTICLE INFOKeywords:Cutaneous LupusDiscoid lupus erythematosusIntravenous ImmunoglobulinsABSTRACTDiscoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a chronic dermatological disease that can lead to scarring, alopecia anddyspigmentation, if not properly treated. Actually, no drugs are speci ﬁcally approved for the treatment of CLE,
although the ﬁrst-line therapy usually consists of photoprotection associated to topical or oral steroids, topicalcalcineurin inhibitors and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). In cases of DLE refractory to these medications, manyother agents have been employed, such as dapsone, methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, biologicdrugs and Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG).We described the case of a DLE patient resistant to combination therapy with steroid and HCQ who wassuccessfully treated with cyclical IVIG therapy. The treatment with IVIG resulted rapidly eﬀ ective with persistenteﬃcacy and low rates of relapses, although more cycles of IVIG are needed to achieve a stable clinical remission.We also discussed the bene ﬁcial and promising eﬀ ects of IVIG in patients with Cutaneous Lupus reporting thepreviously published data.1. IntroductionDiscoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a chronic dermatologicaldisease that can lead to scarring, alopecia and dyspigmentation, if not
properly treated [ 1]. Cutaneous involvement usually occurs on sun-exposed areas, such as the face, ears, neck and scalp, but sometimes itcan be di ﬀused to large part of the body [ 1]. Diagnosis is based on thecharacteristic clinical ﬁndings consisting in well-demarcated, scaly,erythematosus macules or papules which gradually evolve in indurateddiscoid plaques. Over time, these lesions become atrophic with per-ipheral hyperpigmentation and central depigmentation [ 2]. When theclinical manifestations are not so evident and the diagnosis is uncertaina skin biopsy should be performed [ 3,4].DLE represents the most common form of Cutaneous Lupus (CLE),an entity that refers to a variety of LE-speci ﬁc cutaneous ﬁndingsusually subdivided into three di ﬀerent categories: acute CLE (ACLE),subacute CLE (SCLE), and chronic CLE (CCLE) which includes DLE, LEpanniculitis and chilblain LE [ 3,5].
panniculitis and chilblain LE [ 3,5].Actually, no drugs are speci ﬁcally approved for the treatment of CLEand a recent Cochrane systematic review concluded that there is noenough evidence to support the use of di ﬀerent treatments from hy-droxychloroquine (HCQ), acitretin and topic steroids [ 6]. First-linetherapy usually consists of photoprotection associated to topical or oralsteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors and HCQ. In cases of DLE re-fractory to these medications, many other agents have been employed,such as dapsone, methotrexate (MTX), azathioprine (AZA), cyclopho-sphamide (CPM), biologic drugs, including rituximab and IntravenousImmunoglobulin (IVIG) [ 6–8].IVIG is a therapeutic preparation of human polyspeci ﬁc IgG, derivedfrom the plasma of healthy donors. IVIG was initially administered, inthe early 1980s, as a replacement therapy in patients with primary orsecondary immunode ﬁciencies. Since then, IVIG was used in a large
spectrum of autoimmune and systemic in ﬂammatory disorders, thanksto its properties to modulate di ﬀerent pathways of the immune system[9–11].
spectrum of autoimmune and systemic in ﬂammatory disorders, thanksto its properties to modulate di ﬀerent pathways of the immune system[9–11].Although data on the usefulness of IVIG therapy in CLE are limited,this treatment has been successfully used to treat di ﬀerent manifesta-tions of CLE [ 12–20].https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2018.02.010Received 3 February 2018; Accepted 9 February 2018⁎Corresponding author at: Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, University of Siena, Viale Bracci 1, 53100 Siena, Italy.E-mail address: ﬁoravanti7@virgilio.it (A. Fioravanti).Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 791–795Available online 06 June 20181568-9972/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.T
Table 1Summary of available studies on the use of IVIG in Cutaneous Lupus (CLE).Authors StudydesignPts withCLE (n°)Diagnosis IVIG schedule Concomitant therapies E ﬃcacy SafetyPiette et al. 1995 Case series 5 DLE 1 g/kg/day for 2 days monthlyTherapy duration: n.r.IVIG preparation: n.r.Antimalarians,thalidomide, systemicsteroidsIn 3 pts all active skin lesions disappearedbetween 3 weeks and 3 months after the start ofIVIG therapy. Failure in 2 pts.One pt experienced transient headache andanother one ﬂu-like manifestationsLevy et al. 1999 Case serieson SLE (20pts)1 DLE 400 g/kg/day for 5 daysmonthlyTherapy duration: n.r.IVIG preparation: ISIVENHCQ 400 mg/day Signiﬁcant improvement in skin lesions Adverse events were not reportedGénéreau et al.1999Case report 1 SCLE 2 g/kg/month for 6 monthsIVIG preparation: n.r.HCQ (400 mg/day) + topicalbethametasonedipropionateThe skin lesions improved after 3 months and
completely recovered after 6 months.Adverse events were not reportedGoodﬁeld et al.2004Case series 12 SLE with CLE (5 SCLEpts, 5 DLE pts, 1 bullouspt, 1 ACLE pt)1 g/kg/day for 2 days followedby 400 mg/kg/month formaximum 6 monthsIVIG preparation: n.r.Oral prednisone (range5–10 mg/day) (12 pts)At the end of the IVIG therapy, 5 pts presentedcomplete clearing of their skin lesion, two partialimprovement and 3 pts limited responses.One pt developed acute cutaneous vasculitis afterhisﬁrst IVIG infusion and required e.v. CPM tocontrol the disease. Two pts had mild headacheand malaise after the ﬁrst infusion.Kreuter A 2005 Case report 1 SCLE 1 g/kg/day for 3 days monthlyfor 3 times, then 0.5 g/kg/dayfor 3 days monthly for 3 timesIVIG preparation: IntraglobinPrednisone (50 mg/day),AZA (150 mg/day)A complete remission of cutaneous lesions wasobtained after 3 cycles of IVIG, but new lesions
occurred after the sixth cycle of IVIG whenprednisone was tapered to 10 mg/dayAdverse events were not reportedLampropoulos CE2007Case series 3 SLE + SCLE (1 pt)SCLE (2 pts)Single course of 400 mg/kg/day for 5 daysIVIG preparation: n.r.MMF (1.5 g/day) and HCQ(400 mg/day) (1 pt)Tacrolimus (1 pt)MMF and Tacrolimus(1 pt)A rapid remission during almost one year wasobserved in one pt.A signi ﬁcant, but not complete remission wasreported after 4 months in another pt and a singledose of 20 g was re-administered to achievecomplete recovery.A signi ﬁcant improvement of skin lesions wasobtained, but lasted only 2 months in one pt.Adverse events were not reportedKy C 2015 Case series 16 CLE 500 mg/kg/day for 4 daysmonthly for 3 monthsIVIG preparation: Gamunex-CNone All the objective and subjective measures ofdisease activity improved at the end of IVIGtherapy and the remission persisted for the6 months-follow-up. 3 patients had a temporaryﬂare.No serious side e ﬀects occurred. Two pts
developed mild anemia, 1 mild neutropenia, 5headache, 1 back aches, 1 high blood pressure, 2fever, 1 gastro-intestinal upset, 2 nausea/vomiting and 1 herpes-associated erythemamultiformeAbbreviations: Pts: patients; CLE: Cutaneous Lupus; IVIG: Intravenous Immunoglobulin; DLE: Discoid lupus erythematosus; SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine; SCLE: subacute CutaneousLupus; ACLE: acute Cutaneous Lupus; CPM: cyclophosphamide; AZA: azathioprine; MMF: mycophenolate mofetil.S. Tenti et al. Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 791–795792
In this paper, we report the clinical history of a patient with re-sistant DLE and an intercurrent diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma ofthe oral cavity who signi ﬁcantly responded to treatment with IVIG. Wealso review and discuss the available data in this ﬁeld (Table 1).2. Case reportA 65-year-old, Caucasian woman was diagnosed with DLE inSeptember 2011. She was referred to the Rheumatology Unit of Siena(Italy) for the occurrence for three months of well-de ﬁned, scaly er-ythematous and edematous plaques a ﬀecting her face, chest, upperarms and ears, associated to photosensitivity ( Fig. 1A). Furthermore,she presented a non-erosive arthritis mainly involving hands and wrists,but no clinical manifestations suggestive for systemic erythematosuslupus were detected. Testing for antinuclear antibody (ANA) was po-sitive (titer 1/160) with a speckled pattern, while anti-dsDNA, ex-tractable nuclear antigens (ENA), antiCCp, rheumatoid factor and an-
tiphospholipid antibodies were negative. Erythrocyte sedimentationrate (ESR), C Reactive protein (CRP), C3 and C4 were in the normalrange. No haematologic, renal, hepatic or pulmonary involvement wasobserved during disease course.A skin biopsy of the left forearm was performed con ﬁrming theclinically suspected DLE ( Figs. 2A –E and 3). According to the 2017classiﬁcation criteria for DLE [ 4] we showed orthokeratosis of epi-dermis, vacuolar degeneration of the basal keratinocytes, perivascularand periadnexal in ﬂammatory in ﬁltrate of the dermis.In December 2011 the patient started taking oral corticosteroids(prednisone 5 mg/day) and HCQ at a dosage of 400 mg daily. After sixmonths this treatment had made the patient free from arthritis, but notfrom DLE recurrences.Therefore, in July 2012, she started a treatment with intravenoushuman immunoglobulins (Flebogamma ®) at a dosage of 400 mg/kg/
day for three consecutive days for six months. Successively she con-tinued IVIG 400 mg/kg monthly for six times. During this period shecontinued a therapy with HCQ and prednisone was tapered down to2.5 mg/day. A marked improvement of cutaneous manifestations wasevident after two courses of the treatment and lasted over one year afterthe end of the treatment ( Fig. 1B). Unfortunately, in April 2015,squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity was found and the patientunderwent surgical treatment and local radiotherapy with a total doseof 59.4 Gy (standard fractionation 1.8 Gy/day) for two months. Therapywith steroids at the lowest e ﬀective dosage (prednisone 5 mg/day) wasmaintained during this period. In 2015 September, DLE skin re-currences were observed in the face, upper limbs and hands in asso-ciation with a recovery of shoulder, right elbow and right hand ar-thritis. The patient added 400 mg of HCQ to 5 mg/daily of prednisone.
After 6 months, despite of this treatment skin lesions got worse, then anew cycle of IVIG was started at dosage of 400 mg/kg/day for threeconsecutive days for six courses and maintained monthly at same do-sage for six months. The cutaneous manifestations of DLE were opti-mally controlled since the second month of IVIG and the improvementlasted over six months after the end of IVIG. As of this writing, thepatient has just restarted a new course of IVIG.Finally, we highlight that IVIG was well tolerated and did not in-duce any signi ﬁcant modi ﬁcations of laboratory parameters.3. DiscussionWe presented the case of a DLE patient resistant to previous com-bination therapy with low dose of steroid and HCQ who was success-fully treated with cyclical IVIG therapy. The treatment with IVIG re-sulted rapidly e ﬀective with persistent e ﬃcacy and low rates ofrelapses, although more cycles of IVIG are needed to achieve a stableclinical remission.
Considering that there are no speci ﬁctreatments approved for DLEand CLE in general, and that such diseases may be resistant to im-
Considering that there are no speci ﬁctreatments approved for DLEand CLE in general, and that such diseases may be resistant to im-munosuppressive agents, IVIG therapy could be a valid and useful op-tion to achieve remission of these cutaneous manifestations [ 6]. Per-haps, IVIG represents a more precious alternative to treat DLE, if weconsider that these disorders are known to be associated to an increasedrisk of squamous cell carcinoma and that a link between im-munosuppressive therapy, especially CYC and malignancy has beendemonstrated [ 21,22].IVIG is a blood product containing pooled, polyvalent, IgG anti-bodies and deriving from the plasma of 10,000 –20,000 blood donors.Its use has expanded over the years from the treatment of primary andsecondary immunode ﬁciencies to a great variety of autoimmune andinﬂammatory disorders, especially in the dermatologic ﬁeld [ 23].The exact mechanism by which IVIG exerts its immunomodulatory
and anti-in ﬂammatory e ﬀects remains not fully understood, but dif-ferent pathways targeting the innate and adaptive immune systems areinvolved [ 23]. The most well described actions are i) inhibition of theFig. 1. (A) Well-de ﬁned, scaly, erythematous and edematous plaques located on her chin, right cheek and neck. (B) Signi ﬁcant improvement after two courses of theIntravenous Immunoglobulins treatment.S. Tenti et al. Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 791–795793
eﬀects mediated by the complement fragments C3a and C5a, ii) thesaturation of the Fc receptors on phagocytic and vascular endothelialcells that accelerates the catabolism of circulating pathogenic auto-antibodies, reduces phagocytosis and the release of inﬂ ammatorymediators, iii) down-regulation of B cells receptors and decrease of Bcell proliferation and di ﬀerentiation, iv) modulation of T cells numberand function with an increase of regulatory T cells and v) regulation ofthe release of pro/anti-in ﬂammatory cytokines and of metalloprotei-nases [ 23,24].We conducted a search of the literature in January 2018 (the periodexamined was 1994 –2018). Medline was searched using the term“Intravenous Immunoglobulin ”in combination with “discoid lupus er-ythematosus ”and “cutaneous lupus erythematosus ”. Papers written inlanguages other than English were excluded.There are limited data about the e ﬀect of IVIG on CLE, mostly de-
rived from case series or reports ( Table 1). Particularly concerning IVIGtherapy in patients with CDLE, the ﬁrst report came back to 1995, whenPiette et al. [ 12] described ﬁve patients treated with high-dose IVIG(1 g/kg/day for two consecutive days every month). However, we haveno any information about the duration of the treatment. Three patientsexperienced a complete resolution of the skin lesions between threeweeks and three months after the beginning of IVIG therapy; relapseswere observed 2– 10 months after IVIG withdrawal and disappearedwith re-institution of IVIG treatment in one patient.Subsequently, Levy et al. [ 16] described the case of a CDLE patientin a study including other 19 patients with systemic lupus er-ythematosus (SLE) treated with 1– 8 courses of IVIG (ISIVEN) at thedosage of 400 mg/kg/day for ﬁve consecutive days, reporting a sig-niﬁcant improvement in skin lesions. The schedule of each treatmentwas very di ﬀerent between patients.
was very di ﬀerent between patients.In an uncontrolled study, 12 patients with histologically con ﬁrmedCLE, of whom ﬁve were diagnosed with CDLE, received IVIG at thedosage of 1 g/kg for two consecutive days, followed by 400 mg/kgmonthly for six months or until disease resolution. Four of the ﬁveCDLE patients showed some degree of improvements: two patients re-ported partial but helpful clearing of the skin (50%) and one with alimited response (< 50%); the other one CDE patient developed acutecutaneous vasculitis after one infusion. Greater e ﬃcacy was observed inSCLE patients [ 17].Adjunctive evidence derives from the reports on IVIG therapy forSCLE. Généreau et al. [ 15] were the ﬁrst ones who described the case ofawoman with SCLE successfully treated with IVIG. The patients in-itially received monotherapy with HCQ for two years with no responseand subsequently high-dose IVIG (2 g/kg per month) were added. After
three months, the skin lesions improved and after six months resultedcompletely recovered.A similar case report of a patient diagnosed with SCLE and re-fractory to multiple steroid and immunosuppressive agents [chlor-oquine, AZA, MTX, CPM, cyclosporine (CYC), mycophenolate mofetil(MMF)] was described by Kreuter et al. [ 18]. After the worsening of theskin lesions, the patients were treated with IVIG at a dose of 1 g/kg/dayover three consecutive days, obtaining an improvement of the er-ythematosquamous plaques after the ﬁrst cycle and a complete clear-ance after three cycles.The usefulness of IVIG in SCLE was then con ﬁrmed byLampropoulos et al. [ 19] who reported the cases of three patients re-sistant to multiple topic and systemic treatments, such as corticoster-oids, HCQ, CPM, MTX, MMF and/or AZA who were treated with IVIG atthe dosage of 400 mg/kg/day for ﬁve days for one month. All patientspresented a signi ﬁcant improvement of the skin lesions, although one
patient needed an adjunctive single dose of 20 g of IVIG for the re-solution of the active remained rash. The e ﬃcacy was maintained over
patient needed an adjunctive single dose of 20 g of IVIG for the re-solution of the active remained rash. The e ﬃcacy was maintained overtime with a duration of remission ranging from two months to moreFig. 2. (A) Interfaces and perivascular dermatosis (H&E 5x), (B –C) perivascular and periadnexal inﬂ ammatory inﬁ ltrate of the dermis (H&E 20x), (D –E) ortho-keratosis of epidermis and vacuolar degeneration of the basal keratinocytes (H&E 20×).Fig. 3. Deposition of mucin with Alcian blue stain in the super ﬁcial and deepdermis.S. Tenti et al. Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 791–795794
than one year.More recently, Ky et al. [ 20] enrolled 16 patients with active CLE towhom IVIG monotherapy (at 500 mg/kg/day for four consecutive days)was administered for three months; after IVIG discontinuation, thepatients were monitored for additional six months to analyze the re-lapse incidence. At the end of the treatment period, all the evaluatedmeasures of disease activity improved, such as Cutaneous Lupus Er-ythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index (CLASI) and Skindex-29.The relapse rate resulted lower than that reported in the literature, asonly three patients presented a transient ﬂare of CLE symptoms.However, contrasting results were described by De Pita et al. [ 13]who reported SLE and CLE patients with no improvement or even withexacerbation after IVIG, and by Wollina et al. [ 14] who observed noresponse in patients with SLE and skin manifestations.The optimal schedule of IVIG treatment, including the duration,
frequency and dosage, has not been deﬁ nitively established. Most stu-dies described a protocol with high dose (0.4 g/kg/day for ﬁve con-secutive days once a month or 1 g/kg/day for two consecutive daysonce a month) for autoimmune disorders. We chose a low dosage basedon previous experience in SLE and primary and secondary antipho-spholipid syndrome [ 25–27]. This dosage led us to obtain a satisfactoryclinical response with a major cost saving and reduction of adverseevents, allowing a long-term treatment.Taking into account that no controlled trials were conducted toassess the real e ﬃcacy of IVIG in DLE and that the existing reports arevery heterogeneous about the study population, schedule of IVIGtreatment (dosage, number and duration of courses, frequency and typeof IVIG manufacturer), times of follow-up, and concomitant therapiesemployed, any deﬁ nitive conclusion is impossible to be drawn.Our review of the literature highlighted the scarcity of the data in
thisﬁeld and the subsequent need to encourage clinical controlled trialswith uniform therapy schedule and long-term follow-up.Our case report with promising results in the use of IVIG, as anadjuvant therapy, represents an opportunity to re-evaluate the possiblerole of IVIG for cutaneous manifestations associated to autoimmunediseases, despite its high costs.FundingThis research did not receive any speci ﬁc grant from fundingagencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-pro ﬁt sectors.Declaration of interestThe authors declare that there is no con ﬂict of interest that could beperceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported.References[1]Walling HW, Sontheimer RD. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: issues in diagnosisand treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol 2009;10:365 –81.[2]Okon LG, Werth VP. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: diagnosis and treatment. BestPract Res Clin Rheumatol 2013;27:391 –404.
Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2013;27:391 –404.[3]Kuhn A, Landmann A. The classi ﬁcation and diagnosis of cutaneous lupus er-ythematosus. J Autoimmun 2014;48-49:14 –9.[4]Elman SA, Joyce C, Nyberg F, Furukawa F, Good ﬁeld M, Hasegawa M, et al.Development of classi ﬁcation criteria for discoid lupus erythematosus: results of aDelphi exercise. J Am Acad Dermatol 2017;77:261 –7.[5]Zhang YP, Wu J, Han YF, Shi ZR, Wang L. Pathogenesis of cutaneous lupus er-ythema associated with and without systemic lupus erythema. Autoimmun Rev2017;16:735 –42.[6]Jessop S, Whitelaw DA, Grainge MJ, Jayasekera P. Drugs for discoid lupus er-ythematosus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:CD002954 .[7]Sigges J, Biazar C, Landmann A, Ruland V, Patsinakidis N, Amler S, et al. EUSCLECo-Authors. Therapeutic strategies evaluated by the European Society of CutaneousLupus Erythematosus (EUSCLE) Core Set Questionnaire in more than 1000 patientswith cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Autoimmun Rev 2013;12:694 –702.
[8]Garza-Mayers AC, McClurkin M, Smith GP. Review of treatment for discoid lupuserythematosus. Dermatol Ther 2016;29:274 –83.
with cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Autoimmun Rev 2013;12:694 –702.[8]Garza-Mayers AC, McClurkin M, Smith GP. Review of treatment for discoid lupuserythematosus. Dermatol Ther 2016;29:274 –83.[9]Kivity S, Katz U, Daniel N, Nussinovitch U, Papageorgiou N, Shoenfeld Y. Evidencefor the use of intravenous immunoglobulins –a review of the literature. Clin RevAllergy Immunol 2010;38:201 –69.[10] Tenti S, Cheleschi S, Guidelli GM, Galeazzi M, Fioravanti A. Intravenous im-munoglobulins and antiphospholipid syndrome: how, when and why? A review ofthe literature. Autoimmun Rev 2016;15:226 –35.[11] Guidelli GM, Tenti S, Pascarelli NA, Galeazzi M, Fioravanti A. Granulomatosis withpolyangiitis and intravenous immunoglobulins: a case series and review of the lit-erature. Autoimmun Rev 2015;14:659 –64.[12] Piette JC, Frances C, Roy S, Papo T, Godeau P. High-dose immunoglobulins in thetreatment of refractory cutaneous lupus erythematosus: open trial in 5 patients.
Arthritis Rheum 1995;38(suppl 9):S304 .[13] De Pità O, Bellucci AM, Ru ﬀelli M, Girardelli CR, Puddu P. Intravenous im-munoglobulin therapy is not able to e ﬃciently control cutaneous manifestations inpatients with lupus erythematosus. Lupus 1997;6:415 –7.[14] Wollina U, Looks A, Kammler HJ. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in derma-tology: overview and center experience. An Bras Dermatol 1998;73:255 –9.[15] Généreau T, Chosidow O, Danel C, Chérin P, Herson S. High-dose intravenousimmunoglobulinin cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Arch Dermatol1999;135:1124 –5.[16] Levy Y, Sherer Y, Ahmed A, Langevitz P, George J, Fabbrizzi F, et al. A study of 20SLE patients with intravenous immunoglobulin –clinical and serologic response.Lupus 1999;8:705 –12.[17] Goodﬁeld M, Davison K, Bowden K. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) fortherapy-resistant cutaneous lupus erythematosus (LE). J Dermatolog Treat2004;15:46 –50.
2004;15:46 –50.[18] Kreuter A, Hyun J, Altmeyer P, Gambichler T. Intravenous immunoglobulin forrecalcitrant subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Acta Derm Venereol2005;85:545 –7.[19] Lampropoulos CE, Hughes GR, D'Cruz DP. Intravenous immunoglobulin in thetreatment of resistant subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus: a possible alter-native. Clin Rheumatol 2007;26:981 –3.[20] Ky C, Swasdibutra B, Khademi S, Desai S, Laquer V, Grando SA. E ﬃcacy of in-travenous immunoglobulin monotherapy in patients with cutaneous lupus er-ythematosus: results of proof-of-concept study. Dermatol Rep 2015;7:5804 .[21] Hsu CY, Lin MS, Su YJ, Cheng TT, Lin YS, Chen YC, et al. Cumulative im-munosuppressant exposure is associated with diversi ﬁed cancer risk among 14 832patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a nested case-control study.Rheumatology (Oxford) 2017;56:620 –8.[22] Arvanitidou IE, Nikitakis NG, Georgaki M, Papadogeorgakis N, Tzioufas A,
Sklavounou A. Multiple primary squamous cell carcinomas of the lower lip andtongue arising in discoid lupus erythematosus: a case report. Oral Surg Oral MedOral Pathol Oral Radiol 2018;125:e22-e30 .[23] Gelfand EW. Intravenous immune globulin in autoimmune and in ﬂammatory dis-eases. N Engl J Med 2012;367:2015 –25.[24] Basyreva LY, Brodsky IB, Gusev AA, Zhapparova ON, Mikhalchik EV, Gusev SA,et al. The e ﬀect of Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG) on \textit{ex vivo} activa-tion of human leukocytes. Hum Antibodies 2016;24:39 –44.[25] Sherer Y, Kuechler S, Jose Scali J, Rovensky J, Levy Y, Zandman-Goddard G, et al.Low dose intravenous immunoglobulin in systemic lupus erythematosus: analysis of62 cases. Isr Med Assoc J 2008;10:55 –7.[26] Tenti S, Guidelli GM, Bellisai F, Galeazzi M, Fioravanti A. Long-term treatment ofantiphospholipid syndrome with intravenous immunoglobulin in addition to con-ventional therapy. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2013;31:877 –82.
[27] Shoenfeld Y, Katz U. IVIg therapy in autoimmunity and related disorders: our ex-perience with a large cohort of patients. Autoimmunity 2005;38:123 –37.S. Tenti et al.
[27] Shoenfeld Y, Katz U. IVIg therapy in autoimmunity and related disorders: our ex-perience with a large cohort of patients. Autoimmunity 2005;38:123 –37.S. Tenti et al.Autoimmunity Reviews 17 (2018) 791–795795
