Psychological Bulletin1991, Vol. L10, No. 1,109-128Copyright 1991 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.0033-2909/91/i3.00What Is Beautiful Is Good, But. . .: A Meta-Anatytic Review of Researchon the Physical Attractiveness StereotypeAlice H. EagjyPurdue UniversityRichard D. AshmoreRutgers—The State University of New JerseyMona G. MakhijaniPurdue UniversityLaura C. LongoRutgers—The State University of New JerseyThis review demonstrates that the physical attractiveness stereotype established by studies of per-son perception is not as strong or general as suggested by the often-used summary phrase what isbeautiful is good. Although subjects in these studies ascribed more favorable personality traits andmore successful life outcomes to attractive than unattractive targets, the average magnitude of thisbeauty-is-good effect was moderate, and the strength of the effect varied considerably from study to
study Consistent with our implicit personality theory framework, a substantial portion of thisvariation was explained by the specific content of the inferences that subjects were asked to make:The differences in subjects* perception of attractive and unattractive targets were largest for indexesof social competence; intermediate for potency, adjustment, and intellectual competence; and nearzero for integrity and concern for others. The strength of the physical attractiveness stereotype alsovaried as a function of other attributes of the studies, including the presence of individuatinginformation.One of the most widely cited conclusions from research onphysical attractiveness is summarized by Dion, Berscheid, andWalster's (1972) claim that, in people's perceptions of others,"what is beautiful is good" (p. 285). This statement linkingbeauty and goodness suggests the existence of a stereotypewhereby physically attractive individuals are believed to possess
a wide variety of positive personal qualities. In this article, weintegrate the available research on the physical attractivenessstereotype to determine the extent to which the statement thatwhat is beautiful is good provides an accurate summary of peo-ple's inferences from cues that convey physical attractiveness.In the classic study on the physical attractiveness stereotype,Dion and her associates (1972) had subjects rate facial photo-graphs that had been selected on the basis of judges' agreementthat the pictured individuals were low, medium, or high in phys-ical attractiveness. Subjects' ratings pertained to various person-This research was supported by National Science FoundationGrants BNS-8616149 to Richard EX Ashmore and Frances K. DelBoca, Co-Principal Investigators, and BNS-S605256 to Alice H. Eagl>;Principal Investigator. A preliminary report of this research was re-ported at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Society,
June 1989. A table showing the effect sizes and study characteristics foreach study included in the meta-analysis is available from Alice H.Eagly or Richard EX Ashmore.We thank Thomas Alley, Ellen Berscheid, Linda Jackson, and threeanonymous reviewers for their comments on a draft of the article.Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed toAlice H. Eagly, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue Univer-sity, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-1364, or Richard D. Ashmore, De-partment of Psychology, Tillett Hall, Kilmer Campus, Rutgers Univer-sity, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903.ality traits as well as to life outcomes such as marital happinessand career success. Indeed, subjects ascribed more favorablepersonality traits and more successful life outcomes to the pic-tured individuals to the extent that they were physically attrac-tive.The experimental paradigm introduced by Dion and her col-leagues (1972) has guided many subsequent investigators, and
there is, thus, a relatively large body of research on the attractive-
tive.The experimental paradigm introduced by Dion and her col-leagues (1972) has guided many subsequent investigators, andthere is, thus, a relatively large body of research on the attractive-ness stereotype. Most narrative reviewers of this literature haveagreed that the beauty-is-good stereotype is a strong and gen-eral phenomenon (Adams, 1982; Alley & Hildebrandt, 1988;Berscheid, 1981; Berscheid & Walster, 1974; Dion, 1981,1986;Hatfield &Sprecher, 1986; Patzer, 1985). For example, Hatfieldand Sprecher wrote that "people believe good-looking peoplepossess almost all the virtues known to humankind" (p. xix).Most secondary sources, especially introductory social psychol-ogy textbooks, have likewise treated the beauty-is-good stereo-type as a homogeneous, potent, and firmly established phenom-enon (e.g, see Baron & Byrne, 1987, p. 197; Deaux & Wrights-man, 1988, p. 250). In this article, we report the first use of
meta-analytic procedures to combine quantitatively the exist-ing studies to examine the strength and generality of the attrac-tiveness stereotype.Although the general consensus in social psychology is thatan attractive target leads perceivers to make strong inferences ofpersonality goodness, reviewers have noted exceptions to thisphenomenon. Dion (1981,1986) suggested that the beauty-is-good effect is strongest for measures of social competence andinterpersonal ease, and Bassili (1981) reached a similar conclu-sion, arguing that the core of the physical attractiveness stereo-type is social vitality or extroversion. Also, beginning withDermer and Thiel (1975), reviewers noted a dark side to the109
110 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOstereotype. Cash and Janda (1984, p. 52) labeled this aspect the"what is beautiful is self-centered" stereotype on the basis oftheir observation that attractive people may be thought to bevain and egotistical. What is needed at this point is a formal andgeneral scheme for understanding these qualifications and ex-ceptions. As a step in this direction, we conceptualize the pro-cess underlying the attractiveness stereotype in terms of theperson-perception construct of implicit personality theory (seealso Adams, 1982; McArthur, 1982). We then frame predictionsabout variation in the beauty-is-good effect in terms of thisconceptual approach. These hypotheses are tested by means ofa quantitative review of the accumulated research. Before pre-senting the details of this review, we situate our discussion of thebeauty-is-good stereotype within the total body of research andtheory on physical attractiveness.Social Psychology of Beauty
Social Psychology of BeautyA large amount of research has accumulated on physical at-tractiveness (see Cash's, 1981, bibliography of almost 500 nonre-dundant entries). Because this research area is multidisciplin-ary, the studies are methodologically diverse and pertain to avariety of specific hypotheses. However, among studies formu-lated at a social psychological level of analysis, most researchhas addressed three broad questions: (a) Are attractive peopleperceived differently than unattractive people? (b) Are attractivepeople treated differently than unattractive people? (c) Do at-tractive people have different characteristics (i£., personalitytraits, skills, behavioral tendencies) than unattractive people?The first research area, the perception of beautiful people,concerns stereotyping on the basis of physical appearance. Thesecond area, which concerns differential treatment as a func-tion of physical attractiveness, examines looks-based discrimi-
nation, a phenomenon that depends on factors in addition tostereotypes about physical attractiveness (e.g., the social rolesgoverning interaction). The third type of research focuses noton people's reactions to targets, but on the characteristics ofattractive and unattractive individuals, as measured by variousmethods of psychological assessment (e.g., personality tests,self-reports of behavior, observations of behavior). The findingsof this third type of research have often been interpreted interms of self-fulfilling prophecies (e.g, Snyder, Tanke, & Ber-scheid, 1977) or a kernel of truth that underlies the attractivenessstereotype (e.g., Alley & Hildebrandt, 1988).Our review concerns only the first area of social psychologi-cal research on attractiveness: the perception of attractive andunattractive individuals. There are several reasons for thisfocus. One reason is practical: A thorough review of all threeaspects of physical attractiveness research would require many
years to complete and would produce an outcome too large forpresentation in an article format. A second reason is strategic:Meta-analyses are best targeted to research literatures that arenot defined extremely broadly and that have at least a moderateamount of methodological coherence (see Mullen, 1989). Athird reason is analytic: The beauty-is-good stereotype is gener-ally regarded as providing the major mechanism underlyingdifferential treatment based on attractiveness and the develop-ment of differential assessed characteristics, at least insofar asthese characteristics are mediated by self-fulfilling prophecies.Therefore, the stereotype question can be regarded as morebasic to social psychological analysis than the questions oftreatment and assessed characteristics. If the physical attractive-ness stereotype is not at least moderately strong and robust, it isunlikely to underlie the effects of physical attractiveness ontreatment and people's characteristics.
treatment and people's characteristics.Our decision to focus on the physical attractiveness stereo-
unlikely to underlie the effects of physical attractiveness ontreatment and people's characteristics.Our decision to focus on the physical attractiveness stereo-type has two important implications—one methodological andone theoretical. Methodologically, we targeted our meta-analy-sis to include only studies that assess the physical attractivenessstereotype in a relatively pure form, without the constraints ofparticular role relationships such as those that regulate socialinteraction between teachers and students or therapists andpatients. To examine stereotyping in a relatively role-free envi-ronment, we included in our review only those studies in whichsubjects inferred the attributes of people to whom they were notlinked by particular social roles. Subjects' inferences from phys-ical appearance in role-regulated environments should be con-sidered in future reviews that are conceptualized to take thespecifics of role relationships into account. In terms of theoreti-
cal implications, our focus on the physical attractiveness stereo-type led us to formulate our review in terms of existing psycho-logical research on impression formation and stereotyping. Wenow turn to this formulation.Physical Attractiveness Stereotype and ImplicitPersonality TheoryAshmore and Del Boca (1979; see also Ashmore, 1981; Ash-more, Del Boca, & Wohlers, 1986) argued that stereotypes canbe fruitfully conceptualized in terms of the concept of implicitpersonality theory (D. J. Schneider, 1973). By treating stereo-types as part of ordinary social cognition (see also Hamilton,1981), Ashmore and his co-workers placed stereotypes withinthe larger set of knowledge structures that individuals use tomake sense of other people's behavior. More specifically, im-plicit personality theories are hypothetical cognitive structureswhose primary components are personal attributes (e.g., person-ality traits) and inferential relations that specify the degree to
which these attributes covary. The link between such implicittheories and stereotypes about group members becomes appar-ent when we regard group membership as one of the personalattributes inferentially associated with other attributes in suchan implicit theory (Ashmore, 1981). In fact, the inferential rela-tions between group membership and other personal attributescan be regarded as synonymous with the stereotype itself. Thus,translating the usual definition of stereotype as a set of beliefsabout the characteristics of group members into the language ofimplicit personality theory, Ashmore and Del Boca (1979) de-fined stereotype as "a structured set of inferential relations thatlink a social category with personal attributes" (p. 225).The utility of this conceptualization has been demonstratedfor gender stereotypes. Using the implicit personality theoryapproach, Ashmore and his colleagues identified the inferential
relations linking the social categories of male and female tovarious dimensions of personality perception (see Ashmore,1981). Specifically, the distinction between male and femalewas closely associated with the personality dimension ofstrong-weak (or potency). Also men were thought to possess
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 111positive intellectual qualities such as scientific and negative so-cial attributes such as sternness. In contrast, women were asso-ciated with negative intellectual qualities such as naivete andpositive social attributes such as helpfulness.From this same perspective, research on the beauty-is-goodstereotype can be viewed as examining the inferential relationsbetween physical attractiveness and personal attributes. Thesocial categories of attractive and unattractive people shouldthus be associated in individuals' cognitions with various di-mensions of personality. This approach contrasts with thoseanalyses of the physical attractiveness stereotype that take intoaccount only inferences from attractiveness to the general fa-vorability of personality. This presumed inference from attrac-tiveness to evaluation is precisely described by the statementthat beauty is good. This one-dimensional evaluative model
treats the different trait and life-outcome dependent variablesused in attractiveness research as if they indexed a single, ab-stract good-bad continuum. Although the notion of a content-free evaluative dimension has much conceptual and empiricalvalue (e.g., Osgood, Suci, & Tannenbaum, 1957), research onimplicit personality theory has demonstrated that the evalua-tive dimension can be partitioned by perceivers into content-specific types of evaluative meaning. Support for this partition-ing of evaluative meaning exists in Rosenberg and his col-leagues' research using multidimensional scaling (Kim &Rosenberg, 1980; Rosenberg, 1977; Rosenberg, Nelson, & Vive-kananthan, 1968; Rosenberg & Sedlak, 1972). According to thisresearch, one particularly important distinction between typesof evaluative meaning, at least for young adults, is between so-cial and intellectual competence (Rosenberg, 1977; Rosenberg etal, 1968). In addition, on the basis of his own and others' re-
search, Rosenberg identified the content-specific evaluative cat-egories of maturity, concern for others, integrity, psychologicalstability, and physical attractiveness. He also designated potencyas an important category that is sometimes relatively indepen-dent of evaluation (Kim & Rosenberg, 1980; Rosenberg et al,1968; see also Ashmore, 1981). In view of Rosenberg's inclusionof physical attractiveness among these content-specific evalua-tive categories, analyzing the beauty-is-good stereotype withinthe framework of implicit personality theory is especially ap-propriate.This conceptual framework suggests that part of the varia-tion in the impact of physical attractiveness on subjects' infer-ences about personality and life outcomes may be explained bythe specific content of these inferences (see also Bull & Rumsey,1988, pp. 296-297). In particular, physical attractiveness maybe more strongly linked to some dimensions of implicit person-
ality theories than to other dimensions. To test this possibility,we developed a content-analysis scheme for classifying the de-pendent variables used in studies of the physical attractivenessstereotype into the components identified in research on im-plicit personality theory. This scheme takes Rosenbergls (1977)evaluative categories as its starting point. Although Rosenberg'smaturity category could not be treated as a separate class be-cause it was.seldom represented in research on the physicalattractiveness stereotype, dependent variables correspondingto Rosenberg's other types were common enough to includethem as categories in the meta-analysis: social competence, in-tellectual competence, concern for others, integrity, adjustment(i£, psychological stability), and potency.The core of the social competence category is those interper-sonal skills and traits concerned with sociability (e.g., extraver-sion) as well as the outcomes of such skills and inclinations (e.g.,
popularity). Social competence, as here construed, corresponds
sonal skills and traits concerned with sociability (e.g., extraver-sion) as well as the outcomes of such skills and inclinations (e.g.,popularity). Social competence, as here construed, correspondsclosely with Bassili's (1981, p. 242) "social vitality" and Dion's(1986, p. 8) "social competence and interpersonal ease." Theintellectual competence category centers on intellectual andtask-relevant ability (e.g, intelligent) and the results of such abil-ity and motivation (eg, career success); this category also en-compasses a hard and rational mental style (e.g., practical). Con-cern for others, like social competence, implies interpersonalskills. The emphasis, however, is not on sociability and popular-ity, but concern for others' welfare and the associated quality ofselflessness. The positive side of this category involves beingemotionally supportive as well as sensitive and generous toothers. The negative side of this category, which includes traits
such as vain and egotistical, is the dark side of the attractivenessstereotype acknowledged by some reviewers (eg., Adams, 1982;Cash & Janda, 1984). The crucial issue for defining the integritycategory is honesty. This quality can take the form of interper-sonal actions such as telling the truth (vs. being a liar) or abidingby laws and norms (vs. breaking them). The adjustment cate-gory, which is a slight enlargement of Rosenberg's (1977) psycho-logical stability category, includes not only normal (vs. abnor-mal) psychological functioning, but also other indicators of pos-itive adult adjustment, such as self-esteem and good health.Potency resembles Osgood and colleagues' (1957) potency orstrong versus weak factor. In interpersonal terms, potency im-plies dominance over other people (Ashmore, 1981; White,1980).Sources of the Physical Attractiveness StereotypeUnderstanding how these types of evaluative meaningsmight he mentally associated with physical attractiveness re-
quires consideration of how people learn their implicit theoriesof personality including their beliefs about what is associatedwith good looks. Two general types of inputs seem most impor-tant: (a) direct observations of attractive and unattractive peoplein oneTs social environment and (b) exposure to cultural repre-sentations of attractive and unattractive people.1 With regard todirect observation, perceivers no doubt observe that better look-ing people receive more favorable reactions from others; forexample, attractive people are more popular with peers andreceive preferential treatment from others (see reviews byAdams, 1982; Dion, 1981,1986; Feingold, 1990b; Patzer, 1985;but see Bull & Rumsey, 1988; Langlois, 1986). Perceivers mayassume that these favorable reactions are elicited, not merely by1 In addition, physical attractiveness may be aesthetically pleasingand therefore may elicit positive affect that leads perceivers to infer,
perhaps to account for the affect, that attractive people have favorablecharacteristics. Although there is little evidence that the sight of physi-cally attractive people induces positive affect, researchers who manipu-late affect by presenting photographic slides commonly include imagesof physically attractive people among the stimuli that induce positiveaffect (e.g., Larsen, Diener, & Cropanzano, 1987).
112 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHUANI, AND LONGOpeople's good looks, but by other positive aspects of people'sbehavior and personality.Depending in part on the impact that popularity and favor-able treatment have on personality and behavior, perceiversmay observe that physical attractiveness is correlated withvarious positive traits. Consistent with Feingold's (1990b) re-view, research on the true covariation between physical attrac-tiveness and other personal attributes suggests that good lookscovary with social skills, social adjustment, and an absence ofshyness and social anxiety (e.g., Adams, 1977; Adams & Ware-ham, no date; Goldman & Lewis, 1977; Lerner & Lerner, 1977;Pilkonis, 1977). Aside from this relation between physical at-tractiveness and social competence, evidence for true covaria-tion between good looks and personal attributes is much lessconvincing, although there is some suggestion of a weak posi-tive correlation with adjustment (see Cash, 1985) and potency
(Adams, 1977; Chaiken, 1979,1986).Turning to cultural messages about appearance, we suggestthat American culture associates beauty with good things andugliness with bad things. In children's television and books, thewicked witch and evil giant are ugly and the heroic prince andvirtuous princess are attractive. In advertising, attractive mod-els appear in positive settings (e.g, in happy crowds, as the ob-ject of admiration) and with valued possessions (e.g- fancy cars,fashionable clothes). In addition, as shown by Downs andHarrison's (1985) content analysis of the verbal content of tele-vision commercials, statements extolling the virtues of attrac-tive appearance are quite common. \et in these cultural produc-tions, beauty may be associated more often with some positivequalities than others. Although appropriate content analyses ofmedia content are lacking, we suspect that the media mostoften link good looks with sociability and popularity, especially
with the opposite sex. We doubt that the media consistentlyassociate physical attractiveness with integrity, concern forothers, adjustment, or potency. Cultural portrayals of individ-uals outstanding in these qualities are not clearly distinguishedby positive appearance, nor are beautiful people necessarilyexemplars of such qualities.Despite the possibility that the media may portray attractivepeople as successful in their careers, we doubt that physicalattractiveness is strongly linked with intellectual competence inthe popular culture. People depicted as outstanding in intellector accomplishment are not uniformly good-looking, nor aregood-looking people necessarily portrayed as smart and ac-complished (e.g, those labeled as dumb blondes). A weaker im-pact of attractiveness on intellectual competence than on socialcompetence was supported by Ashmore, Tumia, and Schreier's(1980) variation of the classic Asch (1946) experiment on the
effect of the adjectives warm or cold on impression formation.Ashmore and colleagues substituted good-looking for warm andunattractive for cold, and they found that this attractivenessmanipulation strongly influenced the ascription of social com-petence to the stimulus person but not the ascription of intellec-tual competence.In understanding the content of the physical attractivenessstereotype, we also need to take into account the inferences bywhich perceivers may associate stereotypic attributes with otherpersonal attributes. In particular, given the strong link we havedemonstrated between attractiveness and social competence,perceivers may infer on the basis of attractive people's pre-sumed social competence that they have other favorable traits.For example, given that popularity is valued, physical attractive-ness may be viewed as a valued commodity and thereby as asource of interpersonal power. As a consequence, perceivers
may associate beauty with interpersonal potency. In addition,
ness may be viewed as a valued commodity and thereby as asource of interpersonal power. As a consequence, perceiversmay associate beauty with interpersonal potency. In addition,perceivers may assume that good looks are not only a source ofpower but also major ingredients of happiness, self-esteem, andthe other aspects of adjustment. Yet, all these second-order in-ferences that people make from attractiveness may not lead topositive impressions of beautiful targets. For example, concern-ing integrity, people might infer that attractive individuals areexposed to more opportunities for interpersonal cheating (e.g,married people having affairs; see Brigham, 1980). Also per-ceivers may assume that the popularity of attractive peoplemakes it unnecessary for them to develop nurturant qualities orinterpersonal sensitivity to maintain their friendships and otherrelationships.In conclusion, our reasoning suggests a number of principles
that might underlie the content and structure of the physicalattractiveness stereotype. Most important, good looks shouldstrongly imply social competence because of (a) the perceptionthat attractive individuals elicit positive reactions from others,(b) the perception of true covariation between attractivenessand social competence, and (c) the media portrayal of attractive-ness as critical to heterosexual popularity and social attention.In addition, good looks may imply a variety of other positivequalities based on the inferential linkages we have noted andpossibly based to some extent on observations of true (or media-depicted) covariation between attractiveness and other attri-butes. This analysis, therefore, does support the notion of ageneral mental association between beauty and nonphysicalgoodness. However, as our analysis has also implied, the ten-dency for good looks to be associated with positive qualities
may not be very strong overall and may vary considerably instrength, depending on the particular dimension of personalityassessed.Predictions for Meta-AnalysisPredictions about specific content of physical attractivenessstereotype. Our primary predictions follow from the implicitpersonality theory framework as well as from the additionalassumptions that we introduced about (a) social attention andrewards received by beautiful people, (b) genuine covariationbetween physical attractiveness and various attributes, (c) me-dia content, and (d) perceivers' inferential linkages. These pre-dictions concern the differential effects that physical attractive-ness has on perceivers' inferences about the personality traitsthat represent the various dimensions of their implicit theoriesof personality. Although we predict that attractive targetsshould be assigned more positive attributes than unattractivetargets, we hypothesize that this tendency will vary consider-
ably as a function of type of evaluative meaning. Specifically forthe reasons we have indicated, information about physical at-tractiveness should have its strongest impact on inferencesabout social competence. Bassili (1981) and Dion (1981,1986)would probably agree with this prediction. Because of the likelyspillover that we described from social competence to potency
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 113and adjustment, physical attractiveness should affect inferencesto these dimensions, albeit somewhat more weakly than infer-ences to social competence.According to the reasoning we have presented, manipula-tions of physical attractiveness should have a relatively smalleffect on inferences about intellectual competence and an evenweaker impact on integrity and concern for others. The impactof attractiveness on concern for others may be especially weakgiven that this category includes traits such as vanity and ego-tism. As we have already noted, reviewers have implicated suchtraits in the dark side of the physical attractiveness stereotype(Adams, 1982; Cash & Janda, 1984; Dermer & Thiel, 1975).2These predictions suggest that the specific content of thedependent variables used in studies of the physical attractive-ness stereotype contributes to observed differences in the
strength of the stereotype. Studies that happened to includemany dependent variables assessing perceptions of social com-petence should show a stronger impact of physical attractive-ness than studies containing higher proportions of dependentvariables selected from the other dimensions of personality.The content of dependent variables should also account for vari-ations within studies in the strength of subjects' inferences fromphysical appearance to aspects of targets' personalities.Other predictions. Because implicit theories of personalitycomprise much more than beliefs about attractiveness, ourframework raises the issue of whether information that subjectsreceive about attributes other than physical attractiveness mayalso account for inconsistencies in the outcomes of studies. Inparticular, receiving information that conveys attributes of thetarget other than physical attractiveness may moderate infer-ences from physical attractiveness to personality traits.
In general, the beauty-is-good effect should become smalleras the amount of other information about targets increases. Thisprediction is consistent, first of all, with Bull and Rumsey's(1988) survey of existing research. It is also congruent with gen-eral models describing how people combine items of informa-tion into an overall judgment. Specifically, averaging models(see N. H. Anderson, 1974,1981) postulate that the weight orimportance of an item of information as a determinant of ajudgment becomes smaller as a perceiver takes more items ofinformation into account. Such combinatorial models predictthat the impact of physical attractiveness on judgments of per-sonality lessens as more other information is received.In analyzing the probable effect of giving subjects additionalinformation about the target, we must also consider the infor-mativeness or diagnosticity of physical attractiveness comparedwith other information that subjects may receive about targets.
In experiments on the physical attractiveness stereotype, sub-jects sometimes receive information about targets' personal his-tory and personality, and, in videotaped or live presentations oftargets, subjects receive extensive information about targets'personal style. This other information may very commonly bemore diagnostic than physical attractiveness in relation to thetraits and behaviors that subjects were asked to predict. Thisargument is analogous to one made in relation to gender stereo-types, namely, that information other than sex may be morestrongly linked than sex to the various dimensions of personal-ity that comprise perceivers' implicit theories. When perceiversreceive such information, their inferences from sex to personal-ity traits should be weakened. This prediction has been repeat-edly confirmed in research showing that perceivers' inferencesfrom sex to personality or behavior are reduced or even re-
versed by giving subjects other information about targets (e.g,Deaux & Lewis, 1984; Del Boca & Ashmore, 1980; Eagry &
from sex to personality or behavior are reduced or even re-versed by giving subjects other information about targets (e.g,Deaux & Lewis, 1984; Del Boca & Ashmore, 1980; Eagry &Steffen, 1984; Locksley, Borgida, Brekke, & Hepburn, 1980;Locksley, Hepburn, & Ortiz, 1982).The sex of the target is an item of information that subjects inphysical attractiveness experiments almost always possess. Thisfact raises the question of whether the attractiveness stereotypemay be stronger for female targets than for male targets. Such atrend would be consistent with reviewers' conclusions that at-tractiveness is more central to the gender role of women than ofmen as well as to women's personal identity, self-esteem, andinterpersonal outcomes (see Bar-Tal & Saxe, 1976; Rodin, Sil-berstein, & Striegel-Moore, 1985). Moreover, the media moreoften portray women than men as decorative and sexual objects(see Courtney & Whipple, 1983; Roberts, 1982). In addition, in
television commercials explicit verbal statements linkingbeauty and good outcomes are more commonly paired withfemale actors than with male actors (Downs & Harrison, 1985),and viewers of televised advertisements regard the women whoare depicted as more concerned with their looks than the menare (Scheibe, 1979). Finally, Jackson, Sullivan, and Rostker(1988) found that women, compared with men, rated physicalattractiveness as more important to them and reported engag-ing in more behaviors to improve their looks. Such findingssuggest that physical attractiveness may be more important inperceiving women than in perceiving men.Whether physical attractiveness is more important to per-ceivers of one sex than the other is not entirely clear. In view ofFeingold's (1990a) meta-analysis showing that men place greatervalue on physical attractiveness than women do, especiallywhen romantic attraction is considered, ft is possible to argue
that physical attractiveness could be a more powerful dimen-sion in men's than women's implicit theories of personality.However, the research we review on the physical attractivenessstereotype was not carried out in the context of romantic rela-tionships. Moreover, the question addressed in research on thephysical attractiveness stereotype pertains to the meaning in-ferred from attractiveness cues, not the importance of attractive-ness. Men and women may differ in the importance they ac-cord to attractiveness even though they infer similar meaning(e.g., social competence) from attractiveness cues. Particularlyin view of evidence that the content of gender stereotypesdiffers little for male and female subjects (e.g., Deaux & Lewis,1983,1984; Eagly & Steffen, 1984), we suspect that the physicalattractiveness stereotype is widely shared in American cultureand is therefore little affected by variation in subject character-
istics, including subject sex. To the extent that some studies onthe physical attractiveness stereotype used male subjects and2 One reason we do not predict a negative relation between attractive-ness and concern for others is that the findings cited by some narrativereviewers to provide evidence for the dark side of the physical attractive-ness stereotype may not be representative of the total domain of find-ings on egotism and vanity. In addition, our concern for others class ofattributes is somewhat broader than egotism and vanity because ftincludes the positive facets of concern for others and selflessness.
114 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOothers used female subjects, our meta-analytic method allowsus to approach this issue empirically by examining subjects' sexas a predictor of their inferences about targets' personalities.MethodSample of StudiesComputer-based information searches were conducted using the fol-lowing keywords: physical attractiveness, unattractive, beautiful, ugly,ugliness, facial feature, and physical appearance. These keywords weresearched in the following data bases: PsycINFO (Psychological Ab-stract^, 1967 to 1987; ERIC (Educational Resources InformationCenter), 1966 to 1987; Dissertation Abstracts Online, 1861 to 1987; ABI/INFORM (a worldwide business and management data base), 1971 to1987; Sociological Abstracts, 1963 to 1987; Mental Health Abstracts,1969 to 1987; MEDLINE (Medical Subject Headings), 1966 to 1987;andAARP (American Association of Retired Persons), 1985 to 1987. The
Social SciSearch data base was also searched to locate articles thatcited Dion and associates (1972) or Dermer and Thiel (1975). Eachsearch ended with the latest information available in the summer of1987.We also consulted Cash's (1981) bibliography, which contains almost500 abstracts obtained through computer-assisted searches using thekeyword physical attractiveness. Finally, we searched through the refer-ence lists of all located studies and carefully read numerous reviewarticles (e.g., BerscheidA Walster, 1974), books (eg., Patzer, 1985), andchapters of books (e.g., Adams, 1982).Selecting studies that focus on physical attractiveness stereotype.These search procedures yielded over 600 possibly relevant reports.Given our focus on the physical attractiveness stereotype (and not onthe treatment of attractive and unattractive people or their actual char-acteristics), we initially pared down the sample to include only studies
in which subjects rated attractive and unattractive targets on evaluativeattributes. The resulting sample was reduced further to include in thefinal sample only studies that assessed the beauty-is-good stereotype insituations unconstrained by particular role relationships (eg., teacher-student). To select those studies that assessed the attractiveness stereo-type in this relatively pure form, we implemented a number of addi-tional exclusion rules:1. Studies were included in the sample if the general physical attrac-tiveness of target persons was one of its independent variables. Studieswere excluded if they instead examined the impact of specific physicalcharacteristics of target persons, such as height, weight, body type, ordisfiguring facial characteristics (e.g., Dibiase & Hjelle, 1968).2. Studies were included only if physical attractiveness was definedindependently of the subjects who rated the targets' characteristics.
Attractiveness was in fact manipulated in almost all these studies. In afew of the included studies, high- and low-attractiveness targets wereidentified only after the subjects had participated, by attractivenessratings that were independent of subjects' own perceptions of targets'physical attractiveness (e.g., Barnes & Rosemhal. 1985). We excludedstudies in which the attractiveness stereotype was defined only interms of subjects' own perceptions of targets* physical attractiveness;that is, the stereotype was assessed by correlations between subjects'own ratings of targets' physical attractiveness and their ratings of thesetargets on traits and life outcomes (e.g., P. A. Schneider, Conger, &Firth. 1986). Such studies are causally ambiguous and could illustratethe "what is good is beautiful" principle (Gross & Crofton, 1977) ifsubjects inferred good looks from positive personality characteristics.3. Studies were included only if one or more of their dependent
variables was a rating of stimulus persons' personality traits (e.g.,warmth, intelligence, trustworthiness) or life outcomes (eg., career suc-
variables was a rating of stimulus persons' personality traits (e.g.,warmth, intelligence, trustworthiness) or life outcomes (eg., career suc-cess, marital success) on a dimension that could be considered evalua-tive (i.e.. one pole could be identified as more positive than the other).Consistent with our focus on partitioning evaluative meaning into itscomponents, we excluded studies if their dependent measures were notclearly evaluative. For example, we eliminated studies that examinedonly ratings of masculinity and femininity because they concern adifferent hypothesis, what is beautiful is sex-typed (e.g. Cash & Janda,1984), rather than what is beautiful is good. Similarly, we did not con-sider ascriptions of attitudes or group membership to targets (e.g, be-ing a "feminist"; Jacobson & Koch, 1978) or causal attributions fortargets' success and failure (e.g.. Turkat & Dawson, 1976). We also ex-cluded studies if their dependent measures assessed subjects' personal
reactions to targets (eg., ratings of whether the subject would like tohave the target as a date; Touhey, 1979) rather than the ascription ofevaluative characteristics to targets. Because the meta-analysis did notconcern the treatment of attractive and unattractive targets, we alsoexcluded studies using only behavioral measures (e.g., shocking a tar-get; Miller, Gillen, Schenker, & Radlove, 1974). In addition, we elimi-nated the following types of dependent variables reported in studiesaccepted for the sample: (a) ratings of targets' productions (eg., essays;Bull & Stevens, 1979), (b) ratings of targets' effectiveness in a specificoccupational role (eg., counselor; Cash & Kehr, 1978), and (c) ratings oftargets' behavior (e.g., audibility of voice; Jackman, 1979). These elimi-nations reflect our interest in the personality stereotype rather thanperceptions of people's products or role enactments. For studies report-
ing more than one dependent variable, the meta-analysis included onlythose measures that met these criteria for allowable dependent mea-sures (eg., behavioral measures were excluded). .4. Consistent with our focus on the physical attractiveness stereo-type, we included studies only if, following the precedent of Dion andco-workers' (1972) seminal experiment, subjects judged personalitytraits and life outcomes of target persons with whom they had no priorrole relationship. Because the review is not concerned with the effectsof specialized role relationships on the impact of physical attractive-ness, we excluded studies in which subjects and targets had an ongoingrole relationship, for example, studies of students' ratings of theirteachers (e.g., O'Reilly, 1987) or of therapists' ratings of their patients(eg., Nordholm, 1980). We also excluded studies in which subjects role-played a relationship with one or more targets, for example, studies in
which subjects were instructed to rate a counselor from the perspectiveof a client (e.g., Cash & Kehr, 1978). In addition, studies were deleted ifthe target persons were described as paired by means of a role relation-ship (eg., Hartnett & Secord's, 1983, targets were described as marriedcouples).5. Several other criteria excluded studies examining specializedtypes of target persons. Although studies presenting targets in specificjob categories (eg., counselor) were included as long as the subjectswere not in an actual or hypothetical role relationship with these tar-gets, studies were eliminated if the targets were mentally ill (eg., men-tal hospital patients in the Martin, Friedmeyer, & Moore, 1977, study),victimized (eg., rape victims in the Jacobson & Popovich, 1983, study),or specialized in certain other ways (eg., described as having had pre-marital sexual intercourse in the Hocking, Walker, & Fink, 1982,
study). Studies with targets of these types were excluded because physi-cal attractiveness would probably have specialized implications in
study). Studies with targets of these types were excluded because physi-cal attractiveness would probably have specialized implications inthese contexts (e.g, it would not imply good social skills in mentally illtargets; it might have atypical moral and sexual implications for rapevictims or unmarried persons described as sexually active).6. To confine our review to the presumably fully developed stereo-type among late adolescents and adults, studies were included only ifthe subjects (and targets) were over the age of 14 years. The developmen-tal aspects of physical attractiveness stereotyping could well be theobject of a separate meta-analysis.7. Finally, numerous studies were excluded because they lacked suf-ficient information for the computation of at least one effect size (eg.,
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 115R. Anderson &Nida, 1978). Such reports either lacked statistical detailor presented statistical information in a form that does not allow thecomputation of effect sizes (e.g., a multivariate analysis of variance[MANOVA]; a regression with physical attractiveness included alongwith other predictors).In summary, our selection criteria narrowed our sample to studiesthat examined the effects that targets' general physical attractivenesshas on perceivers' inferences about evaluative personal attributes insettings that eliminate specialized roles and personal relationshipslinking perceivers and targets. The resulting sample (see Appendix)consisted of 69 documents reporting 76 studies.3Variables Coded From Each StudyThe following information was coded from each report: (a) date ofpublication; (b) number of observations;' (c) number of judgments ag-gregated into each observation underlying the study-level effect sizes;5
(d) publication form (journal article, dissertation or unpublished docu-ment); (e) source of subject population (college undergraduates, other);(f) nationality of subject population (American, Canadian); (g) sex ofsubjects (male, female, male and female, unknown); (h) instructionalset (accuracy, i.e., of subject's judgment in relation to a presumed crite-rion [see Dion et al., 1972], impression formation, other, none or un-clear); (i) type of attractiveness variation (attractive and unattractivetargets selected, changed appearance of same target, other);' (j) evi-dence that attractiveness varied as intended (preselection judgments,postexperimental ratings, both, none); (k) control for confounds be-tween attractiveness and other attributes of targets (multiple targets ateach attractiveness level, changed appearance of same target, othercontrols, no such control or unknown); (1) within versus between varia-
tion of attractiveness (within, between); (m) stimulus modality (photo-graph, videotape, live, written description, other or more than one); (n)part of target's body viewed (face, head and shoulders, full body, un-clear, mixed or irrelevant); (o) stimuli in color (yes, no, unknown,mixed or irrelevant); (p) source of stimuli (college yearbook, researchertook own photographs or videotapes, other, unknown, irrelevant ormore than one); (q) basis of stimuli selection (means and variances ofjudges' ratings, means of judges' ratings, consensual meaning ofwords, unknown or intuitive, mixed or irrelevant); (r) sex of targets(male, female, male and female); (s) race of targets (whites only, otherexclusion, not restricted, unknown, mixed or irrelevant); (t) restric-tions on target's appearance (eyeglasses excluded, other exclusion,more than one exclusion, no or unknown exclusion or appearance ma-nipulated, mixed or irrelevant); (u) presence of individuating informa-
tion along with attractiveness information (present, absent); (v) inde-pendent variables other than physical attractiveness in design, regard-less of whether they provided individuating information (yes, no); and(w) unusual features of statistical analysis (yes, no).The categories we listed for some of these variables were simplifiedfrom an initially more detailed set because (a) some of these moredetailed categories had few or no entries and (b) prediction of the effectsizes was not improved by the more detailed categories. The variablesfor which the initial coding was more detailed are the following: publi-cation form, instructional set, type of attractiveness variation, controlfor confounds, and presence of individuating information.These variables were independently coded by Alice H. Eagly andMona G. Makhijani, with a median agreement of 95% (estimated *[kappa] = .90); "other independent variables in design" yielded the
lowest agreement: 85% If = .39). Disagreements were resolved by dis-Computation and Analysis of Effect Sizes
[kappa] = .90); "other independent variables in design" yielded thelowest agreement: 85% If = .39). Disagreements were resolved by dis-Computation and Analysis of Effect SizesThe effect size calculated is g, the difference between the means oftwo groups, divided by the relevant standard deviation.7 The sign of thedifference was positive when attractive targets were rated more favor-ably than unattractive targets and negative when unattractive targetswere rated more favorably. The computation of g was based on (a)means and standard deviations or error terms for 446 effect sizes, (b) Fsand K for 110 effect sizes, (c) correlations or chi-squares for 26, and (d)level p values (e.g, p < .05) for 14. Thus, 596 effect sizes were computed.To reduce computational error, these effect sizes were calculatedindependently by Alice H. Eagly and Mona G. Makhijani. When thedata for a study were reported separately for male and female targets,
effect sizes were calculated separately for each sex. These additionalreports, separated by sex of target, supplemented the reports combinedover sex of target, which were used in most analyses.The 596 effect sizes that we computed reported data on 104 differentindividual rating scales as well as on 100 different composite measuresthat authors of the studies had computed by aggregating two or moreratings. To facilitate the analysis of these extremely diverse measures,we aggregated them in various ways before analyzing them. To providea single measure for each study, thus creating effect sizes that satisfy theindependence assumption of meta-analytic statistics (Hedges & Olkin,1985), we computed a single effect size for each study, combining allseparately calculated effect sizes. This study-level effect size was calcu-lated using Rosenthal and Rubin's (1986) suggested formula and assum-3 A list of the studies excluded by these criteria is available from
either Alice H. Eagly or Richard D. Ashmore.4 The number of observations is the n taken into account by thestatistical analysis for the effects of physical attractiveness.5 Study-level effect sizes were aggregated across all of the dependentvariables (see Computation and Analysis of Effect Sizes). For example,each observation might represent a subject's ratings of 4 target personson 10 items, for a total of 40 judgments. To the extent that measureswere based on multiple judgments, they should yield more reliableestimates of the physical attractiveness stereotype, in the manner thatthe number of items in a test relates to the reliability of the total test(e.g, Ghiselli, 1964).6 When a study's design included more than two levels of attractive-ness, we compared only the highest and lowest levels, if the report wassufficient to yield this comparison. This rule maximized comparabil-ity of effect sizes across the studies because the typical study presented
targets preselected to be extremely attractive and extremely unattrac-tive. The following variations were coded as "other" but included asseparate categories in preliminary analyses: high versus medium (whenonly these conditions were present in experiment), changed verbal de-scription, median split on attractiveness, and attractiveness treated as acontinuous variable.7 When physical attractiveness was a between-subjects variable, thisstandard deviation was computed separately within the high- and low-attractiveness conditions and pooled. When physical attractivenesswas a within-subjects variable, the standard deviation was the standarddeviation of the differences between the paired observations. Thesestandard deviations were estimated, whenever possible, only from theportion of each study's data entering into the effect size.Some statisticians have recommended that, when estimating stan-dard deviations from the mean square error of an ANOVA, meta-ana-
lysts reconstitute this error term by adding into the sum of squares
Some statisticians have recommended that, when estimating stan-dard deviations from the mean square error of an ANOVA, meta-ana-lysts reconstitute this error term by adding into the sum of squareserror all other sums of squares except that for the independent variableof interest (see Glass, McGaw, & Smith, 1981; Hedges & Becker, 1986).This strategy was not chosen for this meta-analysis because physicalattractiveness was crossed with manipulated variables that in someexperiments were quite powerful. Consequently, adding sums ofsquares for manipulated variables to the sum of squares error wouldhave had differing impact on these error terms across the studies. Inaddition, statistical information was typically not extensive enough toallow us to reconstitute the error terms.
116 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOing that the correlation between measures was .48. This correlation wasestimated by averaging the correlations between dependent variables(a) reported in the studies or (b) derived from coefficient alphasreported for multiple-kern dependent variables used in the meta-analysis.Categorization of dependent variables. To enable us to test our hy-pothesis that physical attractiveness has more impact on some types ofevaluative beliefs than others, we also classified each study's variablesinto the following six categories: (a) social competence, including inter-personal skills and traits (sociable, fun loving) and successful outcomesof such skills (popular, likable); (b) intellectual competence, includingintellectual ability (intelligent, skillful), rational mental style (rational,scientific), high task motivation (ambitious, hard working), and suc-cessful outcomes of task endeavors (receiving good grades, achieving
career success); (c) concern for others, including social sensitivity (sensi-tive, empathic), nurturance (compassionate, generous), and lack of ego-tism (modest, not egotistic); (d) integrity, including honesty (trust-worthy, honest) and respect for norms (faithfulness to spouse); (e) ad-justment, including good mental health (normal, well adjusted),happiness (satisfied, happy), high self-esteem (confident, positive self-regard), and well-being (maturity, good health); and (f) potency includ-ing power (strong, self-assertive) and dominance (dominant, acting asleader). A composite measure reported in a study was placed into oneof these categories only if 60% or more of its component ratings fit intothe category.In addition, some measures were placed into one of two other catego-ries. The first of these categories is general evaluation, which was cho-sen for single-item measures whose evaluative meaning was completely
nonspecific (e.g., good) and for composite measures whose componentscales fit two or more of our specific categories and failed to attain thecriterion of at least 60% fitting any one category. The second of theseadditional categories is other, which was chosen for measures that nei-ther fit into any of the six specific categories nor qualified as measuresof general evaluation.The measures from a study were thus placed into one or more ofthese eight categories. This classification was accomplished by the fourauthors' independent categorizations of the measures; three of the fourauthors placed 80% of the single-item dependent variables and 72% ofcomposite measures in the same category. Disagreements were re-solved by discussion between Richard D. Ashmore and Laura C.Longo. The 596 effect sizes calculated from the studies' reported find-ings were aggregated into category-level effect sizes for each study for as
many of the eight categories as the study represented. These aggrega-tions were calculated under the assumption that the correlation be-tween measures placed in the same category was .48. Each study thusyielded, in addition to a study-level effect size, one or more of theseeight category-level effect sizes.Analysis of effect sizes. The gs were converted to ds by correctingthem for bias (i.e., g's overestimate of the population effect size, whichoccurs especially for small samples; see Hedges, 1981; Hedges & Olkin,1985). Then the study outcomes were combined by averaging thet/s. Todetermine whether each set of ds shared a common effect size (i.e., wasconsistent across the studies), we calculated a homogeneity statistic, Q,which has an approximate chi-square distribution with k — 1 degrees offreedom, where k is the number of effect sizes (Hedges, 1981; Hedges &Olkin, 1985).In the absence of homogeneity, we accounted for variability in hetero-
geneous effect sizes by relating them to the attributes of the studies. Todetermine the relation between these study characteristics and the
geneous effect sizes by relating them to the attributes of the studies. Todetermine the relation between these study characteristics and themagnitude of the effect sizes, both categorical and continuous modelswere tested (Hedges, 1982a, 1982b; Hedges & Olkin, 1985). Categoricalmodels, which are analogous to ANOVAs, may show that heteroge-neous effect sizes are homogeneous within the subgroups establishedby dividing studies into classes based on study characteristics. Thetechniques for calculating categorical models provide a between-classes effect (analogous to a main effect in an ANOVA) and a test of thehomogeneity of the effect sizes within each class. The between-classeseffect is estimated by QB, which has an approximate chi-square distri-bution with p—1 degrees of freedom, where pis the number of classes.The homogeneity of the effect sizes within each class is estimated by<2w, which has an approximate chi-square distribution with m - \
degrees of freedom, where m is the number of effect sizes in the class.The tables reporting tests of categorical models also include the meanweighted effect size for each class, calculated with each effect sizeweighted by the reciprocal of its variance, and an indication of whetherthis mean differed significantly from the 0.00 value that indicates ex-actly no effect of physical attractiveness.The continuous models are least squares simple linear regressions,calculated with each effect size weighted by the reciprocal of its vari-ance. Each such model yields a test of the significance of a predictor aswell as a test of model specification, which evaluates whether signifi-cant systematic variation remains unexplained in the regression model(Hedges, 1982b; Hedges & Olkin, 1985). The sum of squares error sta-tistic, QEr which provides this test of model specification, has an ap-proximate chi-square distribution with k - p -1 degrees of freedom,
where k is the number of effect sizes and p is the number of predictors(not including the intercept). If correctly specified models are notachieved when implementing continuous models (or homogeneity isnot achieved within the classes when implementing categorical mod-els), the results of these analyses cannot be interpreted as confidently asthey would otherwise be.As a supplementary analysis, we attained homogeneity by identify-ing outliers among the effect sizes and sequentially removing those thatreduced the homogeneity statistic by the largest amount (see Hedges &Olkin, 1985). Using such a procedure, Hedges (1987) found for severalmeta-analyses on psychological topics that the removal of up to 20% ofthe outliers in a group of heterogeneous effect sizes usually resulted in ahigh degree of homogeneity. Inspection of the percentage of effect sizesremoved to attain homogeneity allows one to determine whether the
effect sizes are homogeneous aside from the presence of relatively fewaberrant values. The mean attained after removal of such outliers maybetter represent the distribution of effect sizes than would the meanbased on all of the effect sizes.ResultsCharacteristics of the StudiesBefore considering the findings reported in research on thephysical attractiveness stereotype, we examined the character-istics of the studies from which conclusions about this researchwill be drawn. Table 1 shows many of these study characteris-tics.As shown by the central tendencies of the characteristicslisted in Table 1, studies (a) were published relatively recently, (b)were published as journal articles, (c) involved a moderate num-ber of observations, and (d) aggregated a moderate number ofjudgments into each observation. The studies used subjectswho were college undergraduates, Americans, and both maleand female. In addition, the studies generally (a) established an
impression-formation instructional set; (b) compared percep-tions of targets selected to be attractive and unattractive; (c)
and female. In addition, the studies generally (a) established animpression-formation instructional set; (b) compared percep-tions of targets selected to be attractive and unattractive; (c)presented both preselection and postexperimental evidencethat attractiveness varied as intended; (d) controlled confoundsby means of multiple targets at each attractiveness level, withineach level of target sex; (e) varied attractiveness on a between-subjects basis; (f) presented targets by means of photographs or
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 117Table 1Summary of Study CharacteristicsVariable and classMedian publication yearPublication formJournal articleDissertation or unpublished documentMedian number of observationsMedian number of judgments aggregated into eachobservationSource of subject populationCollege undergraduatesOtherNationality of subjectsAmericanCanadianSex of subjectsMaleFemaleMale and femaleUnknownInstructional setAccuracyImpression formationOtherNone or unclearType of attractiveness variationAttractive and unattractive targets selectedChanged appearance of same targetOtherEvidence that attractiveness varied as intendedPreselection judgmentsPostexperimental ratingsBothNoneControl for confoundsMultiple targetsChanged appearance of same targetOther controls'No such control or unknownWithin versus between variation of attractivenessWithinBetweenValue198053231081270670698581193891057109198463529312
6985811938910571091984635293121858Variable and classStimulus modalityPhotograph or slideVideotapeLiveWritten descriptionOther or more than onePart of target's body viewedFaceHead and shouldersFull bodyUnclearMixed or irrelevantStimuli in colorYesNoUnknownMixed or irrelevantSource of stimuliCollege yearbookResearcher took own photographs or videotapesOtherUnknownIrrelevant or more than oneBasis of stimuli selectionMeans and variances of judges' ratingsMeans of judges' ratingsConsensual meaning of wordsUnknown or intuitiveMixed or irrelevantSex of targetsMaleFemaleMale and femaleRace of targetsWhites onlyOther exclusionNot restrictedUnknownMixed or irrelevantRestrictions on target's appearanceEyeglasses excludedOther exclusionMore than one exclusionNo or unknown exclusion or appearance changedMixed or irrelevantPresence of individuating informationPresentAbsentValue6085I211371511219183722221620735
85I211371511219183722221620735281111830382111512212134724828Note. For categorical variables, numbers in tables represent frequencies of reports in each class.* Includes changed written description and use of both multiple targets and changed appearance in same studyslides; (g) used head-and-shoulders poses of targets; (h) did notmention whether stimuli were presented in color or black andwhite; (i) used college yearbook photographs, or photographs orvideotapes taken by the researcher, or did not mention thesource of stimuli; (j) selected stimuli based on means and vari-ances of judges' ratings or on means only; (k) used female tar-gets only or both male and female targets; (1) did not report onthe race of the targets; (m) did not report on or had no restric-
118 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOtions on targets' appearance or used targets whose appearancewas changed; and (n) presented individuating informationalong with the attractiveness information.women. This stereotype was inconsistent in magnitude acrossthe studies and somewhat smaller once outlying effect sizeswere deleted.Summary of Study-Level Effect SizesThe summary of the study-level effect sizes given in Table 2allows one to determine whether more favorable characteristicswere ascribed to attractive individuals than to unattractive indi-viduals based on the available reports. An overall difference inthe stereotypic direction is shown by a positive mean effect sizethat differed significantly from the 0.00 value that indicatesexactly no difference (i*, by a confidence interval that did notinclude 0.00). As expected, evaluations were more favorable forattractive targets than for unattractive targets, as shown by the
weighted mean of the effect sizes8 as well as by the unweightedmean and the median. In addition, a large proportion (.91) ofthese study-level effect sizes favored the attractive targets overthe unattractive targets. This proportion differed significantlyfrom .50, the proportion expected under the null hypothesis(/K.001).As also shown in Table 2, the effect sizes were not homoge-neous, and homogeneity was not attained until a relatively largeproportion of the effect sizes C33) was removed. The removal ofoutliers produced a somewhat smaller weighted mean that alsodiffered significantly from 0.00.The various indexes of the central tendency of the effect sizesthus substantiate the existence of an attractiveness stereotype,as documented by the ascription of more favorable characteris-tics to attractive men and women than to unattractive men andTable 2Summary of Study-Level Effect SizesCriterion ValueIncluding outliers« 76Mean weighted effect size (dj- 0.58
« 76Mean weighted effect size (dj- 0.5895%CIforrf+ 0.54/0.62Homogeneity (Q) of effect sizes comprising rf+" 450.62*Mean effect size (mean d) 0.6195% CI for mean d 0.50/0.72Median effect size 0.57Differences favoring attractive targets" 69/76 (.91)Excluding outliersnn removed outliersMean weighted effect size (d+)95% CI for d+Homogeneity (Q) of effect sizes comprising rf+5125 (.33)0.490.44/0.5469.11Note. Effect sizes are positive for more favorable evaluation of attrac-tive than unattractive targets and negative for more favorable evalua-tion of unattractive targets. CI = confidence interval." Effect sizes were weighted by the reciprocal of the variance. b Signi-ficance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity. ° Fre-quencies are the number of study-level effect sizes favoring the moreattractive targets divided by the total number of effect sizes. The pro-portion appears in parentheses.Physical Attractiveness Stereotype and Type of Attributes
Ascribed to TargetsThe categorical model in Table 3 tests our prediction that thestrength of the physical attractiveness stereotype depends onthe particular dimension of meaning that was assessed. Thismodel produced a highly significant between-classes effect. Asexpected, the largest mean effect size was produced for ratingsof social competence and the smallest effect sizes for concernfor others and integrity. Ratings on the remaining three specificdimensions of meaning (intellectual competence, adjustment,potency) produced effect sizes that were in between theseclasses of effect sizes. Consistent with this pattern, the generalevaluation category produced effect sizes in the middle range ofthe means for the six specific types of meaning, as did thecategory labeled other, which contained an extremely diverseset of ratings that did not fit into the six specific categories thatwe established. We evaluated the significance of the differences
between these classes of effect sizes by means of post hoc com-parisons, which are represented by the subscripts attached to
we established. We evaluated the significance of the differencesbetween these classes of effect sizes by means of post hoc com-parisons, which are represented by the subscripts attached tothe mean effect sizes given in Table 3 (see Hedges & Becker,1986; Hedges & Olkin, 1985).'Relations Between Other Study Attributes and thePhysical Attractiveness StereotypeThe relations between other study attributes and the physicalattractiveness stereotype were evaluated on the study-level ef-fect sizes. The categorical models that produced significant be-tween-classes effects are given in Table 4. The first model indi-cates a significant between-classes effect for publication form;journal articles produced a stronger stereotype than disserta-tions and unpublished articles. The second model shows a sig-nificant effect for instructional set; the accuracy set yielded aweaker stereotype. Given Dion's (1981,1986) logic that the accu-
racy set would reduce stereotyping and encourage careful think-ing about targets' personal characteristics, a priori compari-sons between the accuracy class of effect sizes and the threeother classes seem appropriate. By such comparisons, thestereotype was significantly weaker with the accuracy set thaneach of the other three sets (ps < .05).Although the physical attractiveness stereotype related to thetype of method researchers used to vary attractiveness, posthoc contrasts show only that the quite diverse category of othermanipulations produced a stronger stereotype than the moretypical manipulation that compared stimuli preselected to behigh or low in attractiveness (p < .001). The type of control thatresearchers established for confounds of the physical attractive-* The weighted means were computed by weighting each effect sizeby the reciprocal of its variance (Hedges & Olkin, 1985), a procedurethat gives more weight to effect sizes that are more reliably estimated.
9 Although our dimensions differed somewhat from those used byFeingold (1990b), the ordering of the dimensions was substantially simi-lar.
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 119Table3Categorical Model for Type of Attributes Ascribed to TargetsBetween-classesAttribute type effect (G>)279.97*Social competenceAdjustmentPotencyIntellectual competenceIntegrityConcern for othersGeneral evaluationOthern3518143811223913Mean weightedefiect size (d,+)0.68.0.52.J0.49^0.46t0.13,0.01,0.57^0.54^95% CI for <kLower0.620.450.390.410.03-0.060.520.44Upper0.730.600.580.510.230.090.620.64Homogeneity withineach class (G^213.60*239.59*36.67*178.48*80.84*284.65*414.59*154.00*Note. Effect sizes are positive for more favorable evaluation of attractive than unattractive targets and negative for more favorable evaluation ofunattractive targets. Differences between means that do not have a subscript in common are significant at the .05 level or beyond. CI = confidenceinterval.* Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity.*p<.001.
*p<.001.ness variable also produced a significant between-classes effect.Yet, using post hoc contrasts, the only significant comparisonamong the four classes showed that the stereotype was strongerwhen no control was used or when the nature of any controlswas unknown than it was when the typical multiple-target tech-nique was used (p < .05). In addition, consistent with thegreater control of extraneous variables and the more preciseerror term in within-subjects designs, within-subjects varia-tions of attractiveness produced a stronger stereotype than be-tween-subjects variations.As also shown in Table 4, several attributes of the target per-sons affected the strength of the physical attractiveness stereo-type. The use of color (vs. black and white) stimuli related signifi-cantly to the effect sizes. Post hoc comparisons showed thatsmaller efiect sizes were produced by stimuli that were knownto be black and white than by stimuli that were in color (p <
.005) or for which color was unknown (p < .001). The nextmodel given in Table 4 failed to confirm our hypothesis that thephysical attractiveness stereotype is stronger for female targetsthan for male targets. This hypothesis was tested on the 98effect sizes produced when studies reporting separate data formale and female targets were represented by these separateeffect sizes and the other studies were represented by study-leveleffect sizes. Although the variable of target sex produced a sig-nificant categorical model, the attractiveness stereotype wasstronger for reports combined over male and female targets (i.e,reports that could not be partitioned by sex of target) than forreports on either male targets (p < .01) or female targets (p <.001). Contrary to hypothesis, the stereotype did not differ formale and female targets. Moreover, we calculated the sex-of-target model separately within each of the dimensions shown in
Table 3 and obtained no evidence of a stronger stereotype forfemale than male targets within any of these dimensions. Also,sex of subjects did not produce a significant model. Finally,consistent with our hypothesis that individuating informationwould attenuate inferences made on the basis of physical attrac-tiveness, the stereotype was weaker when such information waspresent rather than absent.The number of judgments aggregated into each observationwas the only continuous variable that produced a significantmodel. Thus, the physical attractiveness stereotype wasstronger when a greater number of judgments (i£., items) wereaggregated into each of the observations underlying the study-level effect sizes (b = 0.0017, tf = .11, p < .025; QE[74] =445.38, p < .001). This analysis raises the question of whetherthe various dimensions of evaluative meaning shown in Table 3differed with respect to the number of judgments aggregated
into each observation. Although some differences were ob-served, they showed no relation to the strength of the evaluative
differed with respect to the number of judgments aggregatedinto each observation. Although some differences were ob-served, they showed no relation to the strength of the evaluativestereotype (Le, to the means shown in Table 3).DiscussionStrength of the Physical Attractiveness StereotypeAlthough the consensus among social psychologists has beenthat the beauty-is-good stereotype is extremely strong and ro-bust, our implicit personality theory framework led us to ex-pect that the tendency for people to ascribe more favorablepersonal attributes to attractive targets than to unattractive tar-gets would be somewhat modest in size and quite variableacross studies. Relevant to the overall magnitude of the physicalattractiveness stereotype are the several measures of efiect sizecentral tendency reported in Table 2. These measures variedfrom a high of 0.61 for the unweighted mean to a low of 0.49 forthe weighted mean with outliers excluded. These figures indi-
cate approximately one-half standard deviation in the directionof more positive personality traits and life outcomes ascribed toattractive compared with unattractive targets.Methodological features, both of our meta-analysis and ofthe research paradigms of the studies we reviewed, should betaken into account in interpreting the magnitude of the effectsizes we obtained. Among the important features of our meta-analytic methods are the rules we followed for including studiesin the present sample. In particular, studies were included onlyif we could compute at least one effect size, and among the
120 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOTable 4Categorical Models on Study-Level Effect SizesVariable and classPublication formJournal articleDissertation or unpublished documentInstructional setAccuracyImpression formationOtherNone or unclearType of attractiveness variationAttractive and unattractive targets selectedChanged appearance of same targetOtherControl for confoundsMultiple targetsChanged appearance of same targetOther controlsNo control or unknownWithin versus between variation of attractivenessWithinBetweenStimuli in color"YesNoUnknownSex of targetsMaleFemaleBothPresence of individuating informationPresentAbsentBetween-classeseffect (Q,) «23.98***53239.20*193891016.03***5710910.18**52931213.03***185823.15***19183724.23***30521636.63***4828Mean weightedeffect size (dH)0.640.450.500.600.620.640.540.660.730.550.660.540.690.660.530.630.420.630.570.500.720.460.6895% CI for rf,+Lower0.60
0.500.720.460.6895% CI for rf,+Lower0.600.390.430.540.470.570.500.520.640.510.510.350.610.600.480.550.350.580.510.450.650.410.63Upper0.680.510.560.650.770.710.580.810.820.590.810.730.780.720.570.720.500.680.640.560.790.510.73Homogeneity withineach class (Gw,)'258.01***168.64***156.86***227.00***21.90**35.36***60.30***23.14**51.16***382.92***23.14**4.3630.00**126.87***310.72***112.12***137.89***172.99***154.49***280.24***52.80***172.96***241.03***Note. Effect sizes are positive for more favorable evaluation of attractive than unattractive targets and negative for more favorable evaluation ofunattractive targets. Cl = confidence interval."Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity. b The category "mixed or irrelevant*1 (n = 2) was omitted from this analysis.*p<.05. **p<.01. ***p<.001.included studies, only effect sizes that we could compute en-
tered into our aggregations. Although some meta-analysts haveassigned the value of 0.00 to unknown effect sizes, we werereluctant to compromise the accuracy of our data in this way,especially in view of the fact that our computed effect sizes werethen aggregated into study-level effect sizes. Nonetheless, ourprocedure probably increased the magnitude of our averageeffect sizes because of the tendency for minimally reported find-ings to be nonsignificant and generally relatively small.An additional consideration in evaluating meta-analyticmethods is the extent to which the magnitude of the physicalattractiveness stereotype may have been exaggerated in our re-view because of a publication bias in favor of significant find-ings (Greenwald, 1975; Lane & Dunlap, 1978). Indeed, in ourdata the effect sizes were larger in published than unpublishedresearch (see Table 4), a typical result in meta-analyses (see
Glass et al., 1981). Although publication bias must therefore beconsidered an influence, our inclusion of all available unpub-lished findings diluted the impact of this bias on our aggregatedeffect sizes. Moreover, the mean effect size in the unpublishedstudies remained substantial (see Table 4).One of the methodological features of physical attractivenessstudies relevant to interpreting the magnitude of our effect sizesis the degree to which extraneous variables were controlled intypical experiments. Such control reduces the standard devia-tions that serve as the denominator of the effect sizes. Com-pared with many other areas of research in social and personal-ity psychology (e.g., prosocial and antisocial behavior, groupprocess), research on the physical attractiveness stereotype isrelatively controlled, because carefully selected target stimuliare presented to subjects in a laboratory setting that usually
precludes social interaction between the subjects and targets. Inaddition, because dependent variables that aggregate subjects'responses ordinarily strengthen effects (Abelson, 1985; Ajzen,
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 1211988), the fact that the observations analyzed in the studies wereviewed typically represented a moderate number of judg-ments should also be taken into account (see Table 1). Thus, twoimportant methodological features of this research literature—the relatively high level of experimental control and the moder-ate amount of aggregation of responses—favored the produc-tion of large effect sizes.Several additional considerations are relevant to evaluatingthe magnitude of the average ds produced by our meta-analysis(see Eagly, 1987). One set of guidelines for the d metric has beensuggested by Cohen (1977), who proposed that 0.20 can bedescribed as small, 0.50 as medium, and 0.80 as large. Cohenbased these standards on his impressions of effect sizes in thebehavioral sciences and maintained that phenomena repre-sented by medium effect sizes would ordinarily be noticed in
daily life. Cohen's characterization of medium effect sizes asdiscriminable is consistent with the transformation of ourmean weighted effect size of 0.58 into the metric of Rosenthaland Rubin's (1982) binomial effect-size display. By this transfor-mation, 64% of attractive people but only 36% of unattractivepeople were perceived as having above-average personalities.This difference of 28% suggests a substantial tendency, despitethe fact that a d of 0.5 8 can be interpreted as signifying that only8% of the variability in subjects' inferences about targets' per-sonalities was explained by their physical attractiveness.Another basis for interpreting the average effect sizes for thephysical attractiveness stereotype is to compare them with aver-age effect sizes typically produced by meta-analyses on otherhypotheses in social and personality psychology. Eagly's (1987)overview of such effect sizes suggested that they ranged from
roughly 0.00 to 1.20. For example, mean </s for sex differencesin social behavior ranged from a low of 0.13 for helping behav-ior to a high of 1.19 for the use of pause fillers in vocal behavior.Another such comparative standard is provided by Cooper andFindley's (1982) computation of a mean d of 0.92 for the find-ings cited in a sample of social psychology textbooks.10 Becausestudies cited in textbooks are likely to provide the best demon-strations of those phenomena that social psychologists believeare genuine, this figure no doubt considerably overestimates thestrength of typical findings for these phenomena.In summary, the magnitude of the physical attractivenessstereotype in our meta-analytic findings was enhanced by (a)our exclusion of studies for which we could not calculate aneffect size, (b) an apparent publication bias in favor of positivefindings, and (c) experimental designs featuring a high degree of
experimental control and moderate aggregation of judgments.In view of these considerations as well as the numeric guide-lines commonly used for evaluating the magnitude of effectsizes, the beauty-is-good effect should be considered moderatein magnitude but certainly not extremely strong.Finally, in relation to the robustness of the beauty-is-goodstereotype, it is worth commenting on the consistency of thefindings across the studies. The direction of the effect provedquite consistent, as shown by the fact that 91% of the study-leveleffect sizes favored the attractive targets (see Table 2). Nonethe-less, as shown by the large value of the Q statistic (see Table 2),the findings were quite inconsistent in magnitude. Moreover, toachieve a homogeneous set of findings, 33% of the study-leveleffect sizes had to be removed. This figure compares with the20% or less of effect sizes that Hedges (1987) removed to attainhomogeneity among studies on several diverse psychological
hypotheses. Furthermore, other recent meta-analyses on socialpsychological topics have achieved homogeneity by removal of
homogeneity among studies on several diverse psychologicalhypotheses. Furthermore, other recent meta-analyses on socialpsychological topics have achieved homogeneity by removal ofsmaller proportions of effect sizes than the 33% removed in thepresent review (see Eagly & Johnson, 1990; Johnson & Eagly,1989). Thus, the effect sizes produced by studies on the physicalattractiveness stereotype should be viewed as quite inconsistentin magnitude.Impact of Type of Attributes on the PhysicalAttractiveness StereotypeCongruent with our hypotheses, which built on the excep-tions and qualifications noted in some narrative reviews (e.g.,Adams, 1982; Alley & Hildebrandt, 1988; Bassili, 1981; Bull &Rumsey, 1988; Cash & Janda, 1984; Dermer & Thiel, 1975;Dion, 1981, 1986), there was considerable variation in thestrength of the beauty-is-good effect from study to study andfrom measure to measure within studies. As expected, some of
this variation was explained by the type of dependent variableresearchers had used. The fact that physical attractiveness hadits strongest impact on social competence supports our conten-tion that the core of the physical attractiveness stereotype issociability, popularity, and similar attributes. Other evaluativedimensions varied considerably in how closely they were psy-chologically connected to good looks versus bad looks. Physicalattractiveness had little impact on integrity and concern forothers; potency, adjustment, and intellectual competenceshowed intermediate impact.In none of our categories of evaluative meaning were attrac-tive people perceived less favorably than unattractive people,although attractive people possessed no advantage in our con-cern for others class. Because the argument that the attractive-ness stereotype has a dark side (e.g. Cash & Janda, 1984;Dermer & Thiel, 1975) suggests that attractive people are per-
ceived to be more likely than unattractive people to possess thenegative attributes of vanity and selfishness, we performed sepa-rate analyses to determine whether ratings of modesty versusvanity (« = 6) or egotism versus selflessness (n = 6)—two compo-nents of our concern for others class—would show significantreversals of the usual tendency to ascribe more favorable quali-ties to beautiful people. Indeed, both means differed signifi-cantly from 0.00 in the predicted negative direction: d+ — —0.67,CI = -0.51/-0.84 for modesty versus vanity; d< = -0.25, CI =—0.08/-0.41 for egotism versus selflessness. However, themean for egotism became positive when one highly negativeoutlying effect size was removed. Thus, we conclude only thatattractive people are perceived more negatively than unattrac-tive people in one respect: They are thought to be more vainand less modest. The present results, then, serve to clarify the
dark side of the physical attractiveness stereotype. It includes10 This mean effect size aggregates comparisons involving (tests, Ftests, and correlation coefficients.
122 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHUANI, AND LONGOvanity but perhaps not the apparently similar attribute of ego-tism."The heterogeneity of the attractiveness stereotype across di-mensions of evaluative meaning has important implications forinterpreting research in this area. These meta-analytic findingsraise questions about the common practice of aggregating sub-jects' responses into composite indexes. To take the Social De-sirability Index used by Dion and her collaborators (Dion et al,1972) as an example, we placed 7 of the 14 items in this compos-ite in our social competence category, 3 in potency, 3 in concernfor others, and 1 in other. Because this composite emphasizedsocial competence, its distribution of items across the dimen-sions of personality resulted in a relatively strong stereotype, amuch stronger stereotype than would have been obtained bychoosing, for example, a large number of items representingintegrity and concern for others. Our meta-analytic results thus
suggest that researchers should select items systematically bydesigning indexes that represent the content-specific dimen-sions of subjects' implicit theories of personality. Aggregatemeasures consisting of items that were selected through morearbitrary methods produce unreliable estimates of the strengthof the physical attractiveness stereotype and obscure the subtle-ties of people's stereotypic thinking about looks.Impact of Other Variables on the PhysicalAttractiveness StereotypeIndividuating information. The implicit personality theoryframework guiding the present analysis also suggested that thestrength of the physical attractiveness stereotype would be af-fected by information about the targets in addition to theirphysical attractiveness. As predicted, the beauty-is-good effectwas weaker when subjects received individuating informationalong with attractiveness cues. This finding, which is consistentwith the prior research we noted early in this article, suggests
that the evaluative implications of looks may be somewhat weakin many natural settings in which perceivers have extensive in-formation about other people in addition to their physical ap-pearance. Looks should thus be relatively less important in per-ceptions of friends, acquaintances, family members, and co-workers than in perceptions of strangers.Sex of targets. The prediction that the attractiveness stereo-type is stronger for female targets than for male targets was notsupported.12 In seeking to explain why, we offer two quite dif-ferent lines of reasoning. One possibility is that this hypothesismay be valid under circumstances not present in the researchparadigms represented in this meta-analysis. In particular, thegreater weight of attractiveness in perceivers' judgments ofwomen may occur in the context of face-to-face interaction or,more generaUy, in situations in which perceivers are likely tointeract with targets. If women take more interest in and respon-
sibility for the interpersonal aspects of daily experience (seeEagly, 1987; Eagly & Wood, in press), physical attractivenessmay have more impact on judgments of women than men innatural settings where people engage in social interaction, andsocial competence therefore has important consequences. Thegreater importance of attractiveness to perceptions of womenmay not be revealed in the typical stereotype study, in whichsubjects merely rate photographs of targets whom they do notexpect to meet.A second, more radical interpretation is that our hypothesisabout the greater weight of attractiveness in judgments ofwomen is incorrect. If so, how can this conclusion be reconciledwith research suggesting that physical attractiveness is moreimportant to the female gender role than to the male genderrole and to women's self-esteem and personal identity (see sum-mary presented early in this article)? To resolve this apparent
paradox, we suggest framing the effects of physical attractive-
role and to women's self-esteem and personal identity (see sum-mary presented early in this article)? To resolve this apparentparadox, we suggest framing the effects of physical attractive-ness in terms of two stages: (a) In a first stage, perceivers inferfrom appearance cues that targets have certain personalitycharacteristics; and (b) in a second stage, the implications ofthese inferences unfold during social interaction. In the firststage, physical attractiveness may cause perceivers to draw thesame conclusions about women's and menls personalities (iff., itconveys the same information about social competence andother attributes). However, in the second stage, conclusionsbased on attractiveness may be more consequential for womenthan men. Specifically, as social interaction proceeds, the gainsin perceived social competence enjoyed by good-looking peo-ple may have more important consequences for women be-cause the structuring of interaction by means of gender roles
assigns women more responsibility for the maintenance of posi-tive and friendly relationships (see Eagly, 1987). Therefore,women may work harder to be perceived as socially competent,accounting for women's greater interest in their personal ap-pearance and the greater centrality of looks in their self-concepts. Also if marriage and family relationships are morecentral to women than men (see Wood, Rhodes, & Whelan,1989), the implications of looks for heterosexual attraction maybe more important to women than men.Within- versus between-subjects manipulation of attractive-ness. The finding that the attractiveness stereotype wasstronger for within-subjects manipulations than for between-subjects manipulations of appearance is amenable to two possi-ble explanations. One interpretation is that the within-subjectsprocedure provides a more precise error term because subjectsserved as their own controls (see also footnote 7). A second
interpretation is that the context in which stimuli are perceivedin within-subjects experiments—namelji exposure to targets ofwidely differing levels of physical attractiveness—may induce aperceptual contrast effect whereby attractive targets are seen asmore attractive and unattractive targets as less attractive thanthey would otherwise be. Such contrast effects are well docu-mented in research on judgments of physical attractiveness (seePatzer, 1985, for a summary). The more extreme judgments ofattractiveness that result from such a contrast effect could in-duce more extreme judgments of personality.Color versus black-and-white stimuli. Another finding of our" Our conclusion about egotism is somewhat tentative because fiveof the six egotism effect sizes were based on composite measures ofegotism that included some attributes in addition to egotism and itssynonyms.12 Yet Feingold (1990b) showed that physical attractiveness led to
stronger inferences of sexual warmth for female targets than for maletargets.
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 123meta-analysis is that the beauty-is-good effect was more pro-nounced for color stimuli than for black-and-white stimuli. In-terpretation of this finding must remain tentative because, as aresult of the correlational nature of meta-analytic findings, thecolor versus black-and-white aspect of the stimuli was con-founded to some extent with other features of the experiments(e.g., the studies with color stimuli encompassed all of thosewith face-to-face interaction). Nonetheless, if we assume thatcolor stimuli are more vivid than black-and-white photographs,this finding can be interpreted in terms of the greater psycholog-ical impact of vivid (vs. pallid) stimuli. Vivid information ispresumed to attract and hold people's attention because it is, forexample, concrete and imagery provoking, emotionally interest-ing, or proximal in a sensory, temporal, or spatial way (Nisbett
& Ross, 1980). Although empirical support for the hypothesisthat vividly presented information has more impact on judg-ments than pallid information has been mixed, many of thefailures to confirm vividness hypotheses may have been due toresearchers' failures to specify exactly what was made vivid bytheir particular vividness manipulations (see Chaiken & Eagly,1983; Taylor & Thompson, 1982). This ambiguity was for themost part not present in this research because photographswere typically presented, making the physical appearance ofthe target vivid. Thus, the typical experimental paradigm forresearch on the physical attractiveness stereotype may be espe-cially well adapted to demonstrating vividness effects, and pri-mary research within this paradigm might well explore theseeffects.Number of judgments aggregated into dependent variable.The finding that the beauty-is-good effect was stronger when alarger number of judgments was aggregated into the dependent
variable is explicable in terms of ordinary principles of reliabil-ity and aggregation: Dependent variables show stronger rela-tions to appropriate predictors to the extent that measures ofthese variables are more reliable because they are based onaggregations of correlated responses (e.g., Ajzen, 1988). Thisrelation between the strength of findings and response aggrega-tion has been obtained in other meta-analyses (Eagly & John-son, 1990; Eagly & Steffen, 1986), and it is appropriate to rou-tinely track the effects of aggregation in quantitative reviews.Other findings. The relation that the physical attractivenessstereotype showed to instructional set, type of attractivenessvariation, and control for confounds are of somewhat less inter-est because it is difficult to interpret these findings in any butthe most tentative way. \fet the tendency for the accuracy in-structional set to produce a weaker stereotype than other in-
structional sets is interesting and consistent with Dion and col-leagues' (1972) logic in choosing this particular set (see Dion,1981,1986). It is also worth noting the tendency for the stereo-type to be more pronounced in studies that apparently did not(vs. did) implement any control for confounds of attractivenesswith other features of target stimuli. Because such studies pre-sented only two individuals, one attractive person and one unat-tractive person (of each sex if both sexes of targets were in-cluded), attractiveness could have been confounded with otheraspects of targets' physical appearance. The fact that this lack ofcontrol was associated with a stronger beauty-is-good effect sug-gests that confounds favored researchers' hypothesis.Limitations of This Meta-AnalysisOur integration of research on the physical attractiveness ste-reotype addressed only a limited number of questions, and fu-ture meta-analyses of this research literature could well con-
sider several other important issues. In particular, the beauty-is-good hypothesis might be compared with an ugly-is-bad
ture meta-analyses of this research literature could well con-sider several other important issues. In particular, the beauty-is-good hypothesis might be compared with an ugly-is-badhypothesis (Hatfield & Sprecher, 1986; Patzer, 1985). Such ameta-analysis would compare the differences in judgments ofhigh- and medium-attractiveness targets with the differences injudgments of medium- and low-attractiveness targets. We didnot compute effect sizes comparing medium-attractiveness tar-gets with high- or low-attractiveness targets because the designcomparing high- and low-attractiveness targets is the prototypefor research on this topic. In fact, 71% of the studies in oursample did not include a middle or medium level of attractive-ness.Another limitation of our meta-analysis is that we had nosatisfactory way to gauge the strength of researchers' manipula-tions of physical attractiveness. Some of the between-study vari-
ability in findings was no doubt due to variation in the strengthof the attractiveness manipulation. Most researchers usedjudges' ratings to select their target stimuli, but rules for select-ing good- and bad-looking stimuli varied (e.g, some investiga-tors excluded targets that were rated as extremely attractive orunattractive, whereas others did not; see Wallston & O*Leary's,1981, discussion of this point). Although manipulation checkswere often present, data were generally not reported in suffi-cient detail to allow the computation of effect sizes representingthe perceived difference in the physical attractiveness of thehigh- and low-attractiveness targets. Moreover, norms of attrac-tiveness probably changed over time so that the features ofhighly attractive faces varied somewhat from study to study.These variations in looks may have influenced the particularinferences that perceivers made.The conclusions of our meta-analysis are also limited by the
characteristics of the existing paradigm for assessing the attrac-tiveness stereotype. Many researchers from Dion and co-workers (1972) onward have used the same basic laboratoryexperimental procedure. In the interest of experimental con-trol, Dion and associates' paradigm presented only one type ofstimulus in a particular way: namely, college students depictedin head-and-shoulders photographs. In this study and in mostsubsequent research, the targets were young adults with thephysical appearance idiosyncracies of people who attend col-lege. This stimulus domain reduced the likelihood that good-looking but bad types (e.g, dumb blonde, whore/tramp, femmefatale, sleazy guy, gigolo) were represented. For example, theprototypic femme fatale is generally depicted in the media asolder than the modal college woman and identified by clothes,makeup, and jewelry that are unlikely to be worn by collegewomen posing for yearbook photos.
women posing for yearbook photos.The most important limitation of the present meta-analysisfollows directly from our goal of evaluating the strength andgenerality of the physical attractiveness stereotype. Because ofour decision to study only the stereotype itself, we included onlystudies that assessed evaluative perceptions of targets in situa-tions that did not involve personal or role relationships betweenperceiver and target. Although this emphasis allowed us to do
124 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOthe best possible job of documenting the overall size of theattractiveness stereotype and its variability, especially as a func-tion of the specific type of inference, it did not permit us toprobe the impact that the beauty-is-good stereotype has on ac-tion. We have thus not examined the impact of attractivenessstereotyping in ongoing social interaction and everyday rolerelationships. Quantitative summaries of the large research liter-ature addressing such issues can now proceed given the rela-tively clear description that the present review provides of thephysical attractiveness stereotype itself.ConclusionThis meta-anatysis indicates that narrative reviewers werecorrect in concluding that, in terms of perceivers' inferencesfrom cues that convey physical attractiveness, what is beautifulis good. At the same time, our findings reveal that this effect ishighly variable, and that the implicit personality theory frame-
work successfully identifies factors that help account for thisvariation. Thus, our results indicate that the beauty-is-good ef-fect depends crucially on the type of inference the perceiver isasked to make. Good looks induce strong inferences about so-cial competence and weaker inferences about potency, adjust-ment, and intellectual competence, but have little impact onbeliefs about integrity and concern for others. One importantdirection for future primary research is to design explicit testsof the effects we demonstrated of the type of attributes con-tained in dependent measures. Such research would require thedevelopment of reliable and valid indexes of the content-speci-fic dimensions of personality represented in people's implicittheories. Indeed, some researchers have already taken steps inthis direction. Specifically, Bassili (1981), who also proposedthat the attractiveness stereotype is not as general as implied by
the phrase beauty is good (see discussion early in this article),used factor analysis to demonstrate that Dion and colleagues'(1972) Social Desirability Index contains several content-specific types of evaluative meaning. He also offered a moregeneral instrument for measuring dimensions of personalitythat are affected by positive versus negative appearance.Other parts of the social psychological research literature onattractiveness also provide fruitful domains for quantitative re-viewing. The most pressing next step is to integrate the resultsof the large number of studies that have examined the effects ofphysical appearance on how people are treated (e.g, in educa-tional settings, Adams & Cohen, 1974; in judicial proceedings,Stewart, 1980). Our finding that the strength of the beauty-is-good stereotype depends on the type of inference perceiversmake yields some predictions about treatment effects. For ex-ample, targets' physical attractiveness should have greater im-
pact on how people treat them in the general domain of socialcompetence (eg., peer popularity achieved) than intellectualcompetence (e.g., school grades received), integrity (e.g, sen-tences assigned for legal violations), or concern for others (e.g.,opportunities provided for prosocial behavior). In addition, byextending our logic about the dampening effect of individuat-ing information, we expect a weakening of the overall effect ofbeauty as one moves from stereotype studies to research assess-ing behavior in natural settings and even more reduction whenthese natural settings require that people interact within theconstraints imposed by social roles and by organizationalnorms and hierarchies.ReferencesAbelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little isa lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97,129-133.Adams, G. R. (1977). Physical attractiveness research: Toward a devel-opmental social psychology of beauty. Human Development, 20,217-239.
217-239.Adams, G. R. (1982). Physical attractiveness. In A. G. Miller (Ed), In
opmental social psychology of beauty. Human Development, 20,217-239.Adams, G. R. (1982). Physical attractiveness. In A. G. Miller (Ed), Inthe eye of the beholder: Contemporary issues in stereotyping(pp. 253-304). New York: Praeger.Adams, G. R., & Cohen, A. S. (1974). Children's physical and interper-sonal characteristics that affect student-teacher interactions. Journalof Experimental Education, 43,1-5.Adams, G. R., & Wareham, J. (no date). Beautiful is good: Mechanism ofself and others'perceptions. Unpublished manuscript, Utah State Uni-versity; Logan, UT.Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality, and behavior. Chicago: DorseyPress.Allen, B. P. (1978). Social behavior: Facts and falsehoods about commonsense, hypnotism, obedience, altruism, beauty, racism, and sexism.Chicago: Nelson Hall.Alley, T. R, & Hildebrandt, K. A. (1988). Determinants and conse-quences of facial aesthetics. In T. R. Alley (Ed), Social and applied
aspects of perceiving faces (pp. 101-140). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Anderson, N. H. (1974). Cognitive algebra: Integration theory appliedto social attribution. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimentalsocial psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 1-101). New York: Academic Press.Anderson, N. H. (1981). Integration theory applied to cognitive re-sponses and attitudes. In R. E. Petty, T. M. Ostrom, & T. C. Brock(Eds.), Cognitive responses in persuasion (pp. 361-397). Hillsdale,NJ: Erlbaum.Anderson, R., & Nida, S. A. (1978). Effect of physical attractiveness onopposite- and same-sex evaluations. Journal of Personality, 46,401-413.Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality. Journal of Ab-normal and Social Psychology, 41, 258-290.Ashmore, R. D. (1981). Sex stereotypes and implicit personality theory.In D. L. Hamilton (Ed.), Cognitive processes in stereotyping and inter-group behavior (pp. 37-81). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ashmore, R. D., & Del Boca, F. K. (1979). Sex stereotypes and implicitpersonality theory: Toward a cognitive-social psychological concep-tualization. Sex Roles, 5, 219-248.Ashmore, R. D., Del Boca, E K., & Wohlers, A. J. (1986). Genderstereo-types. In R. D Ashmore & F. K. Del Boca (Eds.), The social psychol-ogy of female-male relations: A critical analysis of central concepts(pp. 69-119). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.Ashmore, R. D, Tumia, M, & Schreier, P. (1980). Forming impressionsof personality: A reanalysis of the central trait effect through multidi-mensional scaling. Unpublished manuscript, Rutgers University,New Brunswick, NJ.Barnes, M. L., & Rosenthal, R. (1985). Interpersonal effects of experi-menter attractiveness, attire, and gender. Journal of Personality andSocial Psychology, 48, 435-446.Baron, R. A, & Byrne, D. (1987). Social psychology: Understandinghuman interaction (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Bar-Tal, D, & Saxe, L. (1976). Physical attractiveness and its relation-ship to sex-role stereotyping. Sex Roles, 2,123-133.Bassili, J. N. (1981). The attractiveness stereotype: Goodness or glam-our? Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 2, 235-252.Berscheid, E. (1981). A review of the psychological effects of physicalattractiveness. In G. W Lucker, K. A. Ribbens, & J. A. McNamara
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 125(Eds), Psychological aspects of facial form (pp. 1-23). Ann Arbor,MI: Center for Human Growth.Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1974). Physical attractiveness. In L.Berkowitz (Ed), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7,pp. 157-215). New York: Academic Press.Brigham, J. C. (1980). Limiting conditions of the "physical attractive-ness stereotype": Attributions about divorce. Journal of Research inPersonality, 14, 365-375.Bull, R., & Rumsey, N. (1988). The social psychology of facial appear-ance. New York: Springer-Verlag.Bull, R, & Stevens, J. (1979). The effects of attractiveness of writer andpenmenship on essay grades. Journal of Occupational Psychology.52, 53-59.Cash, T. F. (1981). Physical attractiveness: An annotated bibliographyof theory and research in the behavioral sciences. Psychological Doc-uments, 11, 83. (Ms. No. 2370)Cash, T. F. (1985). Physical appearance and mental health. In J. A.
Graham & A. M. Kligman (Eds.), The psychology of cosmetic treat-ments (pp. 196-216). New York: Praeger.Cash, T. F, & Janda, L. H. (1984, December). The eye of the beholder.Psychology Today, pp. 46-52.Cash, T. F, & Kehr, J. (1978). Influence of nonprofessional counselors'physical attractiveness and sex on perceptions of counselor behavior.Journal of Counseling Psychology, 25, 336-342.Chaiken, S. (1979). Communicator physical attractiveness and persua-sion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,1387-1397.Chaiken, S. (1986). Physical appearance and social influence. In C. P.Herman, M. P. Zanna, & E. T. Higgins (Eds), Physical appearance,stigma, and social behavior: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 3, pp. 143-177). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Chaiken, S., & Eagly, A. H. (1983). Communication modality as a deter-minant of persuasion: The role of communicator salience. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 45, 241-256.
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 241-256.Cohen, S. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences(rev. ed). New York: Academic Press.Cooper, H. M., & Findley, M. (1982). Expected effect sizes: Estimatesfor statistical power analysis in social psychology. Personality andSocial Psychology Bulletin, 8,168-173.Courtney, A. E., & Whipple, T. W (1983). Sex stereotyping in advertis-ing. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.Deaux, K., & Lewis, L. L. (1983). Components of gender stereotypes.Psychological Documents, 13. 25. (Ms. No. 2583)Deaux, K., & Lewis, L. L. (1984). Structure of gender stereotypes:Interrelationships among components and gender label. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 46, 991-1004.Deaux, K., & Wrightsman, L. S. (1988). Social psychology. PacificGrove, CA: Brooks/Cole.Del Boca, F. K., & Ashmore, R. D. (1980). Sex stereotypes through thelife cycle. In L. Wheeler (Ed), Review of personality and social psy-
chology (Vol. 1, pp. 163-192). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.Dernier, M., & Thiel, D. L. (1975). When beauty may fail. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, SI, 1168-1176.Dibiase, W J., &Hjelle, L. A. (1968). Body-image stereotypes and body-type preferences among male college students. Perceptual and MotorSkills, 27,1143-1146.Dion, K. K. (1981). Physical attractiveness, sex roles and heterosexualattraction. In M. Cook (Ed), The bases of human sexual attraction(pp. 3-22). London: Academic Press.Dion, K. K. (1986). Stereotyping based on physical attractiveness: Is-sues and conceptual perspectives. In C. R Herman, M. P. Zanna, &E. T. Higgins (Eds), Physical appearance, stigmaand social behavior:The Ontario Symposium (Vol. 3, pp. 7-21). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Dion, K. K., Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1972). What is beautiful isgood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 285-290.Downs, A. C, & Harrison, S. K. (1985). Embarrassing age spots or just
plain ugly? Physical attractiveness stereotyping as an instrument ofsexism on American television commercials. Sex Roles, 13,9-19.
plain ugly? Physical attractiveness stereotyping as an instrument ofsexism on American television commercials. Sex Roles, 13,9-19.Eagly, A. H. (1987). Sex differences in social behavior: A social-roleinterpretation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: Ameta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 233-256.Eagly, A. H., & Steffen, V J. (1984). Gender stereotypes stem from thedistribution of women and men into social roles. Journal of Personal-ity and Social Psychology, 46, 735-754.Eagly, A. H., & Steffen, V J. (1986). Gender and aggressive behavior: Ameta-analytic review of the social psychological literature. Psycho-logical Bulletin, 100, 309-330.Eagty, A. H., & Wood, W (in press). Explaining sex differences in socialbehavior: A meta-analytic perspective. Personality and Social Psy-chology Bulletin.Feingold, A. (1990a). Gender differences in effects of physical attrac-
tiveness on romantic attraction: A comparison across five researchparadigms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 981-993.Feingold, A. (1990b). Good-looking people are not what we think. Un-published manuscript.Ghiselli, E. E. (1964). Theory of psychological measurement. New York:McGraw-Hill.Glass, G. V, McGaw, B., & Smith, M. L. (1981). Meta-anafysis in socialresearch. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.Goldman, W, & Lewis, P. (1977). Beautiful is good: Evidence that thephysically attractive are more socially skillful. Journal of Experimen-tal Social Psychology, 13,125-130.Greenwald, A. G. (1975). Consequences of prejudice against the nullhypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 82,1-20.Gross, A. E, & Crofton, C. (1977). What is good is beautiful. Socio-metry, 40, 85-90.Hamilton, D. L. (Ed). (1981). Cognitive processes in stereotyping andintergroup behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Hartnett, J. I, & Secord, G. (1983). Physical attraction and its effects on
the perception of extra-marital affairs. Perceptual and Motor Skills,56, 310.Hatfield, E., & Sprecher, S. (1986). Mirror, mirror: The importance oflooks in everyday life. Albany: State University of New York Press.Hedges, L. V(1981). Distribution theory for Glass's estimator of effectsize and related estimators. Journal of Educational Statistics, 6,107-128.Hedges, L. V (1982a). Fitting categorical models to effect sizes from aseries of experiments. Journal of Educational Statistics, 7,119-137.Hedges, L. V (1982b). Fitting continuous models to effect size data.Journal of Educational Statistics, 7,245-270.Hedges, L. V (1987). How hard is hard science, how soft is soft science?The empirical cumulativeness of research. American Psychologist,42, 443-455.Hedges, L. V, & Becker, B. J. (1986). Statistical methods in the meta-analysis of research on gender differences. In J. Hyde & M. C. Linn(Eds), The psychology of gender: Advances through meta-anafysis
(pp. 14-50). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.Hedges, L. V, & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-anafysis.Orlando, FL: Academic Press.Hocking, J. E, Walker, B. A., & Fink, E. L. (1982). Physical attractive-ness and judgments of morality following an "immoral" act. Psycho-logical Reports, 51,111-116.Jackman, D. M. (1979). Effects of physical attractiveness and sex on theperception of assertiveness, aggressiveness, and submissiveness.Dissertations Abstracts International, 39, 5648B. (University Micro-films No. 79-10272)
126 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOJackson, L. A, Sullivan, L. A., & Rostker, R. (1988). Gender, genderrole, and body image. Sex Roles, 19,429-443.Jacobson, M. B., & Koch, W (1978). Attributed reasons for support ofthe feminist movement as a function of attractiveness. Sex Roles, 4,169-174.Jacobson, M. B, & Popovich, P. M. (1983). Victim attractiveness andperceptions of responsibility in an ambiguous rape case. PsychologyofWomen Quarterly, 8,100-104.Johnson, B. T, & Eagly, A. H. (1989). The effects of involvement onpersuasion: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 290-314.Kim, M. R, & Rosenberg, S. (1980). Comparison of two structuralmodels of implicit personality theory. Journal of Personality and So-cial Psychology, 38, 375-389.Lane, D. M., & Dunlap, W P. (1978). Estimating effect size: Bias result-ing from the significance criterion in editorial decisions. BritishJournal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 31,107-112.
Langlois, J. H. (1986). From the eye of the beholder to behavioral real-ity: Development of social behaviors and social relations as a func-tion of physical attractiveness. In C. P. Herman, M. P. Zanna, & E. T.Higgins (Eds.), Physical appearance, stigma, and social behavior:TheOntario Symposium (Vol. 3, pp. 23-51). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.Larsen. R. J., Diener, E., &Cropanzano, R. S. (1987). Cognitive opera-tions associated with individual differences in affect intensity. Jour-nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 767-774.Lerner, R., & Lerner, J. (1977). Effects of age, sex and physical attrac-tiveness on child-peer relations, academic performance, and elemen-tary school adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 13,585-590.Locksley, A, Borgida, E., Brekke, N., & Hepburn, C. (1980). Sex stereo-types and social judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-ogy, 39.S21-S31.Locksley, A, Hepburn, C, & Ortiz, Y (1982). Social stereotypes and
judgments of individuals: An instance of the base-rate fallacy. Jour-nal of Experimental Social Psychology, 18, 23-42.Martin, P. 1, Friedmeyer, M. H, & Moore, J. E. (1977). Pretty patient/healthy patient? A study of physical attractiveness and psychopathol-ogy. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 33,990-994.McArthur, L. Z. (1982). Judging a book by its cover: A cognitive analy-sis of the relationship between physical appearance and stereotyp-ing. In A. H. Hastorf & A. M. Isen (Eds.), Cognitive social psychology(pp. 149-211). New York: Elsevier.Miller, A. G., Gillen, B., Schenker, C., & Radlove, S. (1974). The predic-tion and perception of obedience to authority. Journal of Personality,42, 23-42.Mullen, B. (1989). Advanced BASIC meta-analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-baum.Nisbett, R. E.,& Ross. L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and short-comings of social judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.Nordholm, L. A. (1980). Beautiful patients are good patients: Evidence
for the physical attractiveness stereotype in first impressions of pa-tients. Social Science and Medicine, 14A, 81-83.O'Reilly, M. T. (1987). Physical attractiveness of professors in dentaleducation: Its relationship to students' ratings of teaching effective-ness (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1986). Disser-tation Abstracts International, 47, 433A.Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J, & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The measure-ment of meaning. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.Patzer, G. L. (1985). The physical attractiveness phenomena. New York:Plenum Press.Pilkonis, P. A. (1977). The behavioral consequences of shyness. Journalof Personality, 45, 596-611.Roberts, E. J. (1982). Television and sexual learning in children. In D.Pearl, L. Bouthilet, & J. Lazar (Eds), Television and behavior: Tenyears of scientific progress and implications for the eighties (Vol. 2, pp.209-223). Washington, DC: US. Government Printing Office.
Rodin, J, Silberstein, L., & Striegel-Moore, R. (1985). Women and
years of scientific progress and implications for the eighties (Vol. 2, pp.209-223). Washington, DC: US. Government Printing Office.Rodin, J, Silberstein, L., & Striegel-Moore, R. (1985). Women andweight: A normative discontent. In T. B. Sonderegger & R. A.Dienstbier (Eds), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 1984 (Vol. 33,pp. 267-307). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.Rosenberg, S. (1977). New approaches to the analysis of personal con-structs in person perception. In A. L. Land & J. K. Cole (Eds.),Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 1976 (Vol. 24, pp. 179-242).Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.Rosenberg, S., Nelson, C, & Vivekananthan, P. S. (1968). A multidi-mensional approach to the structure of personality impressions.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 283-294.Rosenberg, S., & Sedlak, A. (1972). Structural representations of im-plicit personality theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experi-
mental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 235-297). New York: AcademicPress.Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1982). A simple, general purpose displayof magnhudeof experimental effect. Journal of Educational Psychol-ogy, 74,166-169.Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1986). Mela-analytic procedures forcombining studies with multiple effect sizes. Psychological Bulletin,99, 400-406.Scheibe, C. (1979). Sex roles in TV commercials. Journal of AdvertisingResearch, 19, 23-27.Schneider, D. J. (1973). Implicit personality theory: A review. Psycholog-ical Bulletin, 79, 294-309.Schneider, P. A, Conger, A, & Firth, E. A. (1986, April). Sex as amoderator of the beauty-good relationship. Paper presented at themeeting of the American Association for Counseling and Develop-ment, Los Angeles.Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception andinterpersonal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social stereo-
types. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 656-666.Stewart, J. E. (1980). Defendant's attractiveness as a factor in the out-come of criminal trials: An observational study. Journal of AppliedSocial Psychology, 10, 348-361.Taylor, S. E., & Thompson, S. C. (1982). Stalking the elusive "vividness"effect. Psychological Review, 89,155-181.Touhey, J. C. (1979). Sex-role stereotyping and individual differences inliking for the physically attractive. Social Psychology Quarterly, 42,285-289.Turkat, D., & Dawson, J. (1976). Attributions of responsibility for achance event as a function of sex and physical attractiveness of targetindividual. Psychological Reports, 39, 275-279.Wallston, B. S, & O"Leary, Y E. (1981). Sex makes a difference: Differ-ential perceptionsof women and men. In L. Wheeler (Ed),/tevfewo/personality and social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 9-41). Beverly Hills,CA: Sage.White, G. M. (1980). Conceptual universal in interpersonal language.
American Anthropologist, 82, 759-781.Wood, W, Rhodes, N., & Whelan, M. (1989). Sex differences in positivewell-being: A meta-analytic review of the effects associated withmarital status. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 249-264.
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS STEREOTYPE 127AppendixReferences for Studies in Meta-AnalysisAdams, G. R., & Huston, T. L. (1975). Social perception of middle-agedpersons varying in physical attractiveness. Developmental Psychol-ogy, 11. 657-658.Alicke, M. n, Smith, R. H., & Klotz, M. L. (1986). Judgments of physi-cal attractiveness: The role of faces and bodies. Personality and So-cial Psychology Bulletin, 12, 381-389.Anderson, S. M., & Bern, S. L. (1981). Sex typing and androgyny indyadic interaction: Individual differences in responsiveness to physi-cal attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41,74-86.Armstrong, D P. (1979). The facial attractiveness riddle (Doctoral dis-sertation, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, 1978). Disser-tation Abstracts International, 39, 5127B.Barnes, M. L, & Rosenthal, R. (1985). Interpersonal effects of experi-menter attractiveness, attire, and gender. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 48, 435-446.Barocas, R., & Karoly, P. (1972). Effects of physical appearance onsocial responsiveness. Psychological Reports, 31, 495-500.Bassili, J. N. (1981). The attractiveness stereotype: Goodness or glam-our? Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 2, 235-252.Benassi, M. A. (1981). The effects of order of presentation and physicalattractiveness on attributions of ability (Doctoral dissertation, DePaul University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 42, 2596B.Black, H. K. (1974). Physical attractiveness and similarity of attitude ininterpersonal attraction. Psychological Reports, 35, 403-406.Boor, M., & Zeis, E R. (1975). Effect of physical attractiveness on 1Qestimation: A failure to extend results of prior research. Psychologi-cal Documents, 5, 234. (Ms. No. 929).Byrne, D, London, O., & Reeves, K. (1968). The effects of physicalattractiveness, sex, and attitude similarity on interpersonal attrac-tion. Journal of Personality, 36,259-271.
tion. Journal of Personality, 36,259-271.Carter, J. A. (1978). Impressions of counselors as a function of coun-selor physical attractiveness. Journal ofCou,:'eling Psychology, 25,28-34.Cash, T. E, Begley, P I, McCown, D. A, & Weise, B. C. (1975). Whencounselors are heard but not seen: Initial impact of physical attrac-tiveness. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 22, 273-279.Cash, T. E, Kehr, J. A., Poryson, J., & Freeman, V (1977). Role of physi-cal attractiveness in peer attribution of psychological disturbance.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 987-993.Covington, J. K. (1981). The communicator's physical attractivenessand credibility as determinants of the effectiveness of a speech (Doc-toral dissertation, Louisiana State University). Dissertation Ab-stracts International, 42, 437A.Cunningham, M. R. (1986). Measuring the physical in physical attrac-tiveness: Quasi-experiments on the sociobiology of female facial
beauty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 925-935.Dermer, M. (1974). When beauty fails (Doctoral dissertation, Univer-sity of Minnesota, 1973). Dissertation Abstracts International, 34,4402A.Dermer, M, & Thiel, D. L. (1975). When beauty may fail. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, J/,1168-1176.Dion, K.., Berscheid, E, & Walster, E. (1972). What is beautiful is good.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 285-290.Dushenko, T. W, Perry, R. P., Schilling, J., &Smolarski, S. (1978). Gener-ality of the physical attractiveness stereotype forage and sex. Journalof Social Psychology, 105, 303-304.Gallucci, N. T. (1984). Effects of men's physical attractiveness on inter-personal attraction. Psychological Reports, 55, 935-938.Gallucci, N. T, & Meyer, R. G. (1984). People can be too perfect:Effects of subjects' and targets' attractiveness on interpersonal at-traction. Psychological Reports, 55, 351-360.
traction. Psychological Reports, 55, 351-360.Gillen, B. (1981). Physical attractiveness: A determinant of two typesof goodness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7.277-281.
traction. Psychological Reports, 55, 351-360.Gillen, B. (1981). Physical attractiveness: A determinant of two typesof goodness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7.277-281.Gillen, B. (1975). Physical attractiveness and sex as determinants oftrait attributions. Dissertation Abstracts International, 36,1945B.(University Microfilms No. 75-21,693)Gillen, B., & Sherman, R. C. (1980). Physical attractiveness and sex asdeterminants of trait attributions. Multivariate Behavioral Research,15, 423^37.Green, C. E, Cunningham, 1, & Yanico, B. J. (1986). Effects of coun-selor and subject race and counselor physical attractiveness on im-pressions and expectations of a female counselor. Journal of Counsel-ing Psychology, 33, 349-352.Guise, B. J., Pollans, C. H., & Turkat, I. D. (1982). Effects of physicalattractiveness on perception of social skill. Perceptual and MotorSkills, 54,1039-1042.Hailey, B. J. (1976). Selective attention as a factor in the maintenance of
physical attractiveness and sex role stereotypes (Doctoral disserta-tion, University of Georgia, 1975). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 36, 4227B.Havassy, V J. (1981). Reactions to professional women as a function ofattractiveness and level of competence (Doctoral dissertation, Cali-fornia School of Professional Psychology). Dissertation Abstracts In-ternational, 42, 2130B.Heilman, M. E.,&Stopeck, M. H. (1985). Attractiveness and corporatesuccess: Different causal attributions for males and females. Journalof Applied Psychology, 70, 379-388.Hicks, R. A., Pellegrini, R. I, & Tomlinson, N. (1978). Attributions offemale college students to male photographs as a function of attrac-tiveness and pupil size. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47,1265-1266.Hill, M. K., & Lando, H. A. (1976). Physical attractiveness and sex-rolestereotypes in impression formation. Perceptual and Motor Skills,43,1251-1255.Jackson, L. A. (1983). The perception of androgyny and physical attrac-
tiveness: Two is better than one. Personality and Social PsychologyBulletin, 9, 405-413.Janda, L. H., O'Grady, K. E., & Barnhart, S. A. (1981). Effects of sexualattitudes and physical attractiveness on person perception of menand women. Sex Roles, 7,189-199.Joseph, W B. (1977). Effect of communicator physical attractivenessand expertness on opinion change and information processing. Dis-sertation Abstracts International, 38, 5017A. (University MicrofilmsNo. 77-31,899)Kaplan, R. M. (1978). Is beauty talent? Sex interaction in the attractive-ness halo effect. Sex Roles, 4,195-204.Kleinke, C. L, & Kahn, M. L. (1980). Perceptions of self-disclosers:Effects of sex and physical attractiveness. Journal of Personality, 48,190-205.Kleinke, C. L., Staneski, R. A, & Pipp, S. L. (1975). Effects of gaze,distance, and attractiveness on males' first impressions of females.Representative Research in Social Psychology, 6, 7-12.
Kollar, M. M. (1973). The beautiful is rotten phenomenon: A negativestereotype of physical attractiveness. Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 34, 4632B. (University Microfilms No. 74-07,769)Landy, D., & Sigall, H. (1974). Beauty is talent: Task evaluation as afunctionof the performer's physical attractiveness. Journal of Person-ality and Social Psychology, 29, 299-304.
128 EAGLY, ASHMORE, MAKHIJANI, AND LONGOLa Voie, J. C, & Adams, G. R. (1978). Physical and interpersonal attrac-tiveness of the model and imitation in adults. Journal of Social Psy-chology, 106,191-202.Lee, L. J., Adams, G. R, & Dobson, W R. (1984). Male and femaleattributions and social influence behavior towards a physically at-tractive female. Journal of Psychology, 117,97-103.Lewis, K. N, & Walsh, W B. (1978). Physical attractiveness: Its impacton the perception of a female counselor. Journal of Counseling Psy-chology, 25, 210-216.Longtain, M. J. (1981). Status generalization and performance expec-tation effects of sex role stereotypes, physical attractiveness, andexpertise. Dissertation Abstracts International, 42, 3034B. (Univer-sity Microfilms No. 81-28,655)Lucker, G. W (1977). Physical attractiveness, individual differencesand personality stereotyping (Doctoral dissertation, University ofTexas at Austin, 1976). Dissertation Abstracts International, 37,4219B.
4219B.Maddux, J. E, & Rogers, R. W (1980). Effects of source expertness,physical attractiveness, and supporting arguments on persuasion: Acase of brains over beauty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-ogy, 39, 235-244.Miller, A. G. (1970). Role of physical attractiveness in impression for-mation. Psychonomic Science, 19, 241-243.Mims, P. R, Hartnett, J. J., & Nay, W R. (1975). Interpersonal attrac-tion and help volunteering as a function of physical attractiveness.Journal of Psychology, 89,125-131.Molberg, A. N. (1977). The effects of interpersonal distance, physicalattractiveness, and sex on impression formation (Doctoral disserta-tion, University of Minnesota, 1976). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 37, 6408B.Moore, J. S., Graziano, W G., & Miller, M. G. (1987). Physical attractive-ness, sex role orientation, and the evaluation of adults and children.Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 13, 95-102.
Nielsen, J. P., & Kernaleguen, A. (1976). Influence of clothing andphysical attractiveness in person perception. Perceptual and MotorSkills, 42, 775-780.Osterkamp, M. B. (1980). Impressions of older persons in initial inter-actions (Doctoral dissertation, University of Kansas, 1979). Disser-tation Abstracts International, 41,849A.Patzer, G. L. (1983). Source credibility as a function of communicatorphysical attractiveness. Journal of Business Research, 11, 229-241.Pistilli.J. A. (1976). Stereotyped perceptionsof women asafunctionofmenstrual cycle phase and physical attractiveness (Doctoral disser-tation, Kent State University, 1975). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 36, 4760B.Reeves, R. A. (1982). The effects of source physical attractiveness, simi-larity, and message type on persuasion: When beauty is not enough(Doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia). Dissertation Ab-
stracts International, 43, 2044B.Saner, S. I. (1983). Beyond the halo effect: Physical attractiveness andimpression formation as a function of cue availability (Doctoral dis-sertation, University of Connecticut). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 44,1253B.Sanders, C. H, & Borowy, T. D. (1983). Physical attractiveness: Its influ-ence on the perceptions of counselors (Report No. CG-017-587).Knoxville: University of Tennessee. (ERIC Document Reproduc-tion Service No. ED 246-345)Saxe, L. (1976). Perceiver characteristics as determinants of judgmentsof physically attractive and unattractive others (Doctoral disserta-tion, University of Pittsburgh, 1975). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-tional, 37, 2577B.Small-Weil, S. B. (1981). The relationship between gender, physicalattractiveness and occupational prestige (Doctoral dissertation,Tufts University, 1980). Dissertation Abstracts International, 41,3613B.Snyder, M, &Rothbart, M. (1971). Communicator attractiveness and
opinion change. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 3, 377-387.Solomon, S., & Saxe, L. (1977). What is intelligent, as well as attractive,
opinion change. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 3, 377-387.Solomon, S., & Saxe, L. (1977). What is intelligent, as well as attractive,is good. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 3, 670-673.Stretch, R. H, & Figley, C. R. (1980). Beauty and the boast: Predictorsof interpersonal attraction in a dating experiment. Psychology: AQuarterly Journal of Human Behavior, 17, 35-43.Tanke, E. D. (1982). Dimensions of the physical attractiveness stereo-type: A factor/analytic study. Journal of Psychology, 110, 63-74.Thornton, B., & Linnstaedter, L. (1980). The influence of physicalattractiveness and sex-role congruence on interpersonal attraction.Representative Research in Social Psychology, 11, 55-63.Webster, M., & Driskell, J. E. (1983). Beauty as status. American Jour-nal of Sociology, 89,140-165.Widgery, R. N. (1974). Sex of receiver and physical attractiveness ofsource as determinants of initial credibility perception. WesternSpeech, 38,13-17.
Speech, 38,13-17.Widgery, R. N., & Webster, B. (1969). The effects of physical attractive-ness upon perceived initial credibility. Michigan Speech Journal, 4,9-19.Wiener, S., Saxe, L, & Bar-Tal, D. (1975). The effects of physical attrac-tiveness on attributions of causality for success and failure (ReportNo. CG-010-288). Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh. (ERICDocument Reproduction Service No. ED 117-588)Wilson, M., Crocker, J., Brown, C. E., Johnson, D, Liotta, R, & Konat,J. (1985). The attractive executive: Effects of sex of business asso-ciates on attributions of competence and social skills. Basic and Ap-plied Social Psychology, 6, 13-23.Received May 17,1989Revision received November 20,1989Accepted November 6,1990 •
