134 Surg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.Original ArticlesAuthors: Victor Hugo Pacagnelli Infante1 Livia Salomão Calixto2  Patrícia Maria Berardo Gonçalves Maia Campos31   Biochemical Pharmacist - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.2   Masters degree student, Faculdade de Ci-ências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto da Universidade de São Paulo (FCFRP-USP) – Ribeirão Preto (SP), Brazil.3  Associate Professor III, FCFRP-USP .Correspondence:  Patrícia Maria Berardo Gonçalves Maia Campos  Departamento de Ciências Farmacêuticas ‒ Cosmetologia Avenida do Café, s/n ‒ Monte Alegre 14040-903 ‒ Ribeirão Preto ‒ SP Brazil E-mail: pmcampos@usp.br Received on: 28/04/2016  Approved on: 27/05/2016  This study was carried out at the Faculda-de de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto da Universidade de São Paulo (FCFR-P-USP) – Ribeirão Preto (SP), Brazil. Financial support: none  Conflict of interests: noneCosmetics consumption behaviour among
men and women and the importance in products indication and treatment adherenceComportamento de homens e mulheres quanto ao consumo de cosméticos e a importância na indicação de produtos e adesão ao tratamentoDOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5935/scd1984-8773.201682817ABSTRACTIntroduction: Cosmetics stands outs in commerce, not only in Brazil but also worldwide. There is great need for knowledge on buying motivations of consumers for the development of better-targeted products and improved adhesion to dermatological treatments. Objective: T o know the cosmetic consumption habits and provide a link from the pharma-ceutical with the medical area. Methods: An analytical observational study, cross-sectional, was conducted by questionnaire. Results: Main change in male skin is oiliness; in women, besides oiliness, there is concern
with blemishes. The consumption of hygiene products is unanimous in both sexes. Women are more concerned with the treatment and prevention of sun damage. The vast majority of women use anti-acne products and makeup. Hair products have the same sales trend for both men and women, but this is not observed among products for skin. Conclusions: Men and women have different motivations when buying cosmetics. The way consumers relate with products has changed dramatically and they are seeking to express their individuality in society. This reflects a need for medical knowledge of such motivations in order to improve patients' adherence to treatment.Keywords: cosmetics; habits; questionnaires; data collection; behaviorRESU MO
Introdução: Os cosméticos apresentam-se em destaque no comércio não só no Brasil, mas mun-dialmente. Há grande necessidade do conhecimento das motivações de compra dos consumidores para o desenvolvimento de produtos mais bem direcionados e melhora na adesão de tratamentos dermatológicos. Objetivo: Conhecer os hábitos de consumo cosmético e fornecer um link da área farmacêutica com a área médica. Métodos: Estudo observacional analítico do tipo transversal, realizado por meio de questionário. Resultados: A principal alteração na pele masculina é a oleosidade, nas mulheres além dessa há a pre-ocupação com manchas. O consumo de produtos de higiene é unânime em ambos os sexos. As mulheres se mostram mais preocupadas com o tratamento e prevenção de danos solares. A maioria das mulheres utiliza produtos antiacne e maquiagens. Produtos para cabelo apresentam a mesma tendência de vendas tanto para homens quanto para mulheres, não sendo o mesmo observado entre os produtos para pele. Conclusões:
entre os produtos para pele. Conclusões: Homens e mulheres apresentam diferentes motivações no momento de adquirir produtos cosméticos. A forma de relacionamento do consumidor com os produtos tem mudado expressivamente, e ele vem buscando expressar sua individualidade perante a sociedade. Isso reflete a necessidade do conhe-cimento médico de tais motivações a fim de melhorar a adesão dos pacientes ao tratamento.Palavras-chave: cosméticos; hábitos; questionários; coleta de dados; comportamento
Surg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.Cosmetics consumption 135INTRODUCTIONThe study of consumer behavior focuses on understand-ing the habits underpinning their actions in different situations involving purchases and consumption. Nevertheless, analyzing their behavior isolatedly is not enough, and understanding why people act in a certain way becomes crucial. Consumers of dif-ferent products have different characteristics, meaning that it is critical to understand the desires and needs of consumers in dif-ferent market segments in light of the relevant product.1Currently, cosmetic products stand out in the market place not only in Brazil, but also worldwide. This is due to the more active and steady participation of these products’ consum-ers, who began to use them more often. Due to the high expo-sure – both in the media and in homes – this type of product became the subject of academic and market research within sev-eral areas of study, in special in marketing. 2
2The cosmetics industry is composed of three major seg-ments: cosmetics (linked to the concept of products for improv-ing the appearance), personal care and fragrance products.1The Brazilian cosmetic industry has grown considerably, having surpassed France and Japan, and becoming the world’s second largest market for cosmetic products in 2009. In light of this fact, it became important to understand whether the con-sumers’ motivation is strictly related to improving their appear-ance and beauty or it is also associated with the improvement in their quality of life and skin’s health.There is a big conjuncture change in the way people
relate with their personal image and there has been a steady growth of this consumer sector in the cosmetic industry. In ad-dition, the increased access of male consumers to the cosmetic market reflects a possible improvement in their quality of life, since many health problems directly related to the skin are ig-nored by that consumer segment due to their resistance to treat-ment with cosmeceutical products.When seeking to understand consumer behavior, it is necessary to bear in mind what is underpinning that behavior, who is involved and which is the socioeconomic context. Be-havior is closely related to stimuli from different sources, and the consumer’s response is processed according to the context. For Martins,3 the factors that motivate consumers to buy can be distributed into five different groups: anthropological or cultural, environmental, organic, psychological, and socioeconomic.In the 80’s, a reconstruction of the male and female mod-
els took place through the symbology involving their clothing, gestures, attitudes and the relationship with one’s own body and sexuality; there was a change in the pattern of behavior linked to gender. In the face of the women’s achievements, men ended up losing their maximum function of being the family provider – inherited from a patriarchal society – and began to engage in a process of transformation of their social persona and intimacy, be-coming more participating at home and capable of progressively sharing responsibilities with women.4Furthermore, men currently believe that being apparent-
ly cleaner, neater and well dressed implies better job opportu-nities, in addition deriving satisfaction from the perception that they are building their own image. While men are concerned with their appearance, they can acknowledge their weaknesses, their susceptibilities and show that they need care – something rarely seen among men up until the mid-80’s. Their concern for health and beauty is such that the cosmetics industry saw a large increase in the demand for products and started to develop lines specific for the male segment.5METHODSAiming at understanding the consumption habits regard-
5METHODSAiming at understanding the consumption habits regard-ing the cosmetic products market, an analytical observational cross-sectional study was carried out. After receiving the approv-al by the Research Ethics Committee CEP/FCFRP n.303, a mixed questionnaire was prepared with 15 closed-ended ques-tions and 1 open-ended question. The questionnaire was applied to the studied individuals, with questions about their social sta-tus, cosmetic consumption culture and some health habits, such as use of sunscreen.The study population consisted of male and female con-sumers of cosmetics. Individuals who did not reside in Brazil were excluded. The sampling method used was the stratified random group sampling of male and female individuals. All par-ticipants answered all questions in the questionnaire. The ob-tained answers were validated, having their consistency and in-tegrity confirmed.RESULTSThe questionnaire comparing the purchasing motiva-
tions, as well as the way through which consumers interact with cosmetic products was applied to the population study, which consisted of 101 people (49 men and 52 women). The partici-pants’ ages concentrated in the range of 18 to 35 years, charac-terizing the population as young.As for the participants’ income distribution, it was possi-ble to notice a strong concentration in the group earning up to six times the minimum wage (R$ 788,00 in 2015), which may be related to the fact that respondents were mainly young people and adults up to 35 years old (Table 1).Respondents were asked about physical characteris-
tics regarding their skin and hair. It was possible to observe a greater number of male respondents with oily skin and normal, short and brown hair. As for women, it was possible to note that most of them classified their skin as oily, and their hair as mixed, brown and long. Overall, it was possible to notice that the respondents have mainly oily or mixed hair and skin, a very Table 1: Interviewees’ distribution by income groupIncome Men Women TotalLess than 3 minimum wages  15,8% 26,7% 42,6%From 3 to 6 minimum wages 16,8% 11,9% 28,7%From 6 to 10 minimum wages 9,7% 8,8% 18,8%More than 10 minimum wages 5,8% 3,9% 9,9%
136 Infante VHP , Calixto LS, Campos PMBGMSurg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.frequently present characteristic among Brazilians. The data on the skin and hair are in Graph 1.This type of information is important for the dermatol-ogist, in conjunction with a pharmacist, to decide on the best treatment for the individual. This becomes even more relevant in light of the fact that different skin or hair types have different physical and chemical characteristics and composition, which will even influence the form of absorption of the active princi-ples. Thus, dermatological prescriptions can be made more per-sonalized and efficient.In order to understand the differences in the motivations for purchasing cosmetic products, two questions were asked in the questionnaire: “What are you searching for when you buy a cosmetic product?” and “What do you take into consideration when choosing a cosmetic product?” Although the questions
seem very similar, they are important to analyze what consumers conceptually expect from a cosmetic product versus what makes consumers to look for a specific, already commercially avaiable product. The data collected are present in Graphs 2 and 3.0.0%	5.0%	10.0%	15.0%	20.0%	 25.0%	30.0%	35.0%	 40.0%	45.0%	Short	Medium	Long	Shaven	Bald	Short	Medium	Long	Shaven	 Bald	Total	 42.7%	 27.6%	 29.7%	 0.0%	 0.0%	Women	6.0%	 15.8%	 29.7%	 0.0%	 0.0%	Men	 36.7%	 11.8%	 0.0%	 0.0%	 0.0%	Hair length0	 5	10	 15	 20	 25	 30	 35	MixedNormalOily	Dry	I don’t knowMixed	 Normal	 Oily	 Dry	 I don’t knowTotal	 25	 32	 31	 8	 5	Women	 17	 15	 16	 2	 2	Men	 8	 17	 15	 6	 3	Hair type0	5	10	15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	Mixed	Normal	Oily	Dry	I don’t knowMixed	 Normal	 Oily	 Dry	 I don’t knowTotal	 23	 27	 44	 4	 3	Women	 16	 13	 21	 2	 0	Men	 7	 14	 23	 2	 3	Skin type0	5	10	15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	Short	Medium	LongShaven	BaldShort	Medium	Long	Shaven	 Bald	Total	 43	 28	 30	 0	 0
Total	 43	 28	 30	 0	 0	Women	 6	 16	 30	 0	 0	Men	 37	 12	 0	 0	 0	Hair lengthGraph 1: Distribution of the interviewees’ skin and hair characteristicsGraph 2:  Consumers’ motivations when buying cosmetic products Graph 3:  What influences consumers in their choice of cosmetic products0	 5	 10	 15	 20	 25	 30	 35	TreatmentHygiene	Prevention	An improvement in the appearance	Well-being 	 Well-being An improvement in 	the appearance	Prevention	 Hygiene 	Treatment	Total	 26	 28	 6	 11	 30	Women	 14	 13	 5	 1	 19	Men	 12	 15	 1	 10	 11	What are you searching for when you buy a cosmetic product? 0	 10	 20	 30	 40	 50	 60	 70	Brand	Sensorial		Indication from friends 	Brand	 Packaging AdvertisingIndication 	from friendsIndication from 	physicians 	Price	Sensorial	 Blogs	Total	 61	 16	 16	 50	 51	 58	 33	 16	Women	 36	 8	 8	 33	 27	 29	 19	 13	Men	 25	 8	 8	 17	 24	 29	 14	 3	What do you take into consideration when choosing a cosmetic product?
Surg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.Cosmetics consumption 137When questioning about what makes consumers to look for a specific cosmetic product, the following picture was ob-tained: women are more influenced by brands, followed by indi-cation from friends and price, while men are mainly influenced by price, brand and medical indication (Graph 3).Regarding customer loyalty, the majority of women were little loyal to brands, enjoying varying manufacturers. On the other hand, among men this trend was balanced, according to the data presented in Graph 4.As part of the questionnaire, respondents should mention up to three brands of cosmetic products that they could recall at the moment. Roughly 60 brands were referred, with 43 arising only once or twice in the sample space. Brands that were men-tioned three or more times are shown in Graph 5.The L’Oreal group stands out as the leader in number
of citations, as well as its various cosmeceutical product lines, such as Vichy and La Roche-Posay. Brazilian brands were poorly recalled; with only Natura and O Boticário groups being cited.The main facial alteration that bothered male respondents was oiliness. Women described cases of oiliness, however prob-lems with spots are also among the main complaints of the in-terviewees, despite being young. The data is depicted in Graph 6.Graph 4:  Consumers’ loyalty to cosmetic brandsGraph 6:  Alterations in the interviewee’s skinGraph 7:  Consumption of personal hygiene products in absolute values0	10	20	30	40	50	60	70	Men	Women	Men	 Women	 Total	24	 38	 62	 Various brands 	The same brand 25	 14	 39	You usually buy cosmetic products of ...	Total	Respondents mentioned all cosmetic products that were
in use at the time of the study or had been previously used at any stage of their lives. For a better analysis of the data, products for hair, skin and personal care were segregated. Respondents could choose any number of products (it is important to note that there is a greater variety of cosmetic products used by women). The data obtained are in Graphs 7, 8 and 9.The presence of personal care products is very significant in both genders. Regarding products for the hair, it was possible to notice that men use a wide range of products. A result that has drawn attention is the intense use of hair conditioners by the male public – even in light of the fact that most have short hair. Men more commonly use hair styling creams and gels.Women use hair moisturizing masks and fixing sprays in
greater quantities. The use of lotions for hair loss by men is spo-radic, mainly due to the fact that the studied public correspond-ed to young men, who do not usually seek treatment at the first signs of baldness. These individuals usually seek improvements in their appearance and while the actual problem does not fully arise, male consumers do not seek treatment. Graph 8 shows that the consumption trend is similar in both genders, nonetheless with different proportions, meaning 0	10	 20	 30	 40	 50	 60	Roughness 	SpotsLinhas	de	expressão	Oiliness	Oiliness	Linhas	de	expressão	Spots RoughnessTotal	 56	 17	 26	 2	Mulher	 23	 8	 19	 2	Homem	 33	 9	 7	 0	Which alteration in the skin of your face that bothers you most?0	 20	 40	 60	 80	 100	 120	Soap	Toothpaste 	ToothpasteDeodorant/AntiperspirantSoap ShampooTotal	 101	 100	 101	 100	Womens	 52	 51	 52	 51	Mens 49	 49	 49	 49	Hygiene productsXampu
Mens 49	 49	 49	 49	Hygiene productsXampuGraph 5:  : Cosmetic brands mentioned more than twice by intervieweesCosmetic brands mentioned by the intervieweesFrequency of the citationMensWomens
138 Infante VHP , Calixto LS, Campos PMBGMSurg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.that men and women tend to purchase the same type of product for the hair, proportionally in greater or more modest quantities. The behavior observed regarding products for the hair is not the same in products for the skin. As shown in Graph 9, there were differences in consumption trends. Women, for instance, tend to consume much greater quantities of makeup, removers and facial moisturizers than men. There is a strong presence of perfumery in this type of consumption, with almost unanimous answers. The fact that more than 20% of men claimed to have already used some sort of makeup such as eyeshadows, correctives or bases is also noteworthy.Another interesting finding relates to the use of products
for shaving by men: 80% of respondents claimed to use shaving cream while only 49% claimed to use after shave lotions. In line with this, the development of product lines for shaving should focus on the production of shaving creams and / or increase the investment in improving the quality of after shave lotions in order to improve the acceptance of the latter by consumers.Regarding sunscreens, the questionnaire provides the fol-lowing picture: women are more concerned, making more use of the products than men, as can be seen in Graph 10. A surpris-ing finding is that roughly 20% of men claim they have never used sunscreens.Graph 8: consumption of cosmetic products for the hairConsumo de produtos cosméticos para cabelos ShampooDry shampooAnti hair loss top ical lotion100 Hair fixing sprayHair mousseHair mascara- Masculino- Feminino-TotalConditionerMensWomensGraph 9: Consumption of cosmetic products for the skinGraph 10: Interviewees’ sun protection habits.DISCUSSION
DISCUSSIONBased on the results obtained and described in the pres-
ent study, it was possible to observe that in general men are concerned with improving their appearance, improving their well-being and receiving treatment, in this order of priority. On the other hand, women have receiving treatment as their main motivation, followed by improving their well-being and improv-ing their appearance. These results confirm what is observed in the macro society, since the search for improved masculine ap-pearance is mainly related with men’s lack of self confidence towards how to present themselves regarding a new job, their so-cial status or partner. The questions related to the motivation for purchasing are crucial to understand consumer behavior, howev-er they become even more important as tools for the dermatol-ogist to understand how their patients behave. For example, it is possible to observe that the brand, price and medical indications are the three main considerations at the moment of obtaining a cosmetic product. Thus, these are three important
cosmetic product. Thus, these are three important points relevant to the dermatologist at the moment of the prescription.
Moreover, treatment, well-being and improvement of the appearance are the most popular factors when consumers are purchasing cosmetics. The understanding of the consumer’s profile by dermatologists, combined with the knowledge of the trends in the cosmetic market, is extremely important for the prescription to be more precise, according to the patient’s profile.35%	65%	Do you usually use sunscreen?Men	Women	0,0%	20,0%	40,0%	60,0%	80,0%	100,0%	120,0%	MenWomenMen	 WomenLip balm 49,0%	 85,0%	Sunscreen 81,2%	 98,2%	Use of sunscreen and lip balm 	PerfumeFacial moisturizerBody moisturizerMensWomensTotalAstringent lotion Products for acneMakeup in generalMakeup removersAnti-aging creamThermal waterAnti-spot cream
Cosmetics consumption 139Surg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.Men seek to build a receptive self-image that is capable of assisting them to achieve their goals. In addition, lifestyle has been disconnected from sexual orientation, increasingly becom-ing an expression of their individuality.5 In turn, women are concerned with the future impacts that a certain alteration in their skin can cause, seeking cosmetic products that are not only associated with an improvement in the appearance, but also with the correction and / or prevention of specific changes, such as formulations that reduce the skin’s oiliness, for example.Although women complain about spots, they do not
Although women complain about spots, they do not make substantial use of creams for treating them, usually making more use of products for acne beforehand, despite the fact that this type of alteration is more common in men. This consump-tion is driven by their vanity, suggesting that women pay more attention to changes in their skin, noticing them as soon as they arise.6  This information is relevant to the medical public for women often do not have knowledge about possible treatments for the spots about which they complain. Moreover, these cuta-neous alterations may have different origins and only an effective dermatologic examination can lead to an effective treatment.The cosmetic product brand appeal became evident with the findings about the purchase motivation. This is in line with studies indicating that advertising is one of the main factors in-fluencing the purchase of cosmetic products7 combined with
7 combined with the perception of body image. However, the influence of price, coupled with the fact that women take into account indication from friends or blogs at the time of purchase, show that they may no longer maintain their loyalty to the brand in case they find a better product offered by a competing manufacturer.A more loyal and conservative behavior is observed among men, meaning that from the moment they find the product they were looking for, they halt the search process. This confirms the notion that men are always practical, even when taking care of their appearance, while women prefer to prolong the time leading to the moment of choice.8 This shows that, despite the fact that men are approaching an area that has been traditionally considered exclusive of women, gender differences still linger.It is important to note that brands that are more pres-
ent in supermarkets and drugstores, such as Nivea, Dove and Rexona, are more remembered by men than by women, with the same being observed regarding personal care products. Tres-Semmé is an essentially feminine brand and advertising focusing on this public, however it was mentioned only by men. Brands found in supermarkets are the most remembered by the male audience. This is in line with previous studies showing that men often buy their cosmetic products in supermarkets, pharmacies and drugstores.9Women seem much more likely to spend more on cos-
Women seem much more likely to spend more on cos-metic products, and prefer to follow suggestions from friends rather than medical indications, with the opposite being ob-served among men. These behaviors are very present in today’s society, nonetheless it is possible to notice a growing number of blogs, magazines and Internet sites responsible for spreading the use of cosmetic products among the male audience. This is a trend already established in Europe and that will not take long to reach the conceited Brazilian masculine market.10It is important to note that knowledge of this trend is critical to dermatologists, with a view to a possible dissemina-tion channel for dermatological knowledge. Physicians should be alert to possible Internet websites that can assist with correct dermatologic information.Although Brazil is considered the second largest cosmet-
Although Brazil is considered the second largest cosmet-ic products consumer market and the world leader in growth in this sector, few national companies were recalled. These com-panies should explore strategies and specificities in the com-position of the skin and hair of Brazilians, providing specialized products.11 Notably, products developed abroad cannot fully be adapted to the skin of Brazilian consumers due to the particu-larities of the population.Understanding which brands the consumer market pre-fers helps to prescribe cosmeceutic products, and increases pa-tients’ adherence to the treatment. Some brands, such those of the L’Oreal group, make use of clinical efficacy studies, which may partly explain their intense presence among the cited brands vis a vis their relatively high cost. Knowing how the product is manufactured and the company’s integrity, combined with the preferences of the consumer market, can assist towards a more effective adherence to the treatment.
Correlating data from the present study with previous ones12, it was possible to observe that the Brazilian cosmetic industry needs to invest in strengthening its identity through marketing strategies, pricing policies that are aligned with what consumers attribute to the products, in addition to market knowledge. In this manner, the Brazilian companies will be able to reach more consumers and supply cosmetic products consis-tent with the local population.Personal care products have almost unanimous use among the population. This cosmetic market segment is very lucrative and affects the population in an almost homogenous way. The industry as a whole, and in special research and devel-opment teams, should be aware of this fact, leveraging opportu-nities within this sector.Men reported the use of products that are traditionally
considered feminine, such as makeup for instance. This finding demonstrates a disconnecting trend in gender constructions. Men are more concerned with their overall presentation than with the premeditated judgment of their spending habits.Additionally, when examining cosmetic products, the solar protection and impact it causes on the quality of life and long-term physical appearance cannot be left aside.13 The use of sunscreen is the main prevention against more severe conse-quences, such as wrinkles or loss of the natural elasticity of the skin, in addition to skin cancer, which affects an important per-centage of the Brazilian population, given that Brazil is a tropical country with high rates of sunlight incidence.There are studies suggesting that the Brazilian population is aware of the risks associated with the exposure to the sun and the importance of photoprotection. Nevertheless, individuals struggle to create long-term habits of using sunscreen.14 A fifth
140 Infante VHP , Calixto LS, Campos PMBGMSurg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.of the male population stated to have never used sunscreen. This data is consistent with previous studies showing that men use sunscreen less frequently than women.15 This kind of behavior reveals a challenge to be addressed: photoprotection awareness campaigns should target the male audience more efficiently and stimulate the habit of applying sunscreen.Knowledge of such behavior is of significant importance to the dermatologist regarding skin cancer prevention cam-paigns, for instance. In addition, it helps the physician when pre-scribing sunscreens, for the approach to male audiences must be more concise and robust.CONCLUSIONSMen and women have different motivations when buy-ing cosmetics. While the first are more concerned with the im-
provement in the appearance, along with a good cost/benefit ratio, the latter are more concerned with products associated with treatments and seek indications of new brands and products from friends. The way consumers relate to products has been changing dramatically, while people are seeking more authentic ways to express their individuality in society, regardless of pre-es-tablished standards.It is possible to realize a pattern of behavior in which people increasingly become protagonists of their own wills – and not necessarily seek to appropriate ideals typical of certain social classes. Caused by a less polarized, hyper-connected and more democratic world, this behavior opens the possibility that people not only have access to common references regardless of their origin, class, gender or age, but also find ways to authenti-cally voice their individuality.Having the understanding of such data may seem exclu-
sive to marketing activities, nevertheless it reveals a range of im-portant information, enabling dermatologists to perform more modern and effective therapeutic approaches. Having knowl-edge of the patients’ behavior means to understand which im-pacts a treatment can have in their quality of life. Moreover, this knowledge helps the physician to understand the more modern and humane therapeutic approaches.l
Cosmetics consumption 141Surg Cosmet Dermatol 2016;8(2):134-41.REFERENCES1. Angonese R. Ambiente, interpretação e estratégia: um estudo na indús-tria brasileira de cosméticos. 2008, 241 f. [Dissertação]. Universidade Po-sitivo, Curitiba, 2008.2. Cerqueira AC, de Oliveira RCR, Honório JB, de Macedo Bergamo FV. Com-portamento do consumidor de cosméticos: um estudo exploratório. Re-vista Formadores. 2013;6(1): 128-57.3. Martins R. Os fatores que influenciam o comportamento humano. Ar-tigonal. 14 ago 2009. Acesso em: 10 nov 2015. Psicologia&Auto-ajuda. Disponível em: http://www.artigonal.com/auto-ajuda-artigos/os-fato-res-que-influenciam-o-comportamento-humano-917162.html. 4. Furtado JA. Titulo do trabalho: Identidade masculina e publicidade: Uma discussão contemporânea. In: III ENECULT - Encontro de Estudos Multi-disciplinares em Cultura, 2007, Salvador. Acesso em: 14 nov 2015. Dispo-nível em: http://www.cult.ufba.br/enecult2007/JulianadeAssisFurtado.pdf.
5. Carvalho JDR. Vaidade masculina: um estudo sobre a mudança de há-bitos do homem contemporâneo. [Monografia]. Centro Universitário de Brasília, Brasília, 2010.6. Strehlau VI, Claro DP , Neto AL. A vaidade impulsiona o consumo de cos-méticos e de procedimentos estéticos cirúrgicos nas mulheres? Uma in-vestigação exploratória. Rev Adm. 2015; 50(1): 73.7. Pereira FC, Antunes AC, Nobre S. O papel da publicidade na compra de produtos cosméticos. Comunicação e Sociedade. 2011;19:161-78.8. Ghilardi-Lucena MIP , Possati JF. O gênero masculino na publicidade de cosméticos e vestuário. Nonada Letras em Revista. 2011; 1(14):11-24.9. Tamashiro HRDS, Merlo EM, Da Silveira JAG. Comportamento do con-sumidor e os atributos que sinalizam as preferências dos formatos de varejo no setor de higiene pessoal, perfumaria e cosméticos. REMark. 2011;10(2): 54.
10. Pinto RPA, Tenorio BL . O Fenômeno Metrossexual - O papel da publicida-de na construção de um novo modelo de homem. In: XXVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Ciências da Comunicação, 2005, Rio de Janeiro. 11. Cruz S, França PXN. Estratégias competitivas: o caso da indústria de cos-mético no Brasil. Veredas Favip - Rev eletr ciên. 2013; 1(1):.20-7.12. Giraldi JDME, De Carvalho DT. A influência da imagem do Brasil nas ati-tudes com relação a produtos brasileiros: uma investigação empírica do efeito país de origem. REAd. Rev. Eletronica Adm. 2006; 12(5):1-28.13. Gilchrest BA, Szabo G. Effects of aging and chronic sun exposure on mela-nocytes in human skin. J Invest Dermatol. 1979;73(2):141-3.14. Bonfá R, Martins-Csta GM, Lovato B, Rezende R, Belletini C, Weber MB. Avaliação do conhecimento e hábitos de fotoproteção entre crianças e seus cuidadores na cidade de Porto Alegre, Brasil Surg  Cosmet Dermatol. 2014; 6(2): 148-53.
15. Castilho IG, Sousa MAA, Leite RMS. Fotoexposição e fatores de risco para câncer da pele: uma avaliação de hábitos e conhecimentos entre estu-dantes universitários. An Bras Dermatol. 2010; 85(2):173-8.
