Diagnosing and Treating Hair LossANNE	L.	MOUNSEY,	MD,  The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North CarolinaSEAN	W.	REED,	MD,	University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia	Hair	loss	 is	a	common	 problem	that	 affects	 up	to	50	percent	 of	men	 and	 women	 throughout	their	 lives.1	It	can	 occur	 any-where	on	the	 body,	 but	 more	 commonly	affects	 just	 the	scalp	 when	 the	patient	 pres-ents	 with	concerns	 about	 the	cosmetic	 effect.	Family	 physicians	 need	 to	be	able	 to	distin-guish	hair	 loss	 that	 represents	 true	 disease	from	 the	 more	 common	 age-related	 hair	loss.	 Hair	 loss	 is	commonly	 categorized	 into	scarring	 and	 nonscarring	 alopecia.	 Scarring	alopecia	 is	rare,	 and	 most	 cases	 of	hair	 loss	seen	 in	primary	 care	 will	 be	nonscarring.	Hair	 loss	 on	the	scalp	 can	 be	further	 classi-fied	as	focal	or	diffuse.	 This	 distinction	 is	the	first	step	in	diagnosis.Differential  Diagnosis
first	step	in	diagnosis.Differential  DiagnosisThe	causes 	of	hair	loss	can	be	broadly 	divided	into	focal 	or	diffuse 	hair	loss	(Table 1) .	Focal	hair	loss	is	secondary 	to	an	underlying 	disor-der	that	may	cause 	nonscarring 	or	scarring	alopecia. 	Nonscarring 	focal 	alopecia 	is	usu-ally	caused	by	tinea 	capitis 	or	alopecia 	areata,	although 	patchy 	hair	loss	may	also	be	caused	by	traction 	alopecia 	or	trichotillomania.	Scarring 	alopecia 	is	rare	and	has	a	number 	of	causes, 	usually 	discoid 	lupus 	erythematosus.	Diffuse 	hair	loss	can	be	further 	categorized	into	conditions 	that	cause 	hair	shedding, 	of	which 	the	most 	common	is	telogen 	effluvium,	and	predominant 	hair	thinning 	caused 	by	male 	or	female 	pattern 	hair	loss	(previously	called 	androgenetic 	alopecia).Focal  Hair LossALOPECIA AREATAAlopecia 	areata 	is	characterized 	by	areas	of	nonscarring 	hair	loss	that	range 	from	single 	oval	patches 	to	multiple 	patches 	that
single 	oval	patches 	to	multiple 	patches 	that	can	become 	confluent. 	Men 	and	women 	are	equally 	affected, 	and, 	although 	it	can	occur	at	any	age,	the	most 	common 	presentation	is	in	children 	and	young 	adults, 	with 	30	to		48	percent	of	patients 	affected 	before 	20	years	of	age.2,3	Alopecia 	totalis 	is	loss	of	all	scalp	hair, 	and	alopecia 	universalis 	refers 	to	loss	of	all	scalp 	and	body 	hair.	In	case	series, 	alope-cia	totalis	and	universalis 	are	less	common	than 	alopecia 	areata 	and	account 	for	4.5	to		30	percent	of	all	alopecia 	cases. 	The	lifetime	risk	of	developing 	alopecia 	areata 	is	1.7	per-cent, 	with	a	prevalence 	of	0.1	percent.2,3	There	is	a	genetic 	predisposition 	to	alopecia 	areata	with 	a	polygenic 	pattern 	of	inheritance.	In	most 	studies, 	20	to	42	percent 	of	those	affected 	have 	a	family 	history 	of	the	disease.4	Skin 	biopsy 	from 	areas 	of	alopecia 	may	show	multiple 	lymphocytes, 	which 	supports 	the
multiple 	lymphocytes, 	which 	supports 	the	theory 	for	an	autoimmune 	cause. 	Alopecia 	is	associated 	with 	autoimmune 	conditions, 	such	as	vitiligo, 	diabetes,	thyroid 	disease, 	rheuma-toid	arthritis, 	and	discoid 	lupus 	erythemato-sus.	Patients 	with 	a	history 	of	atopy 	are	also	at	an	increased 	risk	of	developing 	alopecia.Physicians should be careful not to underestimate the emotional impact of hair loss for some patients. Patients may
an	increased 	risk	of	developing 	alopecia.Physicians should be careful not to underestimate the emotional impact of hair loss for some patients. Patients may
present with focal patches of hair loss or more diffuse hair loss, which may include predominant hair thinning or increased hair shedding. Focal hair loss can be further broken down into scarring and nonscarring. Scarring alo-pecia is best evaluated by a dermatologist. The cause of focal hair loss may be diagnosed by the appearance of the patch and examination for fungal agents. A scalp biopsy may be necessary if the cause of hair loss is unclear. Alopecia areata presents with smooth hairless patches, which have a high spontaneous rate of resolution. Tinea capitis causes patches of alopecia that may be erythematous and scaly. Male and female pattern hair losses have recognizable pat-terns and can be treated with topical minoxidil, and also with finasteride in men. Sudden loss of hair is usually telo-gen effluvium, but can also be diffuse alopecia areata. In telogen effluvium, once the precipitating cause is removed, the hair will regrow. ( Am Fam Physician. 2009;80(4):356-362,
regrow. ( Am Fam Physician. 2009;80(4):356-362, 373-374. Copyright © 2009 American Academy of
Family Physicians.) ▲ Patient information: A handout on hair loss, written by the authors of this article, is provided on page 373.Downloaded from the American Family Physician Web site at www.aafp.org/afp. Copyright © 2009 American Academy of Family Physicians. For the private, noncommercial                     use of one individual user of the Web site. All other rights reserved. Contact copyrights@aafp.org for copyright questions and/or permission requests.
Hair LossAugust 15, 2009  ◆ Volume 80, Number 4 	 www.aafp.org/afp 	 American Family Physician   357The	 patient	 with	 alopecia	 areata	 (Figure 1) 	typ i-cally	presents	 with	 bald	 patches	 on	the	scalp	 that	 often	have	 developed	 rapidly	 with	 sudden	 loss	 of	hair.	 In	dif-fuse	alopecia,	 there	 is	more	 widespread	 hair	 loss,	 often	associated	 with	 graying	 of	the	hair.	 The	 classic	 finding	is	a	smooth,	 hairless	 patch	 surrounded	 by	so-called	 	exclamation	 point	 hairs.	 These	 are	2-	to	3-mm	 broken	hairs	 that	 have	 a	club-shaped	 root	 with	 a	thinner	 proxi-mal	shaft	 and	 a	normal	 caliber	 distal	 shaft	 on	micro-scopic	examination	 (Figure 2) .Treatment 	may	induce 	hair	growth, 	but	usually 	does 	not	change 	the	course 	of	the	disease. 	When 	treatment 	is	stopped,	hair	loss	recurs. 	Many 	patients 	with 	one	or	two	small 	patches	can	be	managed 	without 	treatment 	and	with 	reassurance 	of
the	benign 	nature 	of	the	condition. 	A	system-atic	review 	of	17	randomized 	controlled 	trials	of	topical 	and	oral	steroids, 	topical 	minoxidil	(Rogaine), 	topical 	cyclosporine, 	and	photo-dynamic 	therapy 	found 	no	long-term 	benefit	of	these 	interventions.5	In	patients 	with 	per-sistent	hair	loss	and	less	than 	50	percent 	scalp	involvement, 	intralesional 	corticosteroid 	ther-apy	is	the	first-line 	treatment.6	Patients 	with	more 	than 	50	percent 	hair	loss	can	be	treated	with 	topical 	immunotherapy 	using 	diphenyl-cyclopropenone 	or	squaric 	acid	(Table 2  5-18).7		Overall, 	34	to	50	percent 	of	patients 	with 	alo-pecia	areata 	will	recover 	within 	one	year; 	this	number 	is	as	high 	as	80	percent 	in	patients	with 	one	or	two	patches.6	The	more 	severe 	the	disease 	at	onset, 	the	worse 	the	prognosis, 	with	fewer 	than 	10	percent 	of	patients 	recovering	from 	alopecia 	totalis 	and	alopecia 	universalis.19TINEA CAPITIS
TINEA CAPITISChildren	 are	most	 likely	 to	be	affected	 by	tinea	 capitis	 and	 typically	 present	 with	 a	round	 patch	 of	hair	 loss,	 often	 with	 scaling,	erythema,	 and	 lymphadenopathy.	 In	a	study	of	the	 predictive	 signs	 and	 symptoms	 of	tinea	 capitis	 in	children,	 those	 with	 occipi-tal	adenopathy	 were	 more	 likely	 to	have	 cul-tures	positive	 for	fungi	 (positive	 likelihood	ratio	 of	7.6)	 than	 those	 children	 with	 only	SORT: KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICEClinical recommendationEvidence rating ReferencesIn alopecia areata, there is no long-term benefit of topical steroids, minoxidil (Rogaine), cyclosporine, oral steroids, or photodynamic therapy.A 5Women presenting with hair loss associated with abnormal menses, history of infertility, hirsutism, unresponsive cystic acne, virilization, or galactorrhea should have a targeted endocrine work-up (i.e., testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and prolactin).C 29
Minoxidil 2% causes hair regrowth in female pattern hair loss. B 8Oral finasteride (Propecia) promotes hair regrowth in male pattern hair loss. A 12, 13Minoxidil 2% causes hair regrowth in male pattern hair loss. A 16, 40Discontinuation of finasteride or minoxidil results in loss of any positive effects of treatment (hair growth) in 12 and six months, respectively.A 13, 40A = consistent, good-quality patient-oriented evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence; C = consensus, disease-oriented evidence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information about the SORT evidence rating system, go to http://www.aafp.org/afpsort.xml.Table  1. Differential  Diagnosis  of AlopeciaType of alopecia Distinguishing characteristicsDiffuseFemale pattern hair loss Presents with hair thinning; frontal hairline intact; negative pull test away from hair lossMale pattern hair loss Presents with hair thinning; M pattern; negative
pull test away from hair lossDiffuse alopecia areata Distribution more patchy; positive pull testAlopecia totalis or
Male pattern hair loss Presents with hair thinning; M pattern; negative pull test away from hair lossDiffuse alopecia areata Distribution more patchy; positive pull testAlopecia totalis or universalisTotal hair loss on the scalp and/or bodyTelogen effluvium 30 to 50 percent of hair loss three months after precipitating event; positive pull testAnagen effluvium Sudden hair loss of up to 90 percent two weeks following chemotherapyFocalNonscarringAlopecia areata Normal scalp with surrounding exclamation point hairsTinea capitis Scaly scalp with fungus visible on potassium hydroxide examinationTraction alopecia Patchy; related to hair practices; may have some scarringTrichotillomania Patchy; may be some scarring and associated psychological disturbanceScarring (cicatricial) Scarring and atrophy of scalp (e.g., discoid lupus erythematosus)NOTe: Listed in order of clinical importance.
Hair Loss358  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 80, Number 4  ◆ August 15, 2009alopecia,	 pruritus,	 or	scaling.20	If	the	diagnosis	 is	not	clear	 from	 the	history	 and	 physical	 examination,	 a	skin	scraping	 taken	 from	 the	active	 border	 of	the	inflamed	patch	 can	 be	put	into	 potassium	 hydroxide	 and	 exam-ined	microscopically	 for	the	presence	 of	hyphae.	 Skin	scrapings	 can	 also	 be	sent	 for	fungal	 culture,	 but	this	 is	less	helpful	 because	 the	fungi	 can	take	 up	to	six	weeks	 to	grow.	 Tinea	 is	caused	 by	the	microsporum	 species,	 which	fluoresces	 under	 a	Wood	 lamp;	 however,	 in	the	United	States,	 most	 tinea	 is	caused	 by	trichophyton,	 which	 does	not	fluoresce,	 so	this	 test	is	less	useful.	In	its	most	 severe	form,	 tinea	 capitis	 causes	 a	boggy	 inflammatory	 mass	called	 a	kerion,	 which	 may	 heal	 with	 scarring	 and	 subse-quent	localized	alopecia.Tinea	 capitis	 can	 be	treated	 with	 oral	 terbinafine
(Lamisil),	 fluconazole	 (Diflucan),	 itraconazole	 (Spo-ranox),	 or	griseofulvin	 (Grifulvin);	 topical	 treatments	by	themselves	 are	not	effective.	 Dosing	 of	griseofulvin	 is	10	to	20	mg	per	kg	per	day	for	six	to	eight	 weeks	 in	chil-dren21	or	500	mg	per	day	for	six	to	eight	 weeks	 in	adults.22	Terbinafine	 is	approved	 for	treatment	 of	tinea	 capitis	 in	children	and	requires	a	two-	to	four-week	course.23TRACTION ALOPECIATraction 	alopecia 	is	a	form 	of	un intentional 	hair	loss	associated 	with 	specific 	social, 	cultural, 	and	cosmetic	practices. 	Patients 	(primarily 	women) 	wearing 	wigs, 	tight	braids, 	or	using 	curling 	rollers 	are	at	risk. 	Hair 	process-ing	including 	bleaching, 	coloring, 	and	waving 	also	puts	patients 	at	risk. 	Hair 	loss	usually 	occurs 	in	the	fronto-temporal 	area, 	although 	it	can	vary. 	Eliminating 	the	stressor 	or	source 	of	traction 	on	the	hair	commonly 	cures
the	problem 	and	returns 	hair	growth 	to	normal. 	Several	small 	case	reports 	have 	shown 	topical 	minoxidil 	2%	to	be	beneficial 	for	treatment.24	In	rare	circumstances, 	chronic	traction 	can	set	in	motion 	a	process 	of	folliculitis 	and	subsequent 	scarring 	that	can	result 	in	permanent 	hair	loss	to	the	affected 	area.TRICHOTILLOMANIATrichotillomania	 is	a	psychiatric	 compulsive	 disorder	that	 involves	 repeated	 hair	 plucking.	 It	is	most	 common	in	children,	 but	 may	 persist	 into	 adulthood.	 On	close	inspection,	 twisted	 and	 broken	 off	hairs	 are	visible	 in	patchy	 areas	 across	 the	scalp.	 In	chronic	 cases,	 scarring	alopecia	may	result.CICATRICIAL ALOPECIACicatricial 	or	scarring 	alopecia 	causes 	permanent 	hair	loss	from 	destruction 	of	the	hair	follicles 	by	inflammatory 	or	autoimmune 	diseases. 	The	most 	common 	cause 	of	this	is	Figure  2. Exclamation point hair showing distal broken
end of shaft and proximal club-shaped hair root.Illustrat Ion by Dav ID Kl EmmDistal shaft (normal caliber)Proximal shaft (thinned)Club-shaped hair rootFigure  1. alopecia areata.
Hair LossTable  2. Treatment  of Hair LossTreatment DosingStrength of evidence CommentsAlopecia areataTopical steroids Applied twice daily to scalp B evid ence for short-term growth, but none for long-term growth 5Topical minoxidil (Rogaine) Applied twice daily B evid ence for short-term growth; one study showed more hair regrowth with 5% than 1% formulation 5,6Topical immunotherapy with diphenylcyclopropenone or squaric acidTreatment applied by dermatologist every few weeksB Unl icensed treatment; may cause severe dermatitis 7Oral steroids Six-week tapering course  of prednisone starting at  40 mg per dayB Continued treatment is needed to maintain hair growth; risks of prolonged steroid use outweighs the benefits 6Intralesional corticosteroids Triamcinolone acetonide
(Kenalog) 5 to 10 mg per mL; 0.1 mL injected with a 30-gauge needle into the dermis 1 cm apart to a maximum of 3 mL; can be repeated every four to six weeksC Hair regrowth lasts a few months; effect on long-term outcome is unknown6Anthralin cream  (Dritho-Creme HP)0.5% to 1% cream once daily for 20 to 30 minutes, increasing by 10 to 15 minutes every two weeksC Hair staining prevents use in fair-haired patients6Female pattern hair lossMinoxidil 2% Apply twice daily to dry scalp B 20 percent of women using the drug versus  7 percent of women taking a placebo reported moderate new hair growth after 32 weeks; number needed to treat = 88; 7 percent of women using minoxidil experience undesirable hypertrichosis9 Spironolactone (Aldactone) 100 to 200 mg orally daily C 88 percent of women had a modest decrease in hair loss with treatment10Flutamide (formerly e ulexin) 250 mg orally daily C Treatment for one year resulted in a modest
improvement in alopecia; 32 percent of participants experienced elevated liver function tests while taking the medication, resulting in some safety concerns11Male pattern hair lossFinasteride (Propecia) 1 mg orally daily A Promotes hair growth for more than two years, with the effect waning by year three12,13; does not significantly affect sperm production and poses no risk to a female sex partner; when screening men on finasteride for prostate cancer, the upper limit of normal prostate specific antigen levels should be doubled to ensure appropriate interpretation14,15Minoxidil (2%) 1 mL to scalp twice daily A Consistent evidence showing moderate to dense regrowth of hair 16Minoxidil (5%) 1 mL to scalp twice daily A Consistent evidence showing moderate to dense regrowth of hair 16Ketoconazole (2%) shampoo (Nizoral)Daily C Increased hair density, size, and proportion of anagen follicles after shampooing two to four times per week for 21 weeks17
17 Pyrithione zinc (1%) shampoo (Head and Shoulders)Daily C Increased total visible hair count, but 5 percent less than treatment with minoxidil 5%18A = consistent, good-quality patient-oriented evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence; C = consensus, disease-oriented evi-dence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information about the SORT evidence rating system, go to http://www.aafp.org/afpsort.xml.Information from references 5 through 18.
Hair Loss360  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 80, Number 4  ◆ August 15, 2009discoid 	lupus 	erythematosus, 	which 	produces 	atrophied	erythematous 	patches, 	sometimes 	with 	telangiectasia.Generalized  Hair LossTELOGEN EFFLUVIUMTelogen	 effluvium	 occurs	 when	 an	increased	 number	of	hairs	 enter	 the	 telogen	 (resting)	 phase	 of	the	 hair	cycle	 from	 the	anagen	 (growing)	 phase,	 and	 these	 hairs	are	lost	 approximately	 three	 months	 later.	 Usually,	 an	average	 of	100	 hairs	 are	lost	 each	 day,	 but	this	 becomes	significantly	 more	 in	telogen	 effluvium,	 in	which	 30	to	50	percent	 of	body	 hair	 can	 be	lost.	 Telogen	 effluvium	may	 be	precipitated	 by	severe	 illness,	 injury,	 infection,	surgery,	 crash	 diets,	 psychological	 stress,	 giving	 birth,	thyroid	 disorders,	 iron	 deficiency,	 anemia,	 or	drugs.	Hyperthyroidism	 and	hypothyroidism	 can	cause	 telogen	effluvium,	 which	 is	usually	 reversible	 when	 the	thyroid
status	 is	corrected	 (except	 in	long-standing	 hypothyroid-ism).	Severe	 iron	 deficiency	 anemia	 may	 be	associated	with	 it,	but	 this	 remains	 controversial.25,26	Drugs	 that	cause	 telogen	 effluvium	 include	 antithyroid	 agents,	 hor-mones,	anticonvulsants,	 anticoagulants,	 beta	 blockers,	 	angiotensin-converting	 enzyme	 inhibitors,	 and	 lithium.	No	cause	is	found	in	approximately	one	third	of	cases.27Patients 	with 	telogen 	effluvium 	usually 	present 	with	an	increased 	number 	of	hairs 	in	their 	hairbrush 	or	shower, 	and	sometimes 	thinning 	of	the	hair	in	the	scalp,	 	axillary, 	and	pubic 	areas. 	A	detailed 	history 	may	indicate	the	cause 	of	the	hair	loss,	which 	usually 	has	occurred 	two	or	three 	months 	before 	the	hair	falls	out.	On	examination,	there 	is	generalized 	hair	loss	with 	a	positive 	hair	pull	test,	indicating 	active 	hair	shedding, 	particularly 	at	the	vertex	and	scalp 	margin. 	The	hair	pull	test	is	done 	by	grasping
approximately 	40	to	60	hairs 	between 	the	thumb 	and	fore-finger	and	applying 	steady 	traction 	(slightly 	stretching 	the	scalp) 	as	you	slide 	your 	fingers 	along 	the	length 	of	the	hair.	Generally, 	only 	a	few	hairs 	in	the	telogen 	phase 	can	be	plucked 	in	this	fashion. 	Less	than 	10	percent 	is	considered	normal, 	whereas 	greater 	than 	this	is	considered 	indicative	of	a	pathologic 	process.28	Treatment 	of	telogen 	effluvium	primarily 	involves 	removal 	of	the	underlying 	stressors 	or	correction 	of	any	precipitating 	medical 	conditions.ANAGEN EFFLUVIUMAnagen 	effluvium 	is	the	abrupt 	loss	of	80	to	90	percent 	of	body 	hair, 	which 	occurs 	when 	the	anagen 	(growing) 	phase	is	interrupted. 	The	main 	cause 	of	this	is	chemotherapy.FEMALE PATTERN HAIR LOSSUp	to	50	percent 	of	women 	will	experience 	female 	pat-tern	hair	loss	during 	their 	lifetime.1	Patients 	usually	 	present	with 	hair	thinning 	over 	the	central 	area	of	the
scalp 	and	widening 	of	the	midline 	part, 	but	with 	preser-vation	of	the	frontal 	hairline 	(Figure 3) .	Wom en	who	also	have 	abnormal 	menses, 	history 	of	infertility, 	hirsutism,	unresponsive 	cystic 	acne, 	virilization, 	or	galactorrhea	should 	have 	a	targeted 	endocrine 	work-up 	for	hyperan-drogenism 	(i.e., 	testosterone, 	dehydroepiandrosterone	sulfate, 	and	prolactin), 	although 	most 	will	have 	normal	androgen 	levels.29	Evaluation 	for	iron	deficiency, 	thyroid	disease, 	and	syphilis 	(a	rare	cause) 	should 	be	considered	because 	they 	can	contribute 	to	hair	thinning 	or	general-ized	hair	loss.Minoxidil	 2%	is	the	only	 treatment	 approved	 by	the	U.S.	 Food	 and	 Drug	 Administration	 (FDA)	 for	treating	female	 pattern	 hair	 loss	 in	women	 older	 than	 18	years.	A	hyperandrogenic	 state	 may	 limit	 the	success	 of	treat-ment	with	 minoxidil,30	and,	 in	these	 w omen,	 spirono-lactone	 (Aldactone)	 100	 to	200	 mg	daily	 may	 slow	 the
A	hyperandrogenic	 state	 may	 limit	 the	success	 of	treat-ment	with	 minoxidil,30	and,	 in	these	 w omen,	 spirono-lactone	 (Aldactone)	 100	 to	200	 mg	daily	 may	 slow	 the	rate	 of	hair	 loss.10,31	Women	 with	 evidence	 of	a	hyperan-drogenic	 state	 requesting	 combined	 oral	 contraceptives	would	 benefit	 from	 using	 antiandrogenic	 progesterones,	such	 as	drospirenone.32	Finasteride	 (Propecia)	 is	inef-fective	 in	postmenopausal	 women	 with	 female	 pattern	hair	 loss.33	Over-the-counter	 topical	 preparations,	 hair	extensions,	 and	 hairpieces	 are	available	 for	women	 with	poor	response	to	treatment.MALE PATTERN HAIR LOSSMale 	pattern 	hair	loss	(sometimes 	referred 	to	as	male	androgenetic 	alopecia) 	affects 	up	to	50	percent 	of	all	white	men 	by	50	years 	of	age.1	Although 	it	is	not	life	threaten-ing,	it	is	associated 	with 	negative 	psychological 	effects,	including 	low	self-esteem, 	depression, 	and	a	general 	dis-sat
satisfaction 	with 	body 	appearance.34	Hair 	loss	affects 	the	androgen-sensitive 	follicles, 	starting 	with 	bitemporal	Figure  3. Female pattern hair loss.
Hair LossAugust 15, 2009  ◆ Volume 80, Number 4 	 www.aafp.org/afp 	 American Family Physician   361recession, 	and	then 	spreads 	to	thinning 	of	the	vertex 	and	frontal 	regions 	in	a	classic 	M	pattern. 	Dihydrotestos-terone	(DHT), 	the	androgen 	derived 	from 	testosterone,	plays 	a	key	role	in	male 	pattern 	hair	loss, 	and	men 	with	lower 	levels 	of	DHT 	have 	less	hair	loss.35,36Topical	 minoxidil	 (2%	 and	 5%)	 and	 oral	 finaste-ride	are	the	only	 treatments	 approved	 by	the	FDA	 for	treatment	 of	male	 pattern	 hair	 loss	 in	men	 older	 than	 	18	years.	 Treatment	 with	 finasteride	 can	cause	 decreased	libido,	 impotence,	 and	 ejaculation	 disorders.12	These	adverse	 effects	 often	 abate	 with	 continued	 treatment	and	 happen	 in	less	than	 2	percent	 of	men	 younger	 than	 	40	years.13	Finasteride	 may	 also	 induce	 depression.37	Minoxidil	 is	available	 over-the-counter,	 and	 it	should
be	applied	 to	the	scalp	 and	 not	the	hair.	 Its	mechanism	of	action	 is	unclear.	 Some	 shedding	 during	 the	first	 few	months	 of	treatment	 is	common.	 The	 minoxidil	 5%	solution	 has	 not	 been	 shown	 to	be	consistently	 more	effective	 than	 the	2%	 solution,	 and	 patients	 using	 the	higher	 concentration	 had	more	 adverse	 effects,	 including	allergic	 contact	 dermatitis,	 dryness,	 and	 itching.16	These	typically	resolve	after	treatment	is	discontinued.9Several	 small	 studies	 have	 shown	 some	 increased	 effec-tiveness	 with	 combined	 minoxidil	 and	 finasteride	 treat-ment.38,39	Starting	 treatment	 early	 can	 hel p	maximize	success,	 and	 patients	 can	expect	 to	see	results	 after	 three	to	six	months,	 although	 dense	 regrowth	 is	not	likely.	 Dis-continuation	 of	finasteride	 or	minoxidil	 results	 in	loss	of	any	 positive	 effects	 on	hair	 growth	 within	 12	and	 six	months,	 respectively.13,40	When	 switching	 between	 treat-men
ment	with	 finasteride	 and	 minoxidil,	 it	is	best	 to	over-lap	treatments	 for	three	 months	 to	minimize	 hair	 loss.41	Additional	treatment	options	are	listed	in	 Table 2.5-18Diagnostic  StrategyBegin	 by	determining	 if	hair	 loss	 is	focal	 or	diffuse;	 if	focal,	 look	 for	scarring.	 Patients	 with	 scarring	 should	 be	referred	 to	a	dermatologist.	 In	nonscarring	 focal	 alope-cia,	alopecia	 areata	 or	tinea	 capitis	 are	most	 common.	 In	alopecia	 areata,	 the	lesion	is	 round	 and	 smooth,	 whereas	in	tinea	 capitis,	 the	 skin	 can	 look	 slightly	 scaly	 and	erythematous,	 and	 there	 may	 be	occipital	 adenopathy.	 	A	scraping	 of	the	lesion	 to	evaluate	 for	fungi	 may	 help.	Traction	 alopecia	 and	 trichotillomania	 tend	 to	cause	more	 patchy	 hair	 loss	 and	 can	 usually	 be	determined	from	 the	history.	 Consider	 a	scalp	 biopsy	 if	the	diagnosis	of	the	focal	hair	loss	is	not	clear.In	diffuse	 hair	 loss,	 ask	if	the	loss	 is	predominantly
hair	 thinning	 or	shedding,	 if	there	 is	a	relationship	 to	any	inciting	 event,	 and	if	there	 are	symptoms	 of	anemia,	hyperandrogenism,	 or	thyroid	 disease.	 The	 patient	 who	presents	 with	 gradual	 hair	 thinning	 most	 likely	 has	male	or	female	 pattern	 hair	 loss	recognized	 by	the	typical	 pat-terns.	 The	 h air	pull	 test	 will	 be	positive	 where	 the	hair	is	thinning,	 but	negative	 away	 from	 the	thinning 	areas.	Patients 	with 	hair	shedding 	may 	have 	telogen 	effluvium	or	diffuse 	alopecia 	areata, 	both 	of	which 	cause 	a	posi-tive	hair	pull	test.	The	history 	may 	reveal 	the	precipi-tating	event 	in	telogen 	effluvium, 	whereas 	patients 	with	alopecia 	areata 	may 	have 	exclamation 	point 	hairs. 	In	all	patients 	with 	diffuse 	hair	loss, 	serum 	ferritin 	and	thy-roid	function 	tests 	should 	be	ordered.25,42	Syphilis 	is	a	rare	cause 	of	telogen 	effluvium, 	but	should 	be	ruled 	out
logen 	effluvium, 	but	should 	be	ruled 	out	if	risk	factors 	are	present. 	Patients 	with 	suspected 	telo-gen	effluvium	 can	 be	observed	 until	 spontaneous	 reso-
rare	cause 	of	telogen 	effluvium, 	but	should 	be	ruled 	out	if	risk	factors 	are	present. 	Patients 	with 	suspected 	telo-gen	effluvium	 can	 be	observed	 until	 spontaneous	 reso-lution	occurs,	 usually	 within	 six	months,	 provided	 the	provoking	 stimulus	 has	been	 removed.	 If	hair	 loss	 does	not	resolve,	 a	scalp	 biopsy	 to	differentiate	 between	 alope-cia	areata,	 telogen	 effluvium,	 and	 male	 or	female	 pattern	hair	loss	should	be	obtained.Figures 1 and 3 were provided by Vera Price, MD, Department of Derma-tology, University of California.The AuthorsANNE L. MOUNSEY, MD, is an associate professor of family medicine in the Department of Family Medicine at The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. SEAN W. REED, MD, is an assistant professor of family medicine in the Department of Family Medicine at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
Address correspondence to Anne L. Mounsey, MD, The University of North Carolina, 590 Manning Dr., Chapel Hill, NC 27599 (e-mail: anne_mounsey@med.unc.edu). Reprints are not available from the authors.Author disclosure: Nothing to disclose.REFERENCES 1.  Price VH. Treatment of hair loss.  N Engl J Med.  1999;341(13):964-973. 2.  Safavi KH, Muller SA, Suman VJ, Moshell AN, Melton LJ III. Incidence of alopecia areata in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1975 through 1989. Mayo Clin Proc . 1995;70(7):628-633. 3.  Shellow WV, edwards J e, Koo JY. Profile of alopecia areata: a questionnaire analysis of patient and family. Int J Dermatol.  1992;31(3):186-189. 4.  McDonagh AJ, Messenger AG. The pathogenesis of alopecia areata. Dermatol Clin. 1996;14(4):661-670. 5.  Delamere FM, Sladden MM, Dobbins HM, Leonardi-Bee J. Interventions for alopecia areata. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2008;(2):CD004413. 6.  MacDonald Hull SP, Wood ML, Hutchinson P e, Sladden M, Messenger
AG, for the British Association of Dermatologists. Guidelines for the management of alopecia areata. Br J Dermatol.  2003;149(4):692-699. 7.  Rokhsar CK, Shupack JL, Vafai JJ, Washenik K. efficacy of topical sensitizers in the treatment of alopecia areata.  J Am Acad Dermatol. 1998;39(5 pt 1):751-761. 8.  DeVillez RL, Jacobs JP, Szpunar CA, Warner ML. Androgenetic alope-cia in the female. Treatment with 2% topical minoxidil solution. Arch  Dermatol.  1994;130(3):303-307.
Hair Loss362  American Family Physician  www.aafp.org/afp 	 Volume 80, Number 4  ◆ August 15, 2009 9.  Dawber RP, Rundegren J. Hypertrichosis in females applying minoxidil topical solution and in normal controls. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2003;17(3):271-275. 10.  Sinclair R, Wewerinke M, Jolley D. Treatment of female pattern hair loss with oral antiandrogens. Br J Dermatol.  2005;152(3):466-473. 11.  Carmina e, Lobo RA. Treatment of hyperandrogenic alopecia in women. Fertil Steril.  2003;79(1):91-95. 12.  Leyden J, Dunlap F, Miller B, et al. Finasteride in the treatment of men with frontal male pattern hair loss. J Am Acad Dermatol.  1999;40 (6 pt 1):930-937. 13.  Kaufman KD, Olsen eA, Whiting D, et al. Finasteride in the treatment of men with androgenetic alopecia. Finasteride Male Pattern Hair Loss Study Group. J Am Acad Dermatol.  1998;39(4 pt 1):578-589. 14.  Overstreet JW, Fuh VL, Gould J, et al. Chronic treatment with finasteride
daily does not affect spermatogenesis or semen production in young men. J Urol. 1999;162(4):1295-1300. 15.  Oesterling J e, Roy J, Agha A, et al. Biologic variability of prostate-specific antigen and its usefulness as a marker for prostate cancer: effects of fin-asteride. The Finasteride PSA Study Group. Urology.  1997;50(1):13-18. 16.  Olsen eA, Dunlap F e, Funicella T, et al. A randomized clinical trial of 5% topical minoxidil versus 2% topical minoxidil and placebo in the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in men. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47(3):377-385. 17.  Piérard-Franchimont C, De Doncker P, Cauwenbergh G, Piérard G e. Ketoconazole shampoo: effect of long-term use in androgenic alopecia. Dermatology. 1998;196(4):474-477. 18.  Berger RS, Fu JL, Smiles KA, et al. The effects of minoxidil, 1% pyri-thione zinc and a combination of both on hair density: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Dermatol.  2003;149(2):354-362. 19.
19.  Tosti A, Bellavista S, Iorizzo M. Alopecia areata: a long term follow-up study of 191 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol.  2006;55(3):438-441. 20.  Hubbard TW. The predictive value of symptoms in diagnosing childhood tinea capitis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1999;153(11):1150-1153. 21.  González U, Seaton T, Bergus G, Jacobson J, Martínez-Monzón C. Sys-temic antifungal therapy for tinea capitis in children. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev.  2007;(4):CD004685. 22.  Higgins eM, Fuller LC, Smith CH. Guidelines for the management of tinea capitis. British Association of Dermatologists. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143(1):53-58. 23.  Friedlander SF, Aly R, Krafchik B, et al. Terbinafine in the treatment of Trichophyton tinea capitis: a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, duration-finding study. Pediatrics.  2002;109(4):602-607. 24.  Khumalo NP, Ngwanya RM. Traction alopecia: 2% topical minoxidil shows promise. Report of two cases. J  Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol.
2007;21(3):433-434. 25.  Kantor J, Kessler LJ, Brooks DG, Cotsarelis G. Decreased serum fer-ritin is associated with alopecia in women. J Invest Dermatol. 2003; 121(5):985-988. 26.  Sinclair R. There is no clear association between low serum ferritin and chronic diffuse telogen hair loss. Br J Dermatol.  2002;147(5):982-984. 27.  Harrison S, Sinclair R. Telogen effluvium. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002; 27(5):389-395. 28.  Piérard G e, Piérard-Franchimont C, Marks R, elsner P, for the eeMCO group ( european expert Group on efficacy Measurement of Cosmetics and Other Topical Products). eeMCO guidance for the assessment of hair shedding and alopecia. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2004;17(2):98-110. 29.  Drake LA, Dinehart SM, Farmer eR, et al. Guidelines of care for andro-genetic alopecia. American Academy of Dermatology. J Am Acad Der-matol. 1996;35(3 pt 1):465-469. 30.  Vexiau P, Chaspoux C, Boudou P, et al. effects of minoxidil 2% vs. cyprot-
erone acetate treatment on female androgenetic alopecia: a controlled,
matol. 1996;35(3 pt 1):465-469. 30.  Vexiau P, Chaspoux C, Boudou P, et al. effects of minoxidil 2% vs. cyprot-erone acetate treatment on female androgenetic alopecia: a controlled, 12-month randomized trial. Br J Dermatol.  2002;146(6):992-999. 31.  Burke BM, Cunliffe WJ. Oral spironolactone therapy for female patients with acne, hirsutism or androgenic alopecia. Br J Dermatol. 1985;112(1):124-125. 32.  Raudrant D, Rabe T. Progestogens with antiandrogenic properties. Drugs. 2003;63(5):463-492. 33.  Price VH, Roberts JL, Hordinsky M, et al. Lack of efficacy of finasteride in postmenopausal women with androgenetic alopecia. J Am Acad Der-matol. 2000;43(5 pt 1):768-776. 34.  Wells PA, Willmoth T, Russell RJ. Does fortune favour the bald? Psy-chological correlates of hair loss in males. Br J Psychol.  1995;86(pt 3):337-344. 35.  Imperato-McGinley J, Guerrero L, Gautier T, Peterson R e. Steroid 5alpha-reductase deficiency in man: an inherited form of male pseudo-
hermaphroditism. Science.  1974;186(4170):1213-1215. 36.  Bergfeld WF. Androgenetic alopecia: an autosomal dominant disorder. Am J Med.  1995;98(1A):95S-98S. 37.  Rahimi-Ardabili B, Pourandarjani R, Habibollahi P, Mualeki A. Finas-teride induced depression: a prospective study. BMC Clin Pharmacol. 2006;6:7. 38.  Khandpur S, Suman M, Reddy BS. Comparative efficacy of various treatment regimens for androgenetic alopecia in men. J Dermatol. 2002;29(8):489-498. 39.  Diani AR, Mulholland MJ, Shull KL, et al. Hair growth effects of oral administration of finasteride, a steroid 5 alpha-reductase inhibitor, alone and in combination with topical minoxidil in the balding stumptail macaque. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.  1992;74(2):345-350. 40.  Olsen eA, Weiner MS. Topical minoxidil in male pattern baldness: effects of discontinuation of treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1987; 17(1):97-101. 41.  Olsen eA. Female pattern hair loss and its relationship to permanent/
cicatricial alopecia: a new perspective. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 2005;10(3):217-221. 42.  Trost LB, Bergfeld WF, Calogeras e. The diagnosis and treatment of iron deficiency and its potential relationship to hair loss. J Am Acad Derma-tol. 2006;54(5):824-844.
