Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found athttps://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ifmc20Future Medicinal ChemistryISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ifmc20Exosome Manufacturing StatusWilliam Whitford & Peter GuterstamTo cite this article:  William Whitford & Peter Guterstam (2019) Exosome Manufacturing Status,Future Medicinal Chemistry, 11:10, 1225-1236, DOI: 10.4155/fmc-2018-0417To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.4155/fmc-2018-0417© 2019 Peter Gutersam & William WhitfordPublished online: 08 Jul 2019.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 29279View related articles View Crossmark data
ReviewFor reprint orders, please contact: reprints@future-science.comExosome manufacturing statusWilliam Whitford1& Peter Guterstam*,21Strategic Solutions Leader, GE Healthcare, BioProcess, Cell Culture, Logan, UT, USA2Product Manager, GE Healthcare, BioProcess, Downstream Resins, Uppsala, Sweden*Author for correspondence: peter.guterstam@ge.comExosomes are secreted by mammalian cells and are widely distributed in cellular systems. They are amedium of informationand materialtransmission.The complexityof exosomenatureand functionis notthoroughlyunderstood.Nevertheless,theyarebeingconfirmedasmediatorsofintercellularcommunica-tion and play significant roles in many physiological and pathological processes. Significant obstacles totheefficientandrobustisolationoflargequantitiesofpureandspecificexosomesstillexist.Theseinclude
a lack of understanding of the relationship between exosome characteristics and function, and a short-age of scalable solutions to separate specific exosomes from other large entities remain. Hence, genericproduction platforms are desired. While solutions suitable for exosome manufacturing under GMP areavailable, most have been developed for other purposes.First draft submitted: 24 August 2018; Accepted for publication: 30 January 2019; Published online:8 July 2019Keywords: exosome •manufacturing •productionExosomes are a type of extracellular vesicles (EVs) having a unique generation pathway and characteristic [1].Microvesicles are formed by outward budding from the plasma membrane, and cells undergoing apoptosis releaseapoptotic bodies whereas exosomes are generated through a fusion of the plasma membrane with particularendosomal compartments known as multivesicular bodies ( Figure 1 ). The contents of EVs characteristics and cargo
vary by the type and state of the cells involved in their generation. They carry such diverse cargo as microRNA,mRNA, lncRNA, DNA, lipids, peptides and vast array of proteins (including oncoproteins, tumor suppressors,transcriptional regulators and splicing factors)[2,3]. An EV classiﬁcation solely based on their origin (exosomes,microvesicles and apoptotic bodies) is not sufﬁcient to distinguish different EVs. Additional categorization basedon morphological characteristics has been suggested [4].A single deﬁnition of exosome subtypes, characteristics and purity has, however, not been universally established.This is because researchers from various disciplines have been approaching them through an evolving understandingof their essential nature, and from different arenas of biotechnology, monitored characteristics and applications.Exosomes are produced by many types of cells and have been discovered in nearly every bodily ﬂuid. Their presence
has been reported in the growth medium of many cultured cells, including B lymphocytes, dendritic cells, cytotoxicT cells, intestinal epithelial cells, neurons, oligodendrocytes, platelets, mast cells and Schwann cells. They havebeen demonstrated to be active in immune response; neural communication; reproduction and development; aswell as in cell proliferation, homeostasis and maturation. Interest in exosomes is growing due to the discovery oftheir potential in so many research, diagnostic, analytic and therapeutic procedures.Lately, quite a number of analytical techniques have been applied to their detection, characterization andisolation – with each emphasizing a distinct set of exosome characteristics. Relevant properties for both detectionand isolation include morphological characteristics, size, density, ζpotential and composition – as well as particularchemical and biological characteristics[4,5].
chemical and biological characteristics[4,5].Reasons for interest in the large-scale production of puriﬁed lots of exosomes include their observed paracrine-likeactivity (replacing other communication exhibited by their cells of origin) and their use as a vector of proteins or
activity (replacing other communication exhibited by their cells of origin) and their use as a vector of proteins ornucleic acid in therapeutic applications [6–8]. Exosomes have been, for example, suggested as a delivery system fortherapeutic compounds – especially as they can pass the blood–brain barrier [9].Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10), 1225–1236 ISSN 1756-8919 1225 10.4155/fmc-2018-0417 C⃝Peter Guterstam & William Whitford
Review Whitford & GuterstamESCRT developinto endosomesClathrin coatedpits invaginateInvaginateMulti-vesicularbodiesFusionContents releasedas exosomesFigure 1. A simplified schematic of exosome biogenesis.Large-scale production of exosomes is inﬂuenced by the speciﬁc therapeutic application. For such applications astissue regeneration and immune response modulation, it is important to produce a therapeutic exosome compositionthat reﬂects the expression pattern from the parent cells. The interplay of different exosome subpopulations mayhave a signiﬁcant impact upon the therapeutic effect[5]. When using exosomes as therapeutic vectors, such tailoredcomposition of exosome subpopulations may be less crucial.Isolation and puriﬁcation of exosomes has, in general, proven to be difﬁcult, and certainly it is even moredifﬁcult to isolate a particular subpopulation of exosomes. For example, the use of size-exclusion chromatography,
ultraﬁltration, precipitation, afﬁnity capture or various centrifugation techniques will greatly increase the concen-tration and purity of exosome samples, however, no approach alone will produce a lot of highly puriﬁed vesiclesor separate exosomes from other vesicle types present, and certainly not distinguish between different types ofexosomes. A relatively pure population of exosomes can only be achieved through combination of techniques basedupon such orthogonal properties as physical size or density and such biochemical parameters as the presence orabsence of certain contents. Microﬂuidic techniques present another very successful category of exosome analysis,segregation and isolation. However, these are not of satisfactory capacity for large-scale production purposes. The
therapeutic applications of exosomes, in combination with the delicate challenge to effectively manufacture thesenew therapeutic entities, motivate a current status update regarding exosome manufacturing alternatives.Production of exosomesCellular platformsMany cultured cells will secrete exosomes using standard T-ﬂasks and cell culture media. As products of cells,the manufacture of exosomes is dependent on the ability to produce large quantities of cells in ways that do notalter certain cell behavior and characteristics. The potential for changes in cellular phenotype during technicaltransfer (e.g., scale-up and equipment change) must be considered. As the dynamics of exosome biogenesis is onlybeginning to be understood, such alterations in any number of characteristics of the cell culture platform might
alter the production, composition, attributes or function of the exosomes. The types of cell lines desirable in themanufacturing of exosomes does not aid in this concern. Unlike such platforms as CHO, HeLa or Jurkat lines, itis often necessary to produce exosomes from less established, often primary or stem cell lines[10].Evidence that alterations in such culture environmental parameters as pH gradients, mass transfer and hydro-dynamic (or shear) force during scale-up can result in changes to such characteristics of the culture platformas induction of apoptotic blebs, downregulation of interleukin receptors, induction of mechanically stimulatedprotein-kinase pathways and modulation of extracellular signal-related kinases. The consequences of such cellular1226 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
Exosome manufacturing status Reviewchanges upon the exosome product are not well understood [11]. In scaling up, some primary cell lines exhibit amuch reduced proliferative capacity, limiting the ultimate culture size, duration, number of production batchesor reproducibility. Solutions to this include immortalization by various means, via overexpression of the MYCgene [12,13].Because many of the cells cultured for exosome research are anchorage-dependent, serum-free media are often notadvised, and some degree and schedule of serum supplementation is often required. However, there are reports ofprotocols for the efﬁcient production by some particular cell types in serum-free, even chemically deﬁned, medium.For example, human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitors produced exosomes whenplated on ﬁbronectin-coated plates and cultured in a serum-free medium supplemented with only an added energysource and bFGF I
source and bFGF I[14]. Some have reported that shifting from fetal bovine serum (FBS)-containing to serum-freemedium resulted in the production of exosomes initially presenting some similar characteristics, while the numberof exosomes generated increased. However, further analysis showed that the serum-free exosomes contained differentconstituent component levels. The serum-free medium appeared to cause a shift in exosomal biology[15].Exosomes secreted by speciﬁc human T-cell clones have been employed to modulate immune cells’ activity,including subsets of other T cell. Ceramide, tetraspanins and MAL protein are reported to be critical in T-cellexosome biogenesis. Such molecules may be functional in modulating both exosome production as well as theimmune response in therapeutic applications [16]. Many studies have shown that stem cells secrete several importantgrowth factors, and stem cell conditioned medium is often still currently required for efﬁcient stem cell culture
in vitro . Another complicating factor in the scale-up of stem cell cultures for exosome manufacturing is the lackof source for large volumes of conditioned medium. It has also been demonstrated that the expression of certainexogenous proteins in cultured cells can inﬂuence the type and characteristics of exosomes secreted[17].Where FBS is required, contamination with bovine exosomes is a concern. T o avoid this, exosome-depletedversions of bovine serum are now commercially available. These sera are produced by various exosome-reductionmeans, with each inducing their own effect upon the serum constituents and characteristics. Furthermore, thesesera are affected by the standard source, product, lot speciﬁcs and other disparities of normal serum. They do exhibitsigniﬁcant reductions in exosome-sized vesicles resulting in very low levels of CD63-positive cow exosomes or cow
miRNAs and vendors provide assay results for such properties as cell culture performance, sterility, mycoplasmas,secretion performance and endotoxins.Small-scale culture production typically begins with a culture of adherent cells in a ﬂask or plate for a deﬁnedperiod in a standard culture medium. Then, the medium is exchanged for either medium devoid of serum, ormedium containing exosome-depleted serum. Many serum-dependent cell cultures will perform relatively normallyfor a day or two with no serum supplementation. These cultures are then maintained for a deﬁned number of hoursor days while they secrete exosomes into this fresh ambient medium. The medium is then decanted and processedfor any required vesicle isolation, concentration, characterization and puriﬁcation.Production formats & modes
Production formats & modesBecause many of the desired production platforms involve adherent cell culture, scaling-up activities have focusedon technologies that maximize culture surface area, such as microcarriers in stirred-tank reactors or culture inﬁxed-bed or hollow-ﬁber bioreactors[18]. As mentioned, beyond cell-mass expansion requirements, it is imperative
ﬁxed-bed or hollow-ﬁber bioreactors[18]. As mentioned, beyond cell-mass expansion requirements, it is imperativeto control identiﬁed production environmental parameters such that the cell’s phenotype, and therefore secretedexosome characteristics, do not change[19].As the ﬁeld of in vitro exosome production is in its infancy, much research and many creative approaches arebeing reported. Quite a number of the aspects of culture have been examined, including the use of feeder cells,conditioned media, exogenous extracellular matrices and engineered producer-cell transduction. Such approachesmay be valuable in some formats for large-scale exosome production. The rational design of biomimetic exosomesis also being addressed.Methods exist to produce exosome-mimetic vesicles, overcoming such natural limitations as low loading, efﬁ-ciency and low exosome production yields. One group has developed hybrid exosomes produced through their
fusion with liposomes using a freeze–thaw processes[20]. Others describe a virus-mimetic fusogenic exosome demon-strating enhanced fusion efﬁciency through employing a vascular stomatitis virus viral fusogen within the exosomalmembrane[21]. Such methods either produce de novo modiﬁed exosomes from engineered cells, or support sec-ondary modiﬁcation through the fusion of exosomes with liposomes harboring desired proteins, lipids or syntheticpolymers. Some have even proposed such creative manufacturing approaches as the in vitro mass production offuture science group www.future-science.com 1227
Review Whitford & Guterstamexosome-mimicking nanovesicles using a mini-extruder, and found that they were similar to the native exosomesin some respects [13].Large-scale productionLarger-scale batch exosome production is accomplished in such formats as simply employing dozens of large (e.g., T-225) ﬂasks, multiple stacked array multilayer culture ﬂasks, large ﬁxed-bed bioreactors, in stirred-tank bioreactorsemploying microcarriers or continuous production in perfusion reactors [22]. First, it should be mentioned thatall the issues of modern technical transfer will exist for development of a large-scale, and especially a clinicallyrelevant, exosome manufacturing format. This includes all the steps involved in shifting from an investigational
product to a commercial product, moving from laboratory-scale production to commercial scale and implementinga ﬁleable quality control testing program. It involves such steps as process optimization, conﬁrmation, validation andcharacterization – as well as process performance qualiﬁcation activities. Also, pertinent is that many of the newerand higher industry goals in such transfer will apply. These goals include heightened process control, establishingas many closed operations as possible, moving to more automated and ‘digital’ processes, employing single-usesystems, and implementing as many in situ monitoring devices and sample analytics as may be desirable.Due to the poor efﬁciency of in vitro exosome production, the current scale-up of standard batch-modemanufacturing can involve hundreds of ﬂasks or a signiﬁcant investment in the more expensive and complicatedmultilayer ﬂask systems. Challenges to these approaches include the cost of culture expansion prior to the actual
production phase (sometimes involving, e.g., stem cell-conditioned medium) or the additional cost and timing ofbeginning of the production phase in serum-adjusted or specialty serum-modiﬁed medium. Robust productionof lot-consistent populations of exosomes necessitates veriﬁcation of somewhat reproducible culture conditions,which can take time to establish in the scale-up or scale-out of such systems.Stirred-tank bioreactor cultures employing microcarriers have been reported, as well as a few challenges relatedto this upstream production approach[19]. There are many scale factors and basic environmental conditionsdifferentiating small-scale ﬂask culture and impeller-based bioreactor culture. Culture progression and productionefﬁciency concerns arise from such factors as cell-to-microcarrier binding, gas mass transfer differences and the
hydrodynamic forces generated in sparging and agitation. The effect of these factors upon other such culturecharacteristics as differentiation, apoptosis potential and exosome product quality and quantity have been reportedas well.Perfusion-based production can alleviate some of these concerns and avoid the added process and limitationsassociated with microcarriers. Many membrane-based ﬂasks or bioreactors as perfusion-capable technologies havebeen employed and avoid, or at least reduce, such issues as those associated with hydrodynamic (shear) forces.These systems can not only support culture over an extended period (establishing a continuous biomanufacturing)but can concentrate exosomes within a membrane segregated compartment, facilitating feeding and harvest. Insome reactors, the cell-containing side of the perfusion apparatus also supports the segregation of growth factors,
allowing a severe reduction in added serum, added factors or conditioned medium. Some platforms have beenreported to display entirely new culture characteristics under such high-density culture. These include cell-to-cellcontact inhibition of division and a reduction (or elimination) of what had been a constitutive requirement forcertain added growth factors or other surface-active agents in the culture medium. However, these systems do not
certain added growth factors or other surface-active agents in the culture medium. However, these systems do notameliorate all issues of scale-up, -out or of high-density culture effects. For even larger-scale production in a relatedmode, many porous 3D scaffolds and ﬁber-based packed- and ﬁxed-bed bioreactors are now available, and somewith published applications data.Hollow-ﬁber perfusion bioreactors have been employed in cell culture for many years, and their use in large-scaleproduction of exosomes reported. These reactors can support large numbers of cells at high densities in a continuousculture mode without splitting and subculturing of the cells ( Figure 2 ). Cells are cultured on either the inside oroutside of the reactor ﬁbers which allow nutrients and waste products to pass through but retain such larger secretedproduct as exosomes ( Figure 3 ).In some applications, collection of exosomes can be maintained over several months. In one example, the
phenotype of cells in continuous culture remained constant over the 10-week period of production. It resulted incontinuously harvested exosomes which, by orthogonal measure, did not vary in monitored characteristics[23].S o ,while many of the large-scale culture methods and technical transfer approaches are similar to protein biologicalor cells-as-product manufacturing, we see that there are a few exosome-manufacturing-speciﬁc phenomena to beconsidered.1228 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
Exosome manufacturing status ReviewMedium Harvest Chrom 1 Chrom 2 Chrom 3 FiltrationExosomeproductPerfusioncultureMedium Harvest Chrom 1 Chrom 2 Chrom 3 FiltrationExosomeproductPerfusioncultureMedium Chrom 1 Chrom 2 Chrom 3 FiltrationExosomeproductPerfusioncultureContinuousContinuousContinuousFigure 2. Schematic of model continuous manufacturing approaches.Wastein02/nutrientsoutDABCFigure 3. Cross-section of a hollow fiber reactor. Cells(A)and exosomes (D)in the extracapillary space receivenutrients contained inside (C)the semipermeable hollowfiber wall (B).Finally, it should be mentioned that not only are native or innate exosomes employed in biotechnology andmedicine, but more recently populations speciﬁcally engineered for purpose are being devised. The type of engineer-ing employed ranges from the design of production methods generating exosomes harboring-speciﬁc pharmaceutical
content, to those producing exosome populations presenting synthetic surface targeting moieties. Generation ofexosomes harboring exogenous therapeutic or imaging agents can be accomplished either in vivo or after secretionvia several chemical or physical means. Functionalization of the exosome surface ligands for engineered targetingpurposes can be accomplished by such approaches as the transfection of the donor cells prior to exosome secretion,or post exosome synthesis through the conjugation of biologically active molecules to harvested exosomes. Thislatter can be accomplished by click-reactions, such noncovalent chemistries as electrostatic binding, as well asexosome-native transferrin receptor binding[24,25].future science group www.future-science.com 1229
Review Whitford & GuterstamIsolation & purificationWhen isolating exosomes for therapeutic applications, it is advantageous to have a good understanding of speciﬁccharacteristics of the target exosome subpopulation or target composition of exosomes. This in combination withrobust and consistent upstream feed-stream facilitates the downstream process development. As mentioned in theintroduction, three major groups of EVs have been described according to mechanism of generation: microvesicles,apoptotic bodies and exosomes. The latter are often assumed to represent a homogenous population of EVs.However, recent work has revealed heterogeneities, and the presence of distinct subpopulations of differing biologicalproperties and such molecular compositions as proteomic and nucleic acid repertoires[26]. Such subpopulations
[26]. Such subpopulationshave been reported to mediate differential effects on the gene expression programs in recipient cells. Therefore, itmust be considered that differing types and scales of isolation techniques may produce different populations ofexosome types. For example, separation based on size solely cannot separate the three major EV groups since thesethree groups are overlapping in size.Impurities to remove in the production of exosome-based pharmaceutical ingredients are primarily proteinsand host cell DNA but also include cell debris, including nonexosome EVs, in other words, apoptotic bodies andmicrovesicles. Viral clearance and endotoxin removal must also be considered.Ultracentrifugation is a commonly used approach for isolating EVs[27]but displays such limitations as low yieldand modulation or disruption of the target vesicles and it is not suitable for large-scale exosome manufacturing
due to technical and practical limitations. The GMP setup processes with several sequential ultracentrifugationsteps, generating exceptionally high centrifugal forces (up to 106×g) have been described [28]. A slow-speedcentrifugation may, however, be considered for mid-scale manufacturing scales, ranging up to a few hundred litersof upstream batch feed. Exosome precipitation is an alternative approach, but such procedures indicate the additionof components that may not be suitable in a large-scale manufacturing setup and imply subsequent removal andassociated regulatory and analytical burden[29,30].Midstream removal of cell debris can be performed based on a sole normal ﬂow ﬁltration ( ∼5μm) step andif needed, be complemented with an initial slow-speed centrifugation. These type of midstream steps are usuallyrobust and effective but have an impact on the yield and on the production cost. After removal of large impurities, it
is usually appropriate to concentrate the feed-stream using, for example, ultraﬁltration with a 500–750 kD cut-offﬁlter and simultaneously remove remaining large impurities.Ideally, a speciﬁc capture step would be based on a technology that is independent of midstream debris removal.Such capture technologies, based on a very porous base matrix or magnetic beads, however, require speciﬁcafﬁnity ligands. Such ligands shall preferably be suitable for sanitization to easily ﬁt in a GMP manufacturingprocess. With good characterization and analytics of the target exosomes, midstream independent afﬁnity captureopportunities are within reach. Candidates for target exosomes epitopes are CD63, CD9, Tim4. Afﬁnity ligandscan also be designed to target recombinantly introduced tags such as the Fc-receptor[31]. Externally displayed
[31]. Externally displayedepitopes, regardless of whether the origin is endogenous or not, are not only subjects for isolation established uponafﬁnity-based puriﬁcation, but also subjects for vesicle analysis. Antibodies to such externally displayed epitopes canbe immobilized and used as analytical tool, ideally employing surface plasmon resonance-based technologies such
be immobilized and used as analytical tool, ideally employing surface plasmon resonance-based technologies suchas Biacore (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) for detection of the target exosome population. Proteins associatedwith the endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( Figure 1 ), such as ALIX, TSG101[32]and miRNA,are found in the endosome interior and are therefore candidates for employment as analytical markers of thetarget exosome subpopulation using other traditional analytical techniques such as mass spectrometry, sequencing,electrophoresis – among others.In the absence of exosome afﬁnity ligands, separation based on a combination of size and charge are recommendedto isolate the target exosome population. Ion-exchange resin, primarily anion exchange, offers a scalable methodto isolate the target exosomes from impurities with deviating charge density [33,34]. Variation in the density of
glycans present on the exosome surface can impact their separation when using ion-exchange chromatography [34].Utilizing strong ion-exchange in a bind and elute mode determines elution of the target exosomes at relatively highconductivity. Such a process can, for especially enveloped viruses, have detrimental effect on the exosome yield dueto modulation of the vesicle integrity. T o minimize yield losses it is therefore important to minimize the processtime, especially the critical elution phase of the chromatographic step[35,36]. Chromatographic techniques basedon resins that rely upon diffusion of the target entity into the beads are associated with relatively long contacttimes, due to the limited ﬂow that can be employed. An attractive approach to support higher ﬂow rates and1230 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
Exosome manufacturing status ReviewDNA fragmentsExtracellularvesicleCapto core inert shell excludingdiffusive entry of large entitiesCapto core interior withmultimodal ligandHost cell proteinsFigure 4. Capto core bead technology principle. Small impurities such as DNA residuals and host cells protein canenter the bead interior by passing the inert shell which has small pore size. The impurities that enter the bead bindalmost irreversibly to an octylamine ligand with multimodal functionality. Extracellular vesicles are too big to pass theinert shell and pass in the flow-through.Reproduced with permission fromC⃝General Electric Company (2019),seehttps://www.gelifesciences.co.jp/catalog/pdf/16188 10061.PDFthereby shorter contact time and lower yield losses is to use a monolith, membrane or ﬁber-based chromatographictechnique. These allow higher ﬂow as they are independent of allowing the target entity to diffuse into beads [35,37].
Separation solely by charge of the target entity is, in most cases, not satisfactory to generate the desired purityof the target exosome population, and therefore separation based upon size or other properties can be employed tocomplement separation based on charge [22]. Size separation can be employed before or after an ion-exchange step.The order of these steps must be carefully considered to minimize the need for buffer exchange steps, usually basedon ultraﬁltration. Another consideration affecting the order of the separation steps is that an ion-exchange step is agood means to reduce potential viral contamination and can provide for endotoxin removal[38].As the ﬁeld of exosome manufacturing is so new, a number of creative approaches are appearing. Field-ﬂow
fractionation combined with multiangle and dynamic light scattering is being considered a as potentially powerfultool. It combines true size-based separation using ﬁeld-ﬂow fractionation with an independent determination ofsize and structure via a light scattering instrument. It can determine highly accurate size distributions and particleconcentrations in native solutions. The size fractions may be isolated and automatically collected for further off-lineinvestigation using a standard fraction collector[39].Size-separation can be effectively performed using chromatographic size-exclusion based on a resin with apore size that is tailored for the size-interval of the target exosome population. Size-exclusion chromatography isperformed with an isocratic ﬂow over a packed resin bed. The bed height must be high, up to 60 cm, to achievedesired resolution. The high bed height in combination with the low sample volume that can be applied in each
chromatographic cycle make this size separation technology nonsuitable for large manufacturing. In addition, eachchromatographic cycle is long and therefore contributes negatively from a process economy point of view[40].A more attractive way to remove impurities smaller than the target exosome population is to separate by size,employing a core bead resin. Such resin, for example, Capto Core, is composed of an inactive shell enclosingan activated-ligand core. The inactive shell prohibits large entities from penetrating the smaller pores to the core(Figure 4 ). Larger entities, in other words, the exosomes, are collected in the ﬂow-through fraction while smallermolecules (such undesired material as DNA, residual host cell proteins and process-related impurities) bind to
the resin’s active interior ligands. The functionalized core of each bead presents both hydrophobic and positivelycharged ligands that bind various small contaminants through a highly efﬁcient multimodal chemistry. Differentpore size distributions of the inactive shell in combination with ﬂow optimization allow tailoring the size of largeentities collected in the ﬂow-through fraction. The beauty of core bead technology is that the bed height can befuture science group www.future-science.com 1231
Review Whitford & Guterstamreduced as compared with size-exclusion chromatography and a signiﬁcantly increased ﬂow rate can be employed.These features are valuable in the manufacturing of exosomes at large scale.The concentration of intermediate or ﬁnal preparations often requires variation. This can sometimes be ac-complished via adjustment of ﬁnal steps in the means of collection, isolation or reduced through simple dilution.Concentration of an intermediate or ﬁnal preparation can be accomplished through a variety of means, includingultracentrifugation to a pellet and resuspension or by density gradient centrifugation in sucrose and band collection,and are reviewed in recent publications[41].The downstream component of an exosome manufacturing process is usually ﬁnalized by a buffer-exchange stepand virus ﬁltration. The exact ﬁnal formulation depends on the application area. Exosomes for therapeutic use
may have additional and different process steps. Exosomes with paracrine functionality do not need additionalprocessing, while exosomes used as drug delivery vectors may undergo various loading process steps after thechromatographic isolation[24].Standards, analytics & regulatoryDespite 20 years of research, not only are the basics of exosome biology, occurrence, diversity and identity in theirinfancy, but also the roles they play in normal cellular and organismal physiology are far from fully understood.Currently, many different analytical techniques have been applied to the identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation and potencyevaluation of exosomes – with each measuring one or more of the properties relevant for their detection andisolation mentioned in the Introduction. The ﬁeld is now populated with a number of immature and empirical
descriptions and deﬁnitions for a number of reasons. These include an incomplete understanding of the speciﬁccharacteristics and molecular composition each microvesicle type and subtype, any exosome impurity proﬁle perse, as well as the product and impurity consequences of each exosome harvest source, manufacturing and isolationplatform. Standardization and regulatory positions are complicated by the number of proposals for the use ofpuriﬁed preparations of exosomes including diverse research, diagnostic, analytic and product implementationmodes and formats (e.g., microﬂuidic). There is also a wide range of contemplated and proposed therapeuticapplications and clinical indications. A further consideration here is that, unlike many other biological entitieswithin the medical applications arena, there exist many speciﬁc and distinct tissue and cellular sources (e.g., fromcultured cells to autologous or allogeneic primary cells) for exosomes or exosome-containing products, with many
having a current set of applicable quality and regulatory considerations. Considering many of upcoming in vitroor companion diagnostic exosome products, it is not clear to the authors which would be properly ﬁled under, forexample, a pre-market approval (PMA), 510(k) or humanitarian device exemption (HDE). Regarding the varietyof proposed therapeutic products without precedent: depending upon the particular exosome source, isolationapproach, described mode of action and route of administration, in the USA it is not intuitively obvious if onewould properly ﬁle a new drug application (NDA) or biologic license application (BLA) with Center for DrugEvaluation and Research (CDER) or Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER).Manufacturers currently work from previously published approaches or design techniques suitable for their
current needs. We know of no publications or guidance by national compendial, standards setting or regulatoryagencies on the topic. However, as so many highly regulated applications are being pursued for exosomes, thesematters have been the topic of signiﬁcant discussion during international and professional society meetings – and
matters have been the topic of signiﬁcant discussion during international and professional society meetings – andsome few have published initial guidelines, suggestions and considerations on the matter[42–44] . Finally, as overa dozen clinical trials of exosome application are ongoing in the USA alone, sufﬁcient evidence of control forinvestigational new drugs (INDs) have been established, and no doubt NDA ﬁlings for these are in ﬁnal stages ofdevelopment. For example, the US FDA has recently cleared a stem cell-based IND application for mesenchymalstem cell-derived exosomes as a therapeutic entity for burn victims[45].ConclusionThere exist many different production platforms and modes, designed to produce several different types of exosomes,for many divergent applications. Neither standard analytic and isolation techniques been established, nor havestandard exosome characterization and subtype deﬁnition been achieved. No generic platform or production
modes for either the up- or downstream manufacturing of exosomes for any application has been described atthis point. Equipment and consumables suitable for exosome manufacturing under GMP are available, but to agreat extent these products have been developed for other purposes. Further tailoring and optimization for speciﬁcexosome subtypes and needs, within the broader exosome manufacturing arena, is desired. For example, we may1232 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
Exosome manufacturing status Reviewsee perfusion-based upstream manufacturing, harvesting and capture based on midstream independent afﬁnitytechnologies, and closed processing to remove the need for ﬁnal virus ﬁltration and associated yield losses.Future perspectiveBioproduction is going through a number of revolutions. Uses for exosomes in research, analytic, preclinicaltesting, diagnostic and therapeutic applications continue to be discovered. Stem and other primary cells are beingproduced for several US FDA approved trials in clinical applications. As approvals are established, high efﬁciency,low-risk methods of production will have to be ﬁnalized. Both upstream and downstream manufacturing of proteinbiologicals, vaccines and cells for cell-based therapies are being transformed by such concepts and technologiesas single-use, Industry 4.0 , factory-of-the-future, modular, continuous and intensiﬁed manufacturing initiatives.
There is no reason to believe that each of these advances will not inﬂuence approaches to both the culture of thecell platforms employed in, as well as the actual, upstream and downstream, production of exosomes themselves.Executive summary•Exosomes are a type of extracellular vesicle of unique generation.•Their contents are quite diverse and can vary following many factors.•They naturally occur in nearly every bodily fluid and many cultured cells.•Interest is due to potential in research, diagnostics, analytics and therapeutics.•Characterized by morphology, size, density, ζpotential, composition /properties.•Large-scale production procedures are influenced by the exosome’s application.•Isolation and purification of exosomes has in general proven to be difficult.•Pure populations are only achieved through a combination of techniques.Production of exosomes•Many cultured cells will secrete exosomes using standard T-flasks and cell culture media.
•It is often necessary to produce exosomes from less established primary or stem cell lines.•Alterations in culture environmental parameters can affect exosome yield /characteristics.•Scaling-up from T-flasks can cause issues that have often been addressed in the literature.•Serum-free culture is discouraged for reasons of attachment and exosome characteristics.•Successful serum-reduced (or free) culture reported in some cell types /production modes.•When serum is employed in actual production, reduced-exosome serum is recommended.•Many factors, metabolites, surface-active proteins, factors implicated in quality production.•Large-scale: mainly stirred-tank reactor /microcarriers, fixed bed or hollow fiber bioreactors.•Culture methods: feeder cells, conditioned media, extracellular matrices, engineered cells.•Exosomes method: vesicle and virus-mimetic, various hybrid-fusion, mini-extruder effected.Large-scale production
Large-scale production•Formats: T-225 flasks, multilayer flasks, large fixed-bed reactors, microcarriers in stirred-tank reactor.•All issues of modern technical transfer will exist for development of large-scale manufacturing format.•Concerns arise from, for example, cells-to-microcarrier binding, gas mass-transfer and the shear forces.•Perfusion-based bioproduction can alleviate many bioreactor culture and technology transfer concerns.•Many membrane-based flasks or bioreactors as perfusion-capable technologies have been employed.•Perfusion supports culture over an extended period of time and yields concentrated lots of exosomes.•Many porous 3D scaffolds, fiber-based packed- and fixed-bed bioreactors have been adapted for use.•Hollow-fiber perfusion bioreactors are now being successfully used in large-scale exosome production.•Perfusion supports high density, continuous culture, reduced or eliminated serum /factor requirement.
•Exosomes specifically engineered for research, diagnostic or therapeutic purposes are being designed.•From harboring pharmaceutical content, to populations presenting synthetic surface targeting moieties.
•From harboring pharmaceutical content, to populations presenting synthetic surface targeting moieties.•Exosomes with exogenous therapeutic or imaging agent cargo produced via chemical or physical ways.Isolation & purification•Scalable solutions exist that support regulated therapeutic applications.•Support for bioreactor harvest from batch- or perfusion-based upstream manufacturing.•Filter-based removal of cell debris and large-sized process impurities.•Isolation and purification based on bind /elute chromatography and size-specific separation.•Polishing methods to control impurities.future science group www.future-science.com 1233
Review Whitford & GuterstamStandards, analytic & regulatory•Affected by that exosome biology, occurrence, diversity and identity are in their infancy.•Many analytical techniques have been applied to the identification, quantification and potency.•Immature and empirical descriptions, definitions because of ill-defined characteristics, molecular composition.•Standardization andregulatory positionsarecomplicated bythenumberanddiversity ofexosomeconsiderations.•Including sources, isolation and processing approaches, described mode of action and route of administration.•Many diverse research, diagnostic, analytic and therapeutic product implementation modes /formats exist.•No publications or guidance by national compendial, standards setting or regulatory agencies on the topic.•US FDA has cleared stem cell-based investigational new drug applications for mesenchymal stem cell-derivedexosomes as therapeutic entities.Conclusion
exosomes as therapeutic entities.Conclusion•Neither standard analytic nor isolation techniques have been established.•No standard exosome characterization and subtype definition have been achieved.•No generic platform or production modes for either up- or downstream manufacturing.•Equipment and consumables suitable for exosome manufacturing under GMP are available.•Different production platforms and modes are designed to produce different types of exosomes.Future perspective•More research, analytic, preclinical testing, diagnostic and therapeutic applications are yet to be discovered.•Future seeing single-use, Industry 4.0 , factory-of-the-future, modular, continuous and intensified approaches.Financial & competing interests disclosureWhitfordWandGuterstamParebothemployedbyGEHealthcareasupplierofequipmentandconsumablesforthemanufacturingof biological therapeutics. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from thosedisclosed.No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.Open accessThis work is licensed under the Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license,visit http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by-nc-nd /4.0/ReferencesPapers of special note have been highlighted as: •of interest1. Raposo G, Stoorvogel W. Extracellular vesicles: exosomes, microvesicles and friends. J. Cell Biol. 200(4), 373–383 (2013).2. Valadi H, Ekstrom K, Bossios A, Sjostrand M, Lee JJ, Lotvall JO. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novelmechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 9(6), 654–659 (2007).• A door opener to understand the width of exosome-mediated communication.
3. Xu R, Greening DW, Zhu HJ, Takahashi N, Simpson RJ. Extracellular vesicle isolation and characterization: toward clinical application.J. Clin. Invest. 126(4), 1152–1162 (2016).4. Zabeo D, Cvjetkovic A, Lasser C, Schorb M, Lotvall J, Hoog JL. Exosomes puriﬁed from a single cell type have diverse morphology. J.Extracell. Vesicles 6(1), 1329476 (2017).5. van der Pol E, Hoekstra AG, Sturk A, Otto C, van Leeuwen TG, Nieuwland R. Optical and nonoptical methods for detection andcharacterization of microparticles and exosomes. J. Thromb. Haemost. 8(12), 2596–2607 (2010).6. El Harane N, Kervadec A, Bellamy V et al. Acellular therapeutic approach for heart failure: in vitro production of extracellular vesiclesfrom human cardiovascular progenitors. Eur. Heart J. 39(20), 1835–1847 (2018).7. Herrera MB, Fonsato V, Gatti S et al. Human liver stem cell-derived microvesicles accelerate hepatic regeneration in hepatectomized rats.J. Cell Mol. Med. 14(6B), 1605–1618 (2010).
J. Cell Mol. Med. 14(6B), 1605–1618 (2010).8 . Z h a n gJ ,G u a nJ ,N i uX et al. Exosomes released from human-induced pluripotent stem cells-derived MSCs facilitate cutaneous wound
J. Cell Mol. Med. 14(6B), 1605–1618 (2010).8 . Z h a n gJ ,G u a nJ ,N i uX et al. Exosomes released from human-induced pluripotent stem cells-derived MSCs facilitate cutaneous woundhealing by promoting collagen synthesis and angiogenesis. J. T ransl. Med. 13, 49 (2015).9. Matsumoto J, Stewart T, Banks WA, Zhang J. The transport mechanism of extracellular vesicles at the blood–brain barrier. Curr. Pharm.Des. 23(40), 6206–6214 (2017).10. Cheng L, Zhang K, Wu S, Cui M, Xu T. Focus on mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes: opportunities and challenges in cell-freetherapy. Stem Cells Int. 2017, 6305295 (2017).1234 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
Exosome manufacturing status Review11. Brindley D, Moorthy K, Lee JH, Mason C, Kim HW, Wall I. Bioprocess forces and their impact on cell behavior: implications for boneregeneration therapy. J. Tissue Eng. 2011, 620247 (2011).12. Chen TS, Arslan F, Yin Y et al. Enabling a robust scalable manufacturing process for therapeutic exosomes through oncogenicimmortalization of human ESC-derived MSCs. J. T ransl. Med. 9, 47 (2011).13. Chen TS, Wee Yeh Yeo R, Arslan F et al. Efﬁciency of exosome production correlates inversely with the developmental maturity of MSCdonor. J. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 3(145), 1–10 (2013).14. Preet R, Zhuang S, Hung WT, Christenson L, Dixon DA. The RNA binding protein HuR enhances exosome secretion in colorectalcancer. Gastroenterology 150(4) S27 (2016).15. Li J, Lee Y, Johansson HJ et al. Serum-free culture alters the quantity and protein composition of neuroblastoma-derived extracellularvesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 4, 26883 (2015).
vesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 4, 26883 (2015).16. Ventimiglia LN, Alonso MA. Biogenesis and function of T cell-derived exosomes. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 4, 84 (2016).17. Phan J. Modiﬁcation of the Extracellular Environment of Placenta-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells for Improved Exosome Production[PhD Thesis] . California State University, Sacramento, CA, USA (2018).18. Panchalingam KM, Jung S, Rosenberg L, Behie LA. Bioprocessing strategies for the large-scale production of human mesenchymal stemcells: a review. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 6, 225 (2015).19. Chen AK, Chen X, Choo AB, Reuveny S, Oh SK. Critical microcarrier properties affecting the expansion of undifferentiated humanembryonic stem cells. Stem Cell Res. 7(2), 97–111 (2011).20. Sato YT, Umezaki K, Sawada S et al. Engineering hybrid exosomes by membrane fusion with liposomes. Sci. Rep. 6, 21933 (2016).
21. Yang Y, Hong Y, Nam GH, Chung JH, Koh E, Kim IS. Virus-mimetic fusogenic exosomes for direct delivery of integral membraneproteins to target cell membranes. Adv.Mater. 29(13) doi: 10.1002 /adma.201605604 (2017).22. Colao IL, Corteling R, Bracewell D, Wall I. Manufacturing exosomes: a promising therapeutic platform. T rends Mol. Med. 24(3),242–256 (2018).• A good introduction to the uses, production, puriﬁcation and characterization of exosomes.23. Whitford WG, Ludlow JW, Cadwell JJS. Continuous production of exosomes. Genet. Eng. News 35(16) 34 (2015).• A good early example of efﬁcient high-quantity hollow-ﬁber production of exosomes.24. Luan X, Sansanaphongpricha K, Myers I, Chen H, Yuan H, Sun D. Engineering exosomes as reﬁned biological nanoplatforms for drugdelivery. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 38(6), 754–763 (2017).25. Willis GR, Kourembanas S, Mitsialis SA. T oward exosome-based therapeutics: isolation, heterogeneity, and ﬁt-for-purpose potency.
Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 4, 63 (2017).26. Willms E, Johansson HJ, Mager I et al. Cells release subpopulations of exosomes with distinct molecular and biological properties. Sci.Rep. 6, 22519 (2016).27. Greening DW, Xu R, Ji H, Tauro BJ, Simpson RJ. A protocol for exosome isolation and characterization: evaluation ofultracentrifugation, density-gradient separation, and immunoafﬁnity capture methods. Methods Mol. Biol. 1295, 179–209 (2015).28. Li P, Kaslan M, Lee SH, Yao J, Gao Z. Progress in exosome isolation techniques. Theranostics 7(3), 789–804 (2017).29. Gardiner C, Di Vizio D, Sahoo S et al. T echniques used for the isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles: results of aworldwide survey. J. Extracell. Vesicles 5, 32945 (2016).• A useful survey of the current practices for the isolation, puriﬁcation and characterization of extracellular vesicles.
30. Hill AF, Pegtel DM, Lambertz U et al. ISEV position paper: extracellular vesicle RNA analysis and bioinformatics. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2 doi: 10.3402 /jev.v2i0.22859 (2013) (Epub ahead of print).31. Wiklander O, G ¨orgens A, Gupta D: EP3487529 (2018).
Vesicles 2 doi: 10.3402 /jev.v2i0.22859 (2013) (Epub ahead of print).31. Wiklander O, G ¨orgens A, Gupta D: EP3487529 (2018).32. Raiborg C, Stenmark H. The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins. Nature 458(7237),445–452 (2009).33. Kim DK, Nishida H, An SY, Shetty AK, Bartosh TJ, Prockop DJ. Chromatographically isolated CD63+CD81+extracellular vesiclesfrom mesenchymal stromal cells rescue cognitive impairments after TBI. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113(1), 170–175 (2016).34. Kosanovic M, Milutinovic B, Goc S, Mitic N, Jankovic M. Ion-exchange chromatography puriﬁcation of extracellular vesicles.Biotechniques 63(2), 65–71 (2017).35. McNally DJ, Darling D, Farzaneh F, Levison PR, Slater NK. Optimised concentration and puriﬁcation of retroviruses using membranechromatography. J. Chromatogr. A 1340, 24–32 (2014).36. Rodrigues T, Carvalho A, Roldao A, Carrondo MJ, Alves PM, Cruz PE. Screening anion-exchange chromatographic matrices for
isolation of onco-retroviral vectors. J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. T echnol. BioMed Life Sci. 837(1–2), 59–68 (2006).37. Burden CS, Jin J, Podgornik A, Bracewell DG. A monolith puriﬁcation process for virus-like particles from yeast homogenate. JChromatogr. B Analyt. T echnol. BioMed Life Sci. 880(1), 82–89 (2012).future science group www.future-science.com 1235
Review Whitford & Guterstam38. Jagschies G, Lacki K. Biopharmaceutical processing, process capability requirements. In: Biopharmaceutical Processing. JagschiesG, Lindskog E, -L˛acki KM, Galliher P (Eds.) Elsevier Radarweg, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (2018).39. Zhang H, Freitas D, Kim HS et al. Identiﬁcation of distinct nanoparticles and subsets of extracellular vesicles by asymmetric ﬂowﬁeld-ﬂow fractionation. Nat. Cell Biol. 20(3), 332–343 (2018).40. Manzari RC, O’Donnell JK. SEC in the modern downstream puriﬁcation process. BioPharm Int. 28(3), 34–37 (2015).41. Konoshenko MY, Lekchnov EA, Vlassov AV, Laktionov PP. Isolation of extracellular vesicles: general methodologies and latesttrends. BioMedRes. Int. 2018, 8545347 (2018).42. Bersenev A. Considerations for clinical translation of extracellular vesicles as new class of therapeutics. In: Stem Cell Assays . WilliamGunn, Alexey Bersenev (Eds). Department of Hematology Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA (2016).
• Describes EV as an evolving new class of therapeutics with unclear regulatory pathways, manufacturing standards and qualitycontrols. A review of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) position paper.43. Lener T, Gimona M, Aigner L et al. Applying extracellular vesicles-based therapeutics in clinical trials – an ISEV position paper. J.Extracell. Vesicles 4, 30087 (2015).44. Vogel R, Coumans FA, Maltesen RG et al. A standardized method to determine the concentration of extracellular vesicles using tunableresistive pulse sensing. J. Extracell.Vesicles 5, 31242 (2016).45. Exosome RNA Administrator. Aegle therapeutics receives IND clearance from FDA for stem cell-derived extracellular vesicletherapy (2018). www.exosome-rna.com/aegle-therapeutics-receives-ind-clearance-from-f da-f or-stem-cell-derived-extracellular-vesicle-therapy/1236 Future Med. Chem. (2019) 11(10) future science group
