Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience .ae 10 Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, 10, 10-27   Exosome -based strategies for Dia gnosis and Therapy  Lorena Urbanelli*, Sandra Buratta, Krizia Sagini, Giuseppina F errara, Marco Lanni and  Carla Emiliani  University of Perugia, Department of Chemistry, B iology and Biotechnology, Perugia, Italy   Received:  June  03, 201 5; Revised: June 30 , 201 5; Accepted: July 01, 201 5  Abstract:  Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles (30 -120 nm) of endosomal origin, which are gaining the attention of the scientific community. Orig inally considered only a waste disposal system, they are now emerging as another class of signal me diators. Exosomes are secreted by any cell type and retrieved in every body fluid, such as blood, u rine, saliva and amniotic liquid. Remarkably, their  biochemical content includes not only lipids a nd pr oteins, but also nucleic acids, mainly miRNA and
mRNA, with a few reports also indicating the presen ce of genomic and mitocho ndrial DNA. Their properties have stimulated extensive research to ex ploit them as a source of biomarkers for the diagnosis an d the follow -up of several pathologies. Furthermore, exosomes ar e rel atively robust and stable, so they appear attractive as gene and drug delivery vehicles. They have also revealed immunomo dulatory and regenerative properties, which are encouraging thei r application for therapeutic purposes. Several issue s remain to be addressed: exosome isolation is still time consumin g and unsatisfactorily reproducible, ma king it difficult to compare results among laboratories, improve our knowledge o f their physiologica l function and correlate their features with pathological ou tcomes. Nevertheless, the number of pa tents trying to address these problems is growing ex ponentially and many novelties will reach the scientific co mmunity in the next few years.
Keywords: Biomar kers, circulating nucleic acids, drug delivery, exo somes, exosome -like nanoparticles, extracellular ves icles, liquid biopsy, microvesicles, nanovesicles, neurode generative diseases, stem cell particles, theranost ics, tumor diagn osis. 1. INTRODUCTION   Extracellular vesicles have been shown to be released b y any kind of cell. So far, on the basis of their ori gin and dimension, they have been classified into microvesicles (100 nm to 1mm), which directly bud from the plasma memb rane, apoptotic blebs (50 to 500  nm), which are released by cells undergoing apoptosis, and exosomes (30 to120 nm),  which are secreted via exocytosis from late endosom e multivesic ular bodies (MVBs) [1].   Exosomes are increasingly gaining the attention of investigators because of their s mall size and ubiquitous presence in almost every fluid of the human body, such as saliva, urine, plasma, seminal fluid, amniotic liquid ,
ascites, bronchoalveolar la vage fluid, synovial fluid, breast milk and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [2]. These featur es have suggested to exploit them for minimally invasive diagn ostic procedures. Furthermore, their relative stability i n circula ting body fluids and their ability to pass biologica l barriers, such as the blood -brain barrier [3], have prompted invest igations ai med at using them for therapeutic purposes, namely gene and drug delivery. Finally, a  very large colle ction of evidence shows that exosomes are important regul ators of many bi ological functions, such as immune response and tissue homeostasis. This sugges ts    *Address correspondence to this author at the University of Perugia, Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechno logy Via del Giochetto, Perugia, Italy ; Tel: ++390755857440; Fax: ++390755857436;  E-mail: lorena.urbanelli@unipg.it  they would be usefu l for innovative approaches against
many disorders, including neurodegenerative disease s and cancer. 2. BIOCHEMICAL FEATU RES
E-mail: lorena.urbanelli@unipg.it  they would be usefu l for innovative approaches against many disorders, including neurodegenerative disease s and cancer. 2. BIOCHEMICAL FEATU RES   Exosomes are characterized by a peculiar protein and  lipid composition. Exosomal protein content includes  not only co nserved prote ins, identified in all exosomes despite their origin, but also cell -type-specific proteins. Among those co nserved, it is possible to find proteins involved in  ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Tran sport) -dependent biogenesis of exosomes (e.g. A lix and Tsg101), or in ESCRT -independent biogenesis, such as tetraspanins (e.g., CD63, CD9, CD81 and CD82). Prot eins implicated in intracellular membrane transport and fu sion (e.g., Rab GTPases) or associated with lipid micr odomains (e.g. flotillins) are a lso very often present [4]. According to proteomic studies, exosome protein composition is d ifferent
from that of vesicles released by apoptotic cells a nd membrane shedding vesicles. As a cons equence, guidelines have been recently introduced clearly establ ishing that highly purified exosomes should be devoid of proteins from intracell ular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum or m itochondria [5]. In agreement with their role as antigen pr esenting vesi cles, exosomes released by many cell types co ntain major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I and II molecules. Proteins involved in cell signal ing pathways, like β-catenin, Wnt5B or the Notch ligand Delta -like 4 have been also  described in exosomes, a lthoug h their  2212 -3954 /15 $100.00+.00 © 2015 Bentham Science Publishers
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    11 impact in cell -to-cell communication is far from being elucidated Fig. ( 1).  As for proteins, the lipid composition of exosomes is distinct from that of the cell of or igin, but is anyway typical of the cell type. Internal membranes of MVBs are en riched in lysobisphosphatidic acid, which is known to be important for the internal bu dding of small vesicles from larger ones. In addition, com pelling evidence shows that exosomes are highly enriched in lipids usually asso ciated with lipid rafts, such as cholesterol, ceramide, sphingolipids and glycer ophospholipids with long and saturated fatty -acyl chains. On the other side, phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethan olamine are underrepresented [6]. R emarkably, exosomes also contain many lipid mediators, such as prostaglandins, and e nzymes involved in their synthesis from membrane pho spholipids,
such as phospholipase A2, which is responsible for the release of the most i mportant prostaglandin precursor, i.e. arachidonic acid [7].   The discovery that exosomes contain RNAs, such as mRNA, miRNA and more recently lncRNA [8], has prompted exte nsive investigations aimed at amplifying such molecules from circulating body fluids and use them  as diagnostic tools, thus co ntributing to the concept of “liquid biopsy”. Despite this potential breakthrough applic ation, many functional aspects of exos omal RNA are still unclear. Exosomal mRNAs have been shown to be translated in target cells and this was the first evidence suggestin g cell -to-cell communication by exosome -mediated horizontal transfer of genetic information [9]. Likewise, exosome -transferred miRNAs have also been demon strated to be functional in ta rget cells [10]. However, not all RNAs present in a cell are included in exosomes and it i s not clear
whether a set of RNAs is specifically targeted to e xosomes, despite their cell of origin, in addition to cell -type-specific RNAs.   Very recently, it was also reported that some cell types release exosomes carrying mtDNA [11] but the physiolog ical role of this organelle DNA is unknown, although it has been suggested that it could reach the cytosol of the target cells and be i mported into mitochondria. Tumor -derived exosomes also carry dsDNA [12] representing the whole g enomic DNA, which can also be used to identify mutations present in parental t umor cells, with a significant transl ational potential as a circulating biomarker for  cancer. Ho wever, the functional role of dsDNA associated to vesicles has to be eluc idated, and molecular mechanisms leading to DNA incl usion within vesicles are unknown.  3. BIOLOGICAL FUNCTI ON  Exosomes were once thought to be "trash bags" for ce lls to di scard unwanted pr oteins, but over the past decade, they
emerged as important players in a variety of cell p rocesses. Exosomes release is currently considered an addition al mechanism of cell -to-cell communic ation, that may affect not only neighboring cells,  but also distant districts of the body.   The secretion of exosomes is regulated by MVB fusion  with the plasma membrane. Mechanisms underlying thi s event are not well unde rstood, but a few studies have shown that intracellular ca lcium changes, cell depolar ization and cross -linking of receptors i ncrease the release of exosomes  Fig. (1). The biogenesis and biochemical compositio n of exosomes. Exosomal  vesicles originate from multivesicular bodies (MVBs ), late endosome -derived cell compartments,  which bud off parts of their limiting membrane int o their lumen, forming intral uminal vesicles. MVBs can fuse with the plasma membrane and release exoso mes into the e xtracellular space. Therefore, exosomes can be retri eved in any body
can fuse with the plasma membrane and release exoso mes into the e xtracellular space. Therefore, exosomes can be retri eved in any body fluid, and analyzed to carry out minimally invasive diagnostic procedur es (“liquid biopsy”). In fact, the molecular conten t of exosomes (proteins, lipids and notably RNAs and DNAs) includes n ot only molecules identified in almost all exosomes  despite of their origin, but also  cell-type-specific molecules, which reflects the origin and t he pathophysiological cond itions of the releasing cells.
12    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  [1]. Small GTPases of the Rab family such as Rab11, Rab27 and Rab35, which play a role in intracellular traff icking and fusion of compar tments, have been reported to be involved in the  secretion of exosomes. This process is also increas ed in cells undergoing stress conditions, namely by a p53 activation dependent mechanism [1].   In the immune system, exosomes have been demo nstrated to play an important role in mediating both  adaptive an d innate immune responses, taking part to antigen prese ntation by spreading antigens in association with MHC -II and MHC -I mol ecules. Exosomes may present many types of antigens: vesicles from patho gen-infected cells inco rporate antigens originating from th e pathogen and associate them to MHC molecules, for presentation to T -cells after exosome capture by antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells (DCs).  A
few studies also indicated an important role of the  exosome pathway in retroviral sprea ding: HIV -1 particles captured by DCs are internalized into MVB -like compartments, thus facilitating virus survival and propagation [13]. H owever, other studies have su ggested that, d epending on the kind of cargo, the role of exosomes may be more important i n the promotion of tolerogenesis than in itially thought. This double role of exosomes in the regulation of immune  responses has impl ications for tumor bio logy. In fact, the initial finding that exosomes secreted from tumor c ells represented a source of tumo r antigens in order to  induce efficient anti -tumoral immune responses, has left space to evidence showing that exosomes may  carry imm unosuppressive signals. These decrease the proliferation of T lymphocytes and natural killer (N K) cells, or promote the d ifferentiation of immunosu ppressive cells, such as T regulatory cells [14].
cells, such as T regulatory cells [14].   In addition to tumor escape, other tumor promoting activities have been associated to exosomes, namely modific ation of tumor microenvironment, promotion of cell invasiv eness and c reation of a metastatic niche. In the first case, it has been r eported that exosomes may help tumor cells to modify their surrounding environment by pr omoting angiogenesis and extracell ular matrix remodeling. Regarding cell invasiveness promotion, exosomes  have been shown to activate oncogenic pathways, which may also be relevant  to provide a favorable environment to circulating tumo r cells for the development of metastasis [15]. The nucleic acid content of exosomes also appears to be important for t umor promoting properties, as many angiogenic and/or invas ive properties of exosomes have been shown to be mediat ed by their mRNA and/or miRNA content [16].   In the nervous system, exosomes were found to be
secreted by many cell types and those isolated from a  specific cell type were shown to be able to affect ot her neural cell types; thus, it seems reliable that their main  function could be to ensure co mmunication within the CNS [17]. Neuronal MVBs were predominantly distributed within  the somat odendritic co mpartment and their release was dependent on synaptic activity [18].    The exosome -mediated cell -to-cell communication within the nervous system has pathological implicat ions, as these ves icles were shown to represent a transmission mechanism for path ological p roteins, such as the scrapie form of the prion protein (PrPsc), am yloid precursor pr otein (APP) fragments, phosphorylated tau or α-synuclein, which are relevant for the pathogenesis of Creutzfeld -Jacob, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases respectively [19 ].  Of relevance, exosomes have been identified as key functional components in the conditional medium of stem
cells, where they appear to play an important role in the cell -to-cell communication of mesenchymal and neural stem
functional components in the conditional medium of stem  cells, where they appear to play an important role in the cell -to-cell communication of mesenchymal and neural stem cells, a process fu ndamental to maintain the stem cell niche [20]. On the basis of these findings, they are curr ently invest igated as regenerative tools not only for neurologic al disorders, but also cardiovascular and renal di seases [21].  4. THE ISOLATION OF EXOSOMES FOR PREP ARATIVE A ND ANALYTICAL APPLIC ATIONS   The purification of exosomes is still a matter of de bate. They have been originally defined as extracellular v esicles of endosomal origin, released by MVB fusion and chara cterized by dimensions ranging from 30 to 120nm. Their av erage size is consistently different compared that of m icrovesicles (100 nm to 1 µm) budding from the plasma membrane and apo ptotic blebs (50 -500 nm) released by apoptotic cells. However, as a minor fr action of
microves icles and apoptotic blebs have the sa me size of exosomes, isolation methods relying on size alone, namely differential centrifugation, do not ensure to obtai n preparations devoid of other extracellular vesicles . In addition, in complex circulating fluids such as blood, nucleic acids may be as sociated to other non -vesicular carriers such as protein co mplexes and lipoproteins [22, 23]. Separation of these non -vesicular entities from exosomes is not easily achie vable by current isolation methods. Conve ntional protocols to enrich for exosomes invo lve a series of differential ce ntrifugation steps to separate vesicles from cells or cell debris. The prepar ation of vesicles is essentially obtained with a series of centrifugatio ns at 300 g, 10,000 g and 70,000 g or 100,000 g, upon which t he resulting pe llet is resuspended in about 1/1000 its original volume with a saline buffer to const itute a concentrated exosome solution.
exosome solution.   Many patents have been filed with the aim to improv e isolation methods, providing standard protocols tha t would certainly help not only the comparison of different studies, whose findings may be contradictory and context dep endent, but also to i mprove their diagnostic and therapeutic use. In particular, the possible presence of biological con taminants seriously hampers the safety and reproducibility of therape utic approaches based on the direct administration o f exosomes.   In 2000, AP cells (US), Institut National de la San té et de la Recherche Scientifique (FR) and Institut Curie ( FR) filed the first patent [24] (Table 1) claiming a m ethod to prepare membrane vesicles from a biological sample, i.e. AP C or tumor cells. The method was characterized by at leas t one step of anion -exchange chromatography or gel perme ation. Inventors provided evidence that exosomes originate  a homogeneous pe ak upon ion exchange chromatography,
even using high performance i nstruments and different types of support. However, an initial step to concentrate  exosomes, carried out by centrifugation, clar ification, ultrafiltration,
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    13 nanofiltration and/or affinity chr omatography, was reported to be necessary. In 2001, AP Cells (US) filed a sec ond patent [25] claiming methods to prepare membrane vesicles.  In this case, protocols were based on the combination of concentr ation and dialysis by ultrafiltration, followed by density cus hion centrifugation. Steps of vesicle concentration based on ultracentrifugation, which may cause particle aggregation, were avoided.   More recently, the Agency for Science, Technology a nd Research (SG) patented [26] a method to specificall y purify exosomes from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by an ion exchange chromatography, taking advantage of their negative charge. Evidence was provided that a negative charge is a peculiar feature of exosomes from MSCs,  in contrast with the very basic properties observed fo r brain
tumor exosomes [27].   In 2013 Li fe Technologies Corporation (US) patented [28] methods to isolate exosomes based on the use o f volume exclu ding polymers. These were able to precipitate exosomes from biological samples, thereby allowing their isolation by low speed centrifugation or filtr ation. Examples of volume excluding polymers included polyethylene glycol, dextran, or polyvinyl alcohol,  with a molecular weight b etween 1000 and 1,000,000 daltons (Da). It was reported that when higher conce ntrations of exosomes were present in a sample,  lower molecular weight polymers could be used.   Recently, a peculiar method to isolate exosomes was  patented by the Agency for Sc ience, Technology and Research (SG) [29]. The procedure relied on the precipitation of exosomes in the presence of organi c zwitterions having a molecular weight of less than 350  Da. Table 1.  Patents related to methods and reagents to purify e xosomes.
Application Nu mber Title  Applicants  Refere nce WO2000044389  Method for preparing membrane vesicles  AP Cells Inc. (US)  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale (FR)  Institut Curie (FR)  Dhellin et al. , 2000 [24]  WO2001082958  Methods of producing me mbrane vesicles  AP Cells Inc. (US)  Lamparski et al. , 2001 [25] WO2003016522  Methods and compounds for the trageting of pr oteins to exosomes  Anosys (US).  Delcayre et al. , 2003 [36] WO2012054975  Method of microvesicles enrichment  Clinical Geno mics Pty Ltd (AU)  Lapointe et al. , 2012 [31]  WO2012064993  Method for isolation of n ucleic acid containing particles and extra ction of nucleic acids therefrom  Exosome Diagnostics Inc (US)  Skog et al. , 2012 [32]  WO2012087241  Method of purifying exosomes  Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG)  Lim, 2012 [26]
Research (SG)  Lim, 2012 [26]  WO2012155014  Nucleic acids extraction from heterogenous biological materials Exosome Diagnostics Inc (US)  Comper et al. , 2012 [33]  US20130157300  Methods of quantifying exosomes in cell culture and method of increasing recovery rate of exos ome using the same  Samsung Electronics Co Ltd (KR) Park et al. , 2013 [40]  US20130302822  Methods of analyzing exosomes using fluore scence -labeled exosomes  Samsung Electronics Co Ltd (KR) Park (KR)  Kim et al. , 2013 [41]  US20130078658  Method of quantifying recovery rate of exosome  Samsung Electronics Co Ltd (KR) Kang (KR)  Choi (KR)  Lee (KR)  Park et al. , 2013 [42]  WO2013089738  Compositions and methods for exosome targeted expression  Morehouse School of Med icine (US)  Bond et al. , 2013 [37]  WO2013158203  Metho ds for exosome isol ation Life Technologies (US)  Vlassov et al.,  2013 [28]
WO2014036391  Controls for nucleic acids assay  Exosome Diagnostics Inc (US)  Noerholm et al. , 2014 [34] WO2014078420  Methods and systems for pro cessing exosomes  Wu (US)  Wu, 2014 [30]  WO2014107571  Methods for isolating m icrovesicles  Exosome Diagnostics Inc (US)  Enderle et al. , 2014 [35]
WO2014078420  Methods and systems for pro cessing exosomes  Wu (US)  Wu, 2014 [30]  WO2014107571  Methods for isolating m icrovesicles  Exosome Diagnostics Inc (US)  Enderle et al. , 2014 [35]  WO2015048844  A method of producing exosomes  Xosoma Pty Ltd (AU) Paspaliaris, 2015 [39]  WO2015060784  Exosome recovery methods with low molecular weig ht organic zwitterions  Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG)  Gagnon, 2015 [29]
14    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  Examples of such small organic zwitterions included the amino acid glycine (75 Da) or alanine (89 Da).   Exosomes from a biological fluid are a combination o f several components having a constellation of biologic effects, which could either be advantageous or delete rious for a specific outcome. The removal of unwanted components or subpopulations of exosomes, or the is olation of subpopul ations for specific therapeutic applications, was the object of a p atent filed in 2014 by Wu [30]. The inventor claimed the selective removal of one or more exosom e subpopulations from a mixed population on the basis  of the presence or a bsence of proteins or RNAs. This enrichment, which required the use of specifically co njugated antibodies and/or oligon ucleotides, could be accomplished by a variety of approaches, such as a magnetic or electrical fie ld, light or
ultrasound waves, and micro - or nano -devices.   A good standard for the isolation of exosomes is impo rtant not on ly to prepare an high amount of exosomes of elevated p urity to be administered for therapeutic purposes, but also for diagnostic applications aimed at sensi tive and accurate detection of biomar kers based on circulating DNA or RNA. In this case, it is neces sary to avoid contamination by nucleic acids of cellular origin, which can cons istently affect the results of amplification, and to extract  high quality nucleic acids from a small amount of biological sampl es. A patent filed in 2012 by Clinical Genomics (A U) [31] described a surprisingly simple method to avoid cellu lar nucleic acids contamination in exosomes from plasma. It was proposed that the mechanical rupture of cells i n a biological sample, e.g. by bead milling, improved the purification of nucleic ac ids associated to microvesicles
because the phys ical structure of a membranous microvesicle is sufficiently different from that of a cell, allo wing the selective disruption of the cell membrane but not of membranous microvesicles. The nucleic acid or prote inaceous material r eleased from the cells could be then degraded by enzymes, either naturally present or in troduced into the biological sample. In the same year, anoth er patent [32] aimed at improving vesicle -associated nucleic acids purification was filed  by Exosome Diagnostics (US). The invention provided ev idence that lower centrifugation speeds can achieve results similar to higher centrifugatio n speeds, allowing the extraction of n ucleic acids from microvesicles, RNA -protein co mplexes and DNA -protein c omplexes. It was reported that this substantial improvement of nucle ic acids purification at lower speeds could simply be achiev ed by performing suitable "extra ction enhancement operations",
which could involve the addition of an RNase inhib itor, a proteas e, a DNase and/or a reducing agent. More specifical ly Exosome Diagnostics (US) also filed a patent [33] cl aiming methods to extract high quality nucleic acids from a heterog enous collection of nucleic acid containing material s, i.e. cells or microvesicles,  or both. In this case, the method integrated the principle of “extraction enhancement " described above with affinity selection met hods to enrich/deplete n ucleic acid containing materials of a certain type or origina ting from a particular cell/tissue. The affinity procedure could be accomplished by using antibo dies, aptamers, or molec ularly imprinted polymers specific for a given surface antigen. The same applicant also paten ted [34] a method to isolate microvesicles from a biological  sample using positive control particles, i.e. viruses or virus -like particles such as bact eriophages, that contain control nucleic
acids and can be d etected to assess the accuracy, reliability, and eff iciency of nucleic acids extraction. More recently
particles such as bact eriophages, that contain control nucleic acids and can be d etected to assess the accuracy, reliability, and eff iciency of nucleic acids extraction. More recently Exosome Diagnostics (US) s ucceeded in pa tenting [35] a very innovative method for the isolation of exosome s and the extraction of their n ucleic acids content, based on the development of specific spin columns. The system was  claimed to be fast, robust and easily scalable to l arge volumes. Exosomes were captured on a column by one or more membrane layers. Each layer could either be the  same or different, and could either be charged or unchar ged. The number of membranes was r eported to be proportional to the total volume of sample tha t could be an alyzed at one time. The described protocol was relatively simple: first,  the microvesicle fraction was bound to a me mbrane filter and the filter was washed; second, a reagent was used t o perform
the lysis directly on the membrane, releasing th e nucleic acids. An optional elution step for isolating the m icrovesicles from the filter me mbrane prior to lysis was also provided. In the case of this large group of patents filed by Exo some Diagnostics, it is worth underlining that great attenti on was paid on circulating microvesicles/microparticles, wi thout distinguishing their origin, i.e. endosomal compartment o r cell membrane, or even the pre sence of RNA -protein and DNA -protein complexes. Although this kind of nucleic ac ids purification could be suit able to analyze circulating biomarkers, it could be largely insufficient to fin ely distinguish the n ucleic acid content of vesicles originating from either e ndosomes or cell membrane, thus gaining information about their specific biological fun ction.  Gene tic engineering approaches to target proteins to exosomes, thus obtaining reco mbinant exosomes easier to
purify and detect, were also described in a few pat ents. In 2003, Anosys (US) patented [36] a method to target proteins to exosomes. The approach was b ased on the disco very that lactadherin is selectively expressed in exosomes, and could be used to selectively address lacta dherin fusion proteins in such vesicles. A similar approach was intr oduced in 2013 by the Morehouse School of Med icine (US) [37]. In this case, inventors pr ovided methods based on cells expressing a Nef -fusion protein. Nef is an HIV protein known to be secreted in assoc iation with exosomes. Nef -expressing cells induce the intracellular accum ulation of MVBs and the extracellular accumula tion of exosomes, thus also increa sing their yield.   A treatment able to increase the release of exosome s is certainly of interest in order to improve exosome y ield from cultured cells, for example it is known that some chem icals such as ionomycin can trig ger exosome release by promoting
Ca2+ induced membrane fusion [38]. Surprisingly, in 201 4 Xosoma Pty (AU) presented a method [39] to increase  exosome yield based on the exposition of mammalian cells to light of wavelengths ranging between 500 nm and  820 n m.  Beyond purification methods, many reagents and devi ces were patented to better detect and characterize exo somes, improving their diagnostic applications and the quali ty of therapeutic preparations. The number of these patents is growing rapidly and it is possible to foresee that some of these
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    15 novel reagents and devices will reach the market so on, thus facilita ting clinical investigations and comparative stu dies. Recently, Samsung (KR) filed a few patents paying a ttention to the use of genetic engineerin g not only for the p urification but also for the detection and quantification of ex osomes. In the first pa tent [40] the applicant provided a method for the detection of exosomes by fluorescence. It was based  on the incubation of exosomes, released in the c ell culture medium by cells eng ineered to be fluorescent, with a protease. Then, the culture medium was filtered and its fluorescenc e detected. This a pproach was claimed to be suitable for the screening  of substances promoting the secretion of exosomes. Th e cell fluore scent material could be a fluore scent protein, a photoprotein, or a luciferase, preferably l ocated within
recombinant exosomes. The protease was ne cessary to effectively remove proteins present in the cell cu lture medium, which could otherwise  cause background flu orescence. In the second patent [41], a method of analy zing exosomes was described based on the incubation of a sample compr ising fluorescence -labeled exosomes with a solid support. In this manner, the fluore scence -labeled exosomes cou ld bind to the solid support and the fluore scence signal from the bound exosomes could be measured. Exa mples of solid supports included magnetic beads and polystyrene, possibly a ctivated with an exosome -binding substance such as an antibody. In the third p atent, the use of light emitting proteins to test t he recovery rate of exosome was proposed [42]. The meth od required the mixing of a sample contai ning exosomes with a known amount of a recombinant exosome, containing a  fusion protein b etween a membrane pr otein and a light -emitting
protein. Then, exosomes were isolated from the mixture and the exosome recovery rate determined by calculating  the ratio between the amount of r ecovered exosomes and the known amount of light -emitting exosomes mixed.   A platform for disease detection using exosomes was  the object of a patent filed in 2012 by Medsaic Pty Ltd  (AU) [43] (T able 2). Their approach relied on the capture of exosomes on a solid support by one or more  antibodies or antibody bin ding fragments. Captured exosomes were then revealed with a reagent specific for a marker indic ative of their cell origin, thus identif ying an array binding profile of exosomes indicative of a disease. The patent was an adapt ation of the Cluster of Differentiation (CD) antibody microa rrays (DotScan™, Medsaic Pty Ltd), that had been previously developed by the same applicant to provide extensive surface profiles of le ukemia cells obtained from blood samples and bone marrow aspirates. Recently, Ochiya
(JP) pa tented [44] a simple method to  detect and analyze exosomes in a sample. It was based on the addition of two antibodies specif ically binding two different exosomal antigens. The first antibody had to be conj ugated to an excitation label that was excited at suitable wavel ength, whereas t he second antibody had to be conjugated to a signaling label that emitted a signal upon its exci tation by the emission light of the first antibody. The analysis c ould be performed directly in solution. A peculiar approach  aimed at the disru ption of vesicle s to better detect the harbored exosomal biomarkers was pa tented in 2012 by the Regents of the University of Califo rnia (US) [45]. The method was based on Ele ctric Field Induced Release and Measurement (EFIRM) tec hnique, and it allowed the rapid, simple an d simultaneous quantification not of intact exosomes but of exosome harbored mol ecules. EFIRM used an electrical field
to simultaneously disrupt exosomes, r elease their contents
simultaneous quantification not of intact exosomes but of exosome harbored mol ecules. EFIRM used an electrical field to simultaneously disrupt exosomes, r elease their contents and measure the harbored exosomal RNAs or proteins.  In 2014 the University of Tokyo (JP) and Nikon Corporation (JP) patented [46] an exosome anal ysis method that comprised the binding of an antibody to an exosomal  surface antigen, followed by the detection of the antibody -exosome Table 2.  Patents related to the reagents and devices to detect and characterize exosomes.  Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  WO2007015174  Exosome ligands, their preparation and uses  Exothera (US)  Delcayre et al. , 2007 [48]  WO2012048372  Assay for disease d etection Medsaic Pty Ltd (AU) Christopherson et al. , 2012 [43]  WO2012162563  Method for exosomal biomarker dete ction by electric field induced release and measurement  The Regents of the University of
California (US)  Wong et al. , 2012 [45]  WO2013099925  Mon oclonal ant ibody for detecting exosomes  Shionogi & Co Ltd (JP) Ohta et al. , 2013 [49]  WO2014030590  Exosome analysis method, exosome anal ysis, antibody -exosome complex and exosome electrophor esis chip  The Unive rsity of Tokio (JP)  Nikon Corpor ation (JP) Ichiki et al. , 2014 [46]  WO2014145940  Hybridoma clones and monoclonal antibo dies to CD9 The Translational Genomics Research Institute (US)  Azorsa, 2014 [50]  WO2014145961  Hybridoma clones and monoclonal antibodies to tetraspannin 8  The Translational Genomics  Research Institute (US)  Azorsa, 2014 [51]  WO2014168020  Device for sample analysis and method for exosome capture JVC Ke nwood Corporation (JP)  Itonaga et al. , 2014 [47]  US20150017660  Method of exosome anal ysis, reagent for exosome analysis, and an alyzer for exosome  Ochiya (JP)  Ochiya, 2015 [44]
16    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  complex by measu ring the zeta potential of the comple x. Similarly, in 2014 JVC Kenwood Corpor ation (JP) invented [47] a device for exosome capture and analysis base d on recessed/protruding structures. The r ecessed portions immobilized an antibody binding to an ant igen present in an exosome, allowing the immo bilization of the bound exosome in the recessed po rtion.  As it appears from the previously described patents , innovative devices often rely on the development of r eagents able to specifically bind exosomes in order to dete ct and characterize them. Consist ently, a small group of patents have been filed f ocusing on these aspects. In 2007 ExoThera (US) patented [48] methods to generate exosome spec ific ligands, and also to use such ligands in therapy, f or example blocking the exosome pathway. Inventors showed  that
antibodies could be ge nerated against exosomes, which did not bind to exosome -producing cells. The antibody generation procedure could be based on either immunizi ng animals with the vesicles, or screening libra ries of compounds reacting with the vesi cles. Then, exosome binding ligands that did not react with exosome pro ducing cells had to be selected. Such libraries included p eptide/ polypeptide -, glycolipid - or n ucleotide -based libraries, as well as small mol ecules libraries. In 2013 monoclonal antibodies or antibody fragments against CD9, CD63 and CD81, which are e xpressed on the exosomal surface, were patented by Shionogy and Co (JP) [49]. In addition,  methods for detecting and measuring exosomes from a complex  biological sa mple based on the use of these antibodies were described, allo wing to carry out the diagnosis of cancer or immune system disorders. In 2014 The Translational Genomics Research Institute (US) pa tented monoclonal
antibodies that reco gnize human CD9 [50] and TSPAN8 [51] in their nati ve form, providing hybr idoma cell lines that produced the monoclonal antibo dies and exosome isolation kits based on them.  5. EXOSOMES AS DIAGN OSTIC TOOLS   The use of exosomes as potential biomarker for the detection of pathological conditions derives from some peculiar prope rties of these extracellular vesicles. The molecular content of exosomes (proteins, RNAs, lipi ds) reflects the origin and path ophysiological conditions of the releasing cells. In this context, several studies h ave demonstrated that exoso mes contain mol ecules implicated in cancer as well as in neurodegenerative, met abolic, or infectious diseases [1]. The presence of exosomes, w ith their specific cargo, in body fluids, makes their isolati on and analysis relatively easy and non invasive. Fur thermore, the enrichment of specific dia gnostic biomarkers in circulating
exosomes would help the discovery of relative lowly  expressed biomarkers, that no rmally would go undetected [52].  5.1. Exosomes in Tumor Diagnosis   Exosomes released by tumor cells a ccumulate in biolog ical fluids, including sera, urines, ascites and ple ural fluids [53]. Since the molecular composition of exo somes is reflective of the pathological status of their cell or ti ssue of origin, exosomes and their cargo, namely proteins a nd nucleic acids, are ideal biomarkers not only for can cer detection but also for the asses sment of disease progression and the evaluation of treatment efficacy. As a cons equence, they are currently the object of exte nsive investigations by a growing number of  oncologists worldwide.  5.1.1. Exosomal Proteins as Diagnostic Biomarkers   Exosomes contain many different proteins and recentl y, an increasing number of such proteins were found to  be potential biomarkers for cancer. In 2009 Hansabiomed (EE )
filed a paten t [54] (Table 3) claiming a method to capture, detect, characterize and qua ntify human exosomes in a small
potential biomarkers for cancer. In 2009 Hansabiomed (EE ) filed a paten t [54] (Table 3) claiming a method to capture, detect, characterize and qua ntify human exosomes in a small volume of a human body fluid by using a sandwich ELI SA test, termed ExoTest. The method utilized an anti -Rab5 antibody for capturing exosomes and an antibody recognizing either an exosome antigen (CD63) or oth er antigens e xpressed by the cellular source of exosomes, for example caveolin -1, a protein associated to the m etastatic behavior of tumors. This relatively si mple approach also provided a tool to  distinguish a tumor -related condition from a healthy state, as plasmatic levels of exosomes we re reported to be directly related to the tumor size a nd caveolin -1 was exclusively d etectable in exosomes from the plasma of cancer patients. Similarly Skolnick  et al. (2010) from Myriad Genetics (US) filed a patent [55] providing a stepw ise
strategy, based on the determination of the level o f exosomes and/or exosome -associated mar kers, for diagnosing a cancer in a patient. These markers were proteins present on  exosomal surface and could be general cancer marker s, cancer -type markers, and/or tissue -type markers. Specifically, the presence of ca ncer was determined by detecting the level of exosomes ha ving at least one general cancer marker, followed by the evaluat ion of at least one exosome -associated cancer -type marker and/or exosome -associated tissue -specific marker. As an example, the determination of colon cancer was d escribed, which was carried out by assessing first exosomes level (thro ugh the measure of one or more exosome -associated markers) and second to what extent such exosomes also expressed the GPA33 colon cancer antigen. Though much of the atten tion was focused on exosomal su rface markers, the patent also disclosed the use of other exosomes -associated biomarkers
located within exosomes (protein, mRNA, miRNA, DNA) . In 2010 Oxford Biomedica (UK) filed a pa tent [56] that utilized the detection of 5T4 in urinary exosomes to  diagnose and monitor cancer progre ssion. 5T4 is a 72 kDa transmembrane glycoprotein whose overexpression is associated with cancers of high m etastatic potential and poor prognosis. The applicant claimed that 5T4 was express ed and detectable in urinary exosomes from ca ncer patients.  5.1.2. Exosomal Nucleic Acids as Diagnostic Biomark ers  Exosomes carry RNAs, such as mRNAs and miRNAs, which are delivered and transferred into target cel ls, affec ting their phenotype. These microvescicles are a perf ect shuttle for RNAs since they concentrate and protect the m from RNase -dependent degradation, en suring the stable detection of RNAs in circulating fluids. Over the l ast few years, many RNAs have been ident ified in exosomes: some of them are preferentially detected in exosomes and  not in
the cellular source of exosomes [52]. Recent report s point out t he pre sence of DNA within exosomes, even if this
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    17 presence might also be dependent on the source of a nalyzed vesicles. Exosomes from glioblastoma and astrocytoma  have been shown to carry mtDNA [11] and the presence of dsDNA in tumor -derived exosomes from a broad panel of cancer cell lines, including melanoma, breast, lung , prostate and pancr eatic cancers has been described. In this case, authors have also provided evidence that exosomal D NA could be used to d etect tumor -specific genetic mutations, such as th e BRAF(V600E) mutation [12]. Exosome Diagnostics (US) filed a patent closely related to this  finding [57] (Table 3), specifically disclosing the detection of BRAF mutations in nucleic acids assoc iated to microvesicles (including exosomes) as a tool for the  diagnosis of cancer or other medical conditions. The patent pr ovided methods to
verify: a) the presence or absence of one or more B RAF mutations in nucleic acids extracted from circulating microvesicles; b) whether the BRAF mutation was an activating muta tion; c) whether the BRAF mutation encoded a mutant BRAF.   A strategy based on the comparison of RNAs in exosomes derived from cancer p atients with respect to healthy controls leaded to findings disclosed in tw o patents by Taylor et al. [58, 59]. The first patent [58] described the  use of miRNAs as diagnostic and prognostic markers.  Exosomes were isolated from biological samples using  size exclusion chromatography and centrifugation techniq ues, then cancer -derived exosomes were sep arated from non -cancer derived exosomes by immuno -capture using an anti -cancer antigen antibody, such as an anti -EpCAM antibody. The analysis of both circulating exosomes and tumor cells from the same patients by microarray identified a g roup of overexpressed miRNAs (miR -21, miR -141, miR -200a,
miR-200c, miR -200b, miR -203, miR -205, and miR -214) in both cell and exosomal compartment of ovarian cance r patients, demonstrating that circulating exosomal miR NA profiles could be used as a surr ogate for tissue miRNA. The second patent [59] reported as main novelty th e application of a similar strategy for the identification of can cer-specific lncRNAs in circulating exosomes. Inventors not only  showed the pre sence of lncRNA in circulating exosomes, but also identified specific patterns that enabled to distinguish benig n and malignant pathologies. In addition, it was claimed that the concentration and size dist ribution of exosomes in clinical specimens was di fferent, as NTA (Nanoparticles Tracking Analysis) showed that the si ze distribution of vesicles from cancer and co ntrols e xhibited a similar size range, but controls possessed a grea ter percentage of vesicles within the 200 -300 nm range.   A peculiar application of exosomes was described in  the
patent filed by Itachi Chemical Company Ltd (JP) and  Hitachi Chemical Resea rch Center Inc (US) [60]. Inve ntors claimed the characterization of bone marrow conditi ons, including the recovery following bone marrow transplant ation, through the quantification of bone marrow -associated markers expressed in exosomes obtained f rom biolo gical fluid samples, such as plasma or whole blood.  These markers could be white blood cell -associated mRNAs, red blood cell -associated mRNAs or platelet -associated mRNAs, selected among a large group and d etected by any currently available state -of-the-art technique.  5.1.3. Exosomes in Liver Cancer Diagnosis   Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common malignant disease and the third leading cause o f cancer -related mortality wordwide. miRNAs in body fluids, such as s erum and plasma, have been a mplified and used as potential biomarkers in HCC diagnosis [61]. In this context,
cancer -related mortality wordwide. miRNAs in body fluids, such as s erum and plasma, have been a mplified and used as potential biomarkers in HCC diagnosis [61]. In this context, three pa tents were filed by Xiao et al . [62 -64] (Table 3), Table 3.  Patents related to the use of exosomes in tumor d iagnosis.  Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  WO2009092386  A new method to measure and cha racterize microves icles in the human bo dy fluids  Hansabiomed Ou (EE)  Fais et al. , 2009 [54]  WO2009015357  Exosomes -associated miRNA as a diagnostic marker  University of Louisville Research Found ation, Inc.  Taylor et al. , 2010 [58]  WO2010065968  Cancer detection mar kers Miryad Gene tics Inc (US) Skolnick et al. , 2010 [55]  WO2010070276  Method  Oxford Bi omedica Ltd (UK)  Clayton, 2010 [56]  US20130172208  Assessment of bone marrow recovery by measu ring plasma exoosme mRNAs  Hitachi Chemical Co mpany Ltd (JP)
Hitachi Chem ical Research Center Inc (US)  Mitsuhashi, 2013 [60]  WO2014055775  Use of m icrovesicle in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of medical diseases and co nditions Exosomes Diagnostics, Inc.  Comper et al. , 2014 [57]  WO2014160032  Exosomes -associate RNA as a dia gnostic marker  University of Louisville Research Found ation, Inc.  Taylor et al. , 2010 [59]  CN104152452  Blood miRNA marker related to liver cancer and applic ation thereof  - Xiao et al. , 2014 [64]  CN104152566  Application of miRNA 26a  - Xiao et al. , 2014 [62]  CN104152567  Application of m iRNA 199a  - Xiao et al. , 2014
18    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  claiming the use of miRNAs associated to exosomes i solated from blood samples as HCC markers. Specifically, th e patents claimed the predictive power of two exosome -derived mi RNAs, miR -26a [62] and miR -199a [63], providing evidences that the down -regulation of miR -26a and miRNA -199a is significantly associated with HCC tumor recurrence, meta stasis and poor pro gnosis. In  the third patent [64], the analysis of the two exosomal miRNA s was combined to increase the dia gnostic accuracy.  5.2. Exosomes as Tools for the Diagnosis of Infecti ous Diseases   Exosomes are exploited by pathogens such as prions o r viruses to transfer mol ecules of pathogenic origin b etween host cells, thus being implicated in viral spread a nd immune evasion [65, 66]. As they carry infectious RNA and proteins, they could be used for the development of sensitive  tests, not
only to detect the causative agent but also to foll ow up the infection. Ho wever, according to the absence of patents, this is a field yet to be explored.   In a pioneering patent filed in 2001 by Chiron Corp oration [67] (Table 4) exosomes were used as an alternative approach to virus purification. As a ma tter of fact, t he applicant provided a method for the preparation of pur ified hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA from exosomes isolated from the plasma of HCV -infected individuals. In addition, the prep aration of HCV RNA by isolation of exosomes from the s upernatant of a cell c ulture infected with HCV was also disclosed. More recently, the Morehouse School of Medicine (US) patented [68] a method for diagnosing HIV and hepat itis virus infection by evaluation of virus assoc iated-biomarkers in exosomes isolated from body fluids. Th e applicant claimed the possibility to use this approach not only when the
infectious agent is a virus, but also when it is ba cterial or fungal. The virus -associated biomar kers could be a protein or nucleic acid derived from the infectious  agent or a cell product whose differential expression is caused by that particular i nfectious agent.  5.3. Exosomes in Cardiovascular Diseases Diagnosis   Recent evidence indicate that exosomes could be an important diagnostic tool for cardiovascular diseases : a direct asso ciation between cardiovascular diseases and high concentrations of circulating microvesicles has been r eported [69], and an alteration in circulating miRNAs after  myoca rdial infarction has been observed [70]. Two patents filed by Cavadis (NL) [71, 72] (Tab le 5) proposed the detection of biomarkers of a cardiovascular event i n exosomes isolated from body fluids, namely serum. Inventors discovered by proteomic analyses that pla sma-derived exosomes from su bjects with acute coronary
syndrome (ACS) di ffered from  that of patients who did not have an ACS. They identified as ACS biomarkers a pan el of proteins: vitronectin, serpin F2, CD14, cystatin C,  plasmin ogen, nidogen 2, serpin Gl. As an example, they provided a method to diagnose ACS by measuring the level of serpin F2, CD14 and cystatin C ass ociated to exosomes.  5.4. Exosomes from CSF as Diagnostic Tool   Although exosomes have been isolated from CSF, the difficulty to access CSF biobanks has led to a less  extensive chara cterization of their associated biomarker s. Nevertheless, there is emerging evidence that CSF exosomes could be used for the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders. F or exa mple, tau phosphorylated at Thr181, an e stablished biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), is elevated in exosomes i solated  from CSF of AD patients with mild symptoms [73]. Ex osome Diagnostics (US) filed a patent [74]  (Table 6) reporting a
method to detect neurodege nerative diseases and brain Table 4.  Patents related to the use of exosomes for infectio us diseases diagnosis.  Application Nu mber Title Applicants  Reference
method to detect neurodege nerative diseases and brain Table 4.  Patents related to the use of exosomes for infectio us diseases diagnosis.  Application Nu mber Title Applicants  Reference  WO200136601  Method for the preparation of purified HCV RNA by exosome pre paration  Chiron Spa (IT)  Abrignani et al. , 2001 [67] US20140134606  Exosome -mediated diagnosis of hepatitis virus infections and diseases Morehouse School of Medicine (US)  Newman et al. , 2014 [68]  Table 5. Patents related to the use of exosomes for  cardiovasc ular diseases diagnosis.   Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  WO2012110253  Exosomal biomarkers for predicting cardi ovascular events Cavadis (NL)  De Kleijn et al. , 2012 [71] WO201 2126531  Method for diagnosing acute coronary sy ndrome (ACS)  Cavadis (NL)  De Kleijn et al. , 2012 [72]    Table 6.  Patent related to the use of exosomes from cerebr ospinal fluid as diagnostic tool.  Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference
Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  US2015003833 5 Cerebrospinal fluid assay  Exosomes Diagno stics, Inc. (US)  Skog et al. , 2015 [74]
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    19 cancer (glioblastoma) based on the measure of RNAs (mRNA, miRNA, siRNA or shRNA) asso ciated to CSF -derived exosomes. In the reported examples, biomark ers associated with AD or other neurodegenerative disea ses were nucleic acids corresponding to APP, Aβ42, BACE1, tau (alone or in combination), whereas the bi omarker associated with glioblast oma or other brain cancers was an EGFR variant. 5.5. Urinary Exosomes as Diagnostic Tool   Proteins in urinary exoso mes have also been exploited for their potential utility not only for cancer dia gnosis but also for the detection of urinary tract diseases. P roteomic analyses demonstrated that exosomal urinary fractio ns, obtained by differential centrifug ation, contain s pecific proteins representative of different tracts of the renal epithelium [75]. Zhou et al. (2008) [76] reported that urinary
exosomes were enriched in kidney injury bi omarkers that were not found in normal healthy individuals. In 20 13 a patent was filed  by Irarrazabal (CL) [77] (Table 7) disclosing methods to dia gnose and monitor Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) at early stage. The protocol was based on: i) isolat ion  of exosomes from urine by at least one step of immunopurification with ant ibodies against prot eins preferably e xpressed in specific structures of the kidney (e.g. AQP -1, AQP -2, AQP -3 NKCC2, NHE -3); ii) detection of an AKI marker in exosomes (e.g. KIM -1, NGAL, IL -8, and cystatin).   mRNAs in urinary exosomes have also been proposed as diagnostic biom arkers. In 2014, a patent filed by Hitachi Chemical Co (JP), Hitachi Chemical Research Center (US) and the Regents of The University of California (US ) [78] claimed the ident ification and use of mRNAs isolated from urinary exosomes in the recognition and m onitoring of
diabetic nephropathy. The method relied on the isolatio n of nucleic acid -containing vesicles from urine, followed by the determination of the expression levels of mRNAs  associated with diabetes -induced damage, e.g. PPARGCIA, SMAD, UMOD, NRF2, SLC12A1 and CD24. The patent also pr ovided data demonstrating that the evaluation of these exos omal mRNAs is more sensitive with respect to the evaluation of glycated hemoglobin. Exosome Diagno stics (US) filed two patents [79, 80] proposing the analysis of  nucleic acids extracted from urinary microvesicles, d efined as all me mbrane vesicles smaller than 0.8µm, for the diagnosis of med ical conditions of prostate gland, including prostate cancer. Biomarkers were mRNAs of one or more isoforms of large group of gen es. As an example, the patent provided a method to detect prostate cancer by determination in ur inary microves icles of the fusion between SLC45A3 and BRAF genes. The novelty
reported by Exosome Diagnostics (US) in its more rec ent patent [80] was the evaluation of the quality of th e microvesicle isolation and/or nucleic acid extra ction using as contro l particle the Qβ bacteriophage, that was added during microvesicle isolation or nucleic acid e xtraction to validate the proc edure.   On the basis of previous studies demonstrating the association between the presence of a disease and chang es in the conce ntration of urinary -selected miRNAs [81], Felder  et al. (2015) filed a patent [82] disclosing the use of miRNAs specifically associated to urinary exosomes as potenti al biomarkers for the diagnosis of blood pressure salt sensitivity. These markers were claimed  to be useful for predicting the risk of cardiovascular diseases.  6. EXOSOME -BASED IMMUNOTHERAPY   First described in the blood as vesicles specifical ly secreted by reticulocytes [83], exosomes became of in terest for immunologists a few years later, when th eir role in
antigen presentation was discovered. Now compelling
secreted by reticulocytes [83], exosomes became of in terest for immunologists a few years later, when th eir role in antigen presentation was discovered. Now compelling evidence shows that exosomes are secreted from eryt hroid progenitors during their maturation, as well as fro m B -Iymphocytes and DCs, with mult iple immune functions [84]. This finding has promp ted investigations aimed at exploi ting them for clinical application, mostly for vaccinati on against malignant diseases. Initially, it was demonstrated [85] that exosomes secreted by Epstein -Barr virus -transformed B lymph ocytes harbor MHC class II dimers b ound to antigenic peptides and present the MHC –peptide complexes to T cells, suggesting that they could play a role in adaptive immune responses. Later, it was showed [86] that DCs, the i mmune cells that initiate adaptive immune r esponses by presenting Table 7.  Patents related to urinary exosomes as diagnostic t ool.
Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  WO2013028788  Urine biomar kers Exosome Diagno stics, Inc. (US) Russo, 2015 [79]  WO2013041913  Meth od for monitoring, diagnosis and/or progn osis of acute kidney injury in early stage Universidad de los Andes (CL)  Irarrazabal -Munoz, 2013 [77] WO2014055687  Urine exosome mRNAs and methods of using sameto detect diabetic nep hropathy  Hitachi Chem ical Co, LT D (JP) Hitachi chemical Co Ame rica, LTD (US)  The Regents of The University of Califo rnia (US)  Mitsuhashi et al. , 2014 [78] US20150005290  Composition and methods for diagnosing and treating salt sensitivity of blood pre ssure University of Virginia Patent Found ation (US)  Felder et al. , 2015 [82]  WO2015021158  Urine biomarkers cohorts, gene expression signatures and methods of use thereof  Exosome Diagno stics Inc (US) Skog et al. , 2015 [80]
20    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  MHC –peptide complexes to naïve T lymphocytes, secrete exosomes bearing functional MHC class I –peptide complexes, which could promote CD8+ T lymph ocyte-dependent antitumor immune responses. These findings  prompted the filing of pioneering patents related t o the use of exosomes in the immunological field as stimulators of anti -cancer i mmune responses, by the same authors who published these papers. As a matter of fact, Geuze and Melief (NL), who co -discovered the release of exosomes carrying MHC class -II associa ted peptides from B lymph ocytes [85], filed a patent [87] (Table 8) aimed at using exosomes as novel vehicle for immunotherapy, in particular peptide vaccination to erad icate tumors. The application was based on the finding that peptides present on exosome s in association with MHC mol ecules were the result of antigen processing by APCs. Therefore exos omes
could be purified by APCs and used for vaccination.  Alternatively, empty MHC molecules on pur ified exosomes could be loaded with peptides. This invention was the first to claim the use for vaccination of antigen pr esenting vesicles, free from their natural cellular surroun dings.   Zitvogel [88], who co -discove red the presence of functional MHC class I -peptide complexes on exosomes, filed an inve ntion providing new methods to present antigens to cells, based on exosomes released from tumor cel ls, containing t umor-associated antigens in the context of MHC class I  and II molecules. Authors claimed the use of tumor  exosomes, desi gnated as texosomes, the use of APCs loaded with texosomes, and the use of vesicles secreted by  DCs loaded with texosomes, designated as dexosomes, for  cancer immunotherapy.   A few patents w ere filed aimed at engineering
A few patents w ere filed aimed at engineering recomb inant exosomes to present exogenous antigenic peptides or pr oteins for immunization without their direct display in the MHC context [89]. This approach was i nspired by retrovirus, which use the pre -existing exosome biog enesis pathway for the formation of viral particles. In 20 04 Nouvax (KR) filed a patent [90] claiming the use for vacci nation of recombinant exosomes secreted into the extracellula r space by a cell line expressing a gene encoding an exogen ous antigen. As a n example, exosomes carrying the muc1 antigen were pr oduced for immunization against this protein. A more  sophi sticated strategy to obtain recombinant exosomes for  immunological appl ications was patented by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (FR) [91]. The invention pr oposed the use of chimeric proteins enabling the secretion of a protein of interest in association with
exosomes. Sch ematically, the chimeric pr oteins comprised the antigen of interest fused to a cytosolic domain  and to a membran e anchorage domain.   Despite these initial attempts to exploit exosomes to boost the immune response against tumors, different  and often contras ting immune -related functions emerged later. These evidences indicated a role for exosomes in the  immune escape of tumors, associated with the promotion of cancer progression. As a matter of fact, exosomes s ecreted by tumors also bear various imm unosuppressive molecules, which were reported to decrease prolifer ation of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes [92, 93], NK cells [94, 95], or to promote the differentiation of immunosuppre ssive cells such as T regulatory lymphocytes [96] or my eloid cells [97]. A few patents were consequently filed in order either  to overcome or to exploit the immunosu ppressive function of exosomes. Xiang [98] claimed that the use of exosomes for
immunological purposes could be improved by indu cing T helper cells to acquire the antigen presenting mach inery from Table 8.  Patents related to the immunological use of exosome s.  Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference
helper cells to acquire the antigen presenting mach inery from Table 8.  Patents related to the immunological use of exosome s.  Application Number  Title Applicants  Reference  WO1997005900  Cell d erived antigen presenting vesicles  Rijksunivesiteit te Leiden (NL) Rijksunivesiteit Utrecht (NL)  Geuze et al. , 1997 [87]  WO1999003499  Cellular vesicle called “exosome”. Prepar ation and use thereof in i mmune stimulation  Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale (FR) Institut Gustave Roussy (FR)  Centre National de la Recherche Scient ifique (FR)  Institut Curie (FR)  Zitvogel et al. , 1999 [88]  WO2004014954  Exosome containing exogenous antigen through gene transfe ction and method for utilizing t he same  Nouvax Co, Ltd. (KR)  Kim et al. , 2004 [90]  US20060233750  Materials and method of  modulating the immune response Xiang (CA)  Xiang, 2006 [98]
WO2008092153  Modification of exosomal components for use as a vaccine University of Louisville Research Foundation, Inc. (US)  Taylor et al. , 2008 [100]  US20100111916  Materials and Method of Modulating the Immune Response Xiang (CA)  Xiang, 2010 [99]  WO2011000551  Exosome based trea tment of cancer Ith Immune therapy holdings AB (SE)  Gabrielsson, 2011 [101]  WO2 011036416  Novel Chimeric polynucleotides and polypeptides enabling the secretion of a polipeptide of interest in combin ation with exosomes and uses thereof  Centre National de la Recherche Scient ifique (FR)  Mamoun, 2011 [91]
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    21 APCs. In the invention, a method to obtain a p eculiar T helper -APC was introduced, comprisi ng the co ntact of an exosome derived from a DC with a CD4+ T lymph ocyte. This T helper -APC could directly stimulate the immune response, particularly CTL activity. However, on the b asis of the new findings about the imm unosuppressive properties of exosomes , a few years later the same inventor filed a paten t [99] aimed at exploiting their immunomod ulatory properties to make either a T helper -APC as prev iously described or a T regulatory -APC. T regulatory -APCs were used to su ppress the immune response in orde r to treat or prevent a cond ition such as transplant rejection. The treatment was base d on the direct administration of these cells.   In 2008, a more sophisticated strategy aimed at elimina ting the immunosuppressive properties of exosome s
to pote ntiate their use as vaccine for cancer immunotherapy  was pa tented by the University of Louisville Research Foundation (US) [100]. The inventor proposed the use  of exosomes pr oduced by cells engineered to i) remove one or more immun osuppre ssive pro teins and ii) express one or more exogenous antigens, in particular "superantige ns" of bacterial origin able to enhance T cell stimul ation. As an example, inventors described exosomes with suppress ed expression of Fas ligand, loaded with a staphylococ cal enterotoxin as supera ntigen.   Another patent aimed at treating cancer by means of  exosomes was filed in 2011 by Ith Immune Therapy Holdings AB (SE) [101]. In this invention the direct administr ation of exosomes to the patient was proposed. The method compri sed the immo rtalization of B cells collected from the patient by infection with Epstein Barr viru s, the culture of these cells in the presence of a cancer antigen, and
the ha rvest of exosomes carrying the cancer antigen releas ed by B cells. Alternatively, harvested exosomes could be loaded with the cancer antigen. The novelty of the a pproach relied on the finding that in contrast to what earl ier reported, exosomes would specifically target naïve  B-cells or monocytes and not T -cells. Consequently, naïve  B-cells could act as antigen presenting cells (APCs) in fur ther recruitment of T -cells.  7. EXOSOME -BASED THERAPEUTIC AP PROACHES   Immunotherapy is not the only therapeutic approach which was based on the use of exosomes. Over the la st decade, exosomes have been  proposed as therapeutic tools for other disorders, namely cancer and neurodegener ative diseases, using different a pproaches.   A peculiar anti -cancer therapy relying on the general inhibition of exosome secretion was proposed in two  patents. In the first o ne, Croce et al . [102] (Table 9) reported that
Table 9.  Patents related to the therapeutic approaches based  on use of exosomes.   Application Nu mber Title Applicants  Refer ence JP2010285426  Nucleic acid introducing method  National Cancer Center (JP)  Dainippon Sum itomo Pharma Ltd (JP)  Ochitani et al. , 2010 [109] WO2011097480  Exosomal compositions and methods for the treatment of disease  University of Louisville Research Foundation (US)  Zhang, 2011 [113]  US20130177627  Growth inhibitory effects of nanoparticles co ntaining triterpene glycosides or trite rpenes  Einbond L (US)  Redenti S (US)  Einbond et al. , 2013 [114] WO2013014255  Exosome inhibiting agents and uses thereof  Georg -August -Universität Gö ttingen Stiftung Öffentlichen Rechts Unive rsität Medizin (DE)  Wulf, 2013 [103]  WO2013054534  Drugs for diseases associated with amyloid β, and screening thereof  National Unive rsity Corporation Hokkaido Un iversity (JP) Shionogi & Co Lt d (JP)  Yuyama et al. , 2013 [105]
Co Lt d (JP)  Yuyama et al. , 2013 [105] WO2013090556  Methods and compositions related to miR -21 and miR29a,
thereof  National Unive rsity Corporation Hokkaido Un iversity (JP) Shionogi & Co Lt d (JP)  Yuyama et al. , 2013 [105] WO2013090556  Methods and compositions related to miR -21 and miR29a, exosome inh ibition and cancer metastasis  The Ohio State University (US)  Croce et al. , 2013 [102]  WO2014022852  Cell-specific delivery of miRNA modulators for the treatment of obesity and r elated disorders  Aptamir Ther apeutics Inc. (US)  Thibonnier [107], 2014  WO2014028763  Exosome based therapeutics against neurod egenerative disorders  The University of Chicago (US)  Pusic et al. , 2014 [106]  WO2014054588  Nano gel/exosome complex and DDS.  Kyoto Unive rsity (JP)  Mie University (JP)  Akiyoshi et al. , 2014 [111] WO2014197747  Exosome for orofacial diagnostics and therapeutics  The Trustees of Columbia Un iversity in the City of New York (US)  Mao et al.,  2014 [108]  WO2 014197747  Exosome for orofacial diagnostics and therapeutics  The Trustees of Columbia Un iversity in
the City of New York (US)  Mao et al.,  2014 [108]
22    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  miRNAs are secreted by cancer cells in the surround ing tumor microenv ironment within exosomes. Released exosomes contained miR -21 and miR -29a, which could be engulfed by the immune cells surrounding cancer cel ls and bind to Toll -like Receptor 8 (TLR8) on immune cells. As a consequence, TLR8 was act ivated and immune cells released IL-6 and TNFα, which increased tumor growth and metastatic pote ntial. The applicants proposed to i nhibit metastasis not only by decre asing miR -21 and/or miR -29a level, but also by blocking exosome secretion. The s econd patent, filed in 2013 by Wulf [103], provided methods to reduce exosome -mediated tumor resistance against a therapeutic binding molecule. The inventor disco vered [104] that lymphoma B -cells released exosomes carrying the CD20 oncogene and able to bind therapeutic anti -CD20 antibodies
such as r ituximab. These exosomes consumed complement and pr otected target cells from the antibody attack. Moreo ver ABCA3, which had been sho wn to mediate resistance to chem otherapy [104], was reported to modulate the amount of released exosomes. The patent claimed the pharmacolo gical blocking or genetic silencing of ABCA3 as a strateg y to inhibit exosomes release, thus e nhancing the susceptibi lity of target cells to antibody -mediated therapy. The agent inhibi ting exosomes formation could be an inhibitor of  the group A of ABC transporters, an inhibitor of phosphatidyl inositol -3-kinase, of ADAM -metalloproteases, or a calcium chelator.   Exosomes a re emerging as mediators not only of neurodegeneration, but also of ne uroprotection. As a matter of fact, they were shown to be involved in the rege neration of peripheral nerves and in the repair of neuronal injuries [17]. Furthe rmore, their ability to cro ss the blood –brain
barrier [3] prompted extensive investigations to us e them as delivery vehicles for neurological disorders. In th is context, an inte resting patent was filed by the National University Corpor ation Hokkaido (JP) and Shionogy & Co (JP) [105] , directed at treating a disease associated with amyl oid β (Aβ), such as AD. It relied on the finding that exosomes strongly induced an insoluble A β fibril formation, but the binding of Aβ peptides to exosomes promoted their degradation throug h microglia. Furthermore inventors reported that the secretion of exosomes from nerve cells was regulated by the a ctivity of sphingolipid metabolism enzy mes, namely neutral sphing omyelinase 2 (nSMase2) and sphingomyelin sy nthase 2 (SMS2). Therefore the regulation of th e release and/or the removal of exosomes was proposed as a treatment for  AD, and this was claimed to be achieved by regulating t he activity of nSMase2 and SMS2. More recently, the
activity of nSMase2 and SMS2. More recently, the University of Chicago (US) proposed an exosome -based therapy against neurode generative disorders [106] based on the administr ation of exosomes from cells that had produced them in r esponse to oxidative stress. These exosomes could also be loaded with externally added therapeutic ag ents, such as nucleic acids or proteins, and could  be produced by any type of cell. As an example, the treatment of a dem yelinating disorder such as multiple sclerosis using these exosomal  compos itions was described.   So far therapeutic approaches based on exosomes  have found their main applications in ca ncer and neurodegener ative di seases, but innovative therapeutic strategies for other pathologies have also been pro posed. Recently, Aptamir Therapeutics filed a patent [107] describing cell specific d elivery of miRNA modulators for the treatment of obesity  and relative di sorders, using as vehicles exosomes, aptamers or both.
vehicles exosomes, aptamers or both.   Exosome -based compositions have been also proposed for the treatment of orofacial diseases. The Trustees  of
vehicles exosomes, aptamers or both.   Exosome -based compositions have been also proposed for the treatment of orofacial diseases. The Trustees  of Columbia University in the City of New York (US) pate nted [108] the administ ration of exosomes (or proteins, mRNA, or miRNA d erived from exosomes) to dental cells. Inventors claimed that such therapy increased the expression of dentin sialophosphopr otein, osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, thus promoting calcium deposition, dentin ogenesis, amelogenesis and/or odontogenesis. In this case exosomes could b e derived from epithelium, mesenchyme or mesoderm.  8. THERAPIES BASED ON EXO SOMES AS CARRIERS   The use of exosome for the delivery of pharmacologic al agents or for gene delivery has b een the object of an increa sing number of patents. As a matter of fact, it has been observed that the formation of exosome -therapeutic agent complexes results in their i ncreased solubility and stability,
as well as in increased bioavailability. In particu lar, the presence of nucleic acids within exosomes has suggested  their use as platform for the delivery of RNA -based therape utics. In fact, siRNA and miRNA have demonstrated their efficacy for the treatment of many disorders,  but their clinical appl ication is hampered by their instabi lity and difficulty to target specific tissues at therapeuti c doses.   The use of exosomes to deliver nucleic acid drugs wa s the object of a patent by National Cancer Center an d Daini ppon Sumitomo Pharma Co Ltd (JP) [109] (Table 9). Inventors provided a technique to introduce nucleic acid s into exosomes based on the insertion of an exogenou s nucleic acid into a cell, followed by isolation of the exosome -containing fraction from the cell culture medium. In the pa tent by Ohio State Innovation Foundation [110] exosomes were loaded with a therapeutic protein. The se exosomes co ntained an exosome targeted fusion protein and
were pr oduced by engineered cells. An invention aimed at provi ding an incorporation method for promoting the cellu lar uptake of exosomes was filed by Kyoto University (J P) and Mie Un iversity (JP) [111]. The method relied on increasing the affi nity of exosomes for cell membrane by coating their surface with hydrophobic polysaccharide nan ogels, thus enabling the introduc tion of exosomes into cells that normally would not interact with them.   Exosome -like nanoparticles were recently identified for the first time in an edible plant, i.e. grape; thei r structure and composition appeared to be similar to mammalian derive d exosomes [112]. A few patents exploit exosomes isolated  from plants as gene d elivery vehicles. The University of Louisville Research Foundation (US) patented [113] a  composition comprising a therapeutic agent encapsulate d  by exosomes and described methods base d on the administr ation of this exosomal composition to treat an
inflammatory disease or a cancer. Suitable preparat ions were obtained from cultured ca ncer cell exosomes and also from plant exosomes, e.g. grape and tomato. The therapeut ic agent could be a phytochemical agent, a chemotherapeutic agent, or a Stat3 i nhibitor. Furthe rmore, inventors showed that the
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    23 intranasal administration of these exosomal composi tions resulted in their preferential targeting to microgl ia cells, therefore such preparations we re claimed to be able to cross the blood -brain barrier and could be used to deliver the therapeutic agent to the brain. In 2013, Linda Einbond a nd Stepehn Redenti pa tented [114] a pharmaceutical composition containing a physiologically effective dose of a nanoparticle triterpene glycoside or nanoparticle t riterpene complex, where the nanoparticles were claimed to be  exosomes or liposomes. Also in this case, the inven tion encompassed a unified a pproach to treat cancer and other diseases using exosomes from p lants, conjugated with their respective active comp onents. Exosomes were obtained from the species Actaea (e.g., black cohosh or Cimicifug a) and
mixed with the active compound to form complexes.  9. EXOSOMES AS TOOLS  FOR REGENERATIVE MEDICINE   Stem cell are  functionally defined as cells having the capacity to self -renew and to differentiate. They are class ified as e mbryonic or adult stem cells, depending on their developmental stage and origin. Adult stem ce lls are involved in tissue home ostasis and organism  repair. When they are stimulated to differentiate along a define d lineage, they are also referred to as progenitor cells [115] . Growing evidence suggests an emerging role of exosomes in the biology of stem cells: it has been hypoth esized that these vesicl es may be involved in the self -renewal and expansion of plur ipotent or multipotent stem cells in vitro [116] and it has been reported that these vesicles may alter the  phenotype of neighboring cells, making them resemble to ves icle-producing cells [117].   Stem cells have the potential to be a powerful tool  in the
growing field of regenerative medicine, particulary  in regenerative therapies requiring tissue re placement, regener ation or repair [118]. However, there are several drawbacks to the use of stem cells, i.e. the need o f a consistent supply of cells with phenotypic stabilit y as well as the high costs and time delay for the ge neration and handling of thes e cells. Besides, immunological co mpatibility is required in order to avoid rejection. Last but not l east, there are complex regulatory issues related to potential risks of tumor or ectopic tissue formation. In this context,  exosomes and extracellular ves icles have gained a consistent attention, because they could be advantageous over the corr esponding stem cells: they are smaller and less co mplex, thereby easier to produce, and have the potential to avoid some of  the regulatory i ssues that surround stem ce lls [116].   Over the last few years, several patents have been filed
disclosing the use of exosomes from stem cells, mai nly Mesench ymal Stem Cells (MSCs) and Neural Stem Cells (NSCs). MSCs are lineage -restricted stem cells having the potential to differe ntiate into mesenchymal cell types only, namely adipocytic, chondrocytic and osteocytic line ages [118]. MSCs are derived from a variety of sources i ncluding bone marrow, blood, adipose and other somatic tissu es. A consistent number of patents related to vari ous aspects of exosomes r eleased by MSCs have been field by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG) (Table 10). In the first patent [119] the composition and the biol ogical activity of particles (inclu ding exosomes) secreted by MSCs were discl osed. These particles were isolated from MSC conditioned medium (MSC -CM) and demonstrated the biolog ical activity of MSCs, namely cardioprotection, reduction of oxidative stress and reduction of infa rct size. As
a cons equence it was claimed that they could  be used for any therapeutic purposes based on MSCs or MSC -CM
reduction of oxidative stress and reduction of infa rct size. As a cons equence it was claimed that they could  be used for any therapeutic purposes based on MSCs or MSC -CM administration. Besides, as exosomes from MSCs were  shown to modulate several signaling pathways, they could be used to prevent or treat a disease in which these s ignaling pathways were i nvolved , such as cardiac failure, bone marrow disease, skin disease, burns and degener ative diseases such as diabetes, AD, Parkinson's disease and cancer. To better e xploit such particles, the same inventor also filed additional patents [26, 120, 121]. In on e of them [26], previously reported in Se ction 4, a method to purify Table 10.  Patents related to the exosomes from stem cells.  Application Nu mber Title Applicants  Reference  WO2009105044  Mesenchymal stem cells particles  Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG)  Lim, 2009 [119]  WO2012053976  Use of exosomes to promote  or enhance hair
growth  Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG)  Lim et al. , 2012 [121] WO2012108842  Methods of detecting therapeutic exosomes  Agency for Science, Technology and Research (SG)  Lim, 2012 [120]  CN10386573  Exosomes neural stem cell sources in the prepar ation and application of neurological diseases  Shanxi University (CN)  Tian et al. , 2013 [128] WO2014013029  Use of preparations comprising exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCS) in the prevention and therapy of inflammatory  cond itions Universitat Duisburg -Essen (DE)  Beelen et al. , 2014 [122] WO2014013258  Stem cell micropart icles Reneuron Limited (GB)  Sinden et al. , 2014 [125] WO2014125276  Stem cell micropart icles and miRNA  Reneuron Limited (GB)  Stevanato et al. , 2014 [126] WO2015022545  Stem cell micropart icles and miRNA  Reneuron Limited (GB)  Hicks et al. , 2015 [127]
24    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  MSC particles based on anion e xchange chrom atography was disclosed. In another [120] a method to assess the therapeutic properties of exosomes was described. Th is was based on the determinatio n of several exosome biological activities including (a) immunodulatory a ctivity; (b) complement inhibition activity; (c) proteasome acti vity; (d) glycolytic enzyme activity; (e) anti -oxidative activity; (f) extracellular matrix (ECM) modifying activity; ( g) NT5E (CD73) ecto -5'-ectonucleotidase activity; (h) ion homeostasis acti vity; and (i) chaperone activity. According to the detection of one or more of such activities,  the exosome was likely to be a pharmacological composit ion having a specific therapeut ic property. In the last one [121] the use of MSC exosomes to pr omote or enhance wound healing or hair growth was described. A specific ap plication
of exosomes released by MSCs was patented by the Unive rsity of Duisburg -Essen (DE) [122]. In this case inven tors claimed that exosome preparations derived from  neonatal or adult tissue -derived MSCs were suitable for the prevention or therapy of inflammatory conditions su ch as pre- and post -natally acquired damages of the brain, or in complic ations following stem  cell transplantation ("graft vs host disease").   Neural stem cells (NSCs) are self -renewing, multipotent stem cells that generate neurons, astrocytes and oligodendr ocytes [123]. As damaged CNS tissue has a very limited r egenerative capacity, loss of neuro logical function is often chronic and pr ogressive. NSCs have shown promising results in stem cell -based therapy of neurological injuries or diseases [124]. Reneuron (UK) found that NSCs released  microparticles, including exosomes, were able to reta in some of the functions of the NSCs from which they were d erived.
These would have the same therapeutic i ndications of NSCs and were the object of a few patents. In the first one [125] the production and therapeutic use of NSCs micropar ticles was disclosed. NSC m icroparticles were derived from a conditionally -immortalized stem cell line, such as CTXOE03 (deposited at the ECACC with Accession No. 04091601 ). In the same year, a second patent was filed related no t only to NSC microparticles but also to miRNAs isolate d from these microparticles. In this case, inventors succeeded i n identif ying four main miRNA species in NSC microparticles, namely hsa -miR-1246, hsa -miR-4492, hsa -miR-4488 and hsa-miR-4532, claiming the use of these miRNAs for therapeutic purposes [126]. In a very recent patent the same applicant [127] disclosed the use of NSC microparticles in the therapy of a condition involving u nwanted or undesirable cell migration. Inventors identified NSC m icroparticles able
to inhibit the migration of fibroblasts an d cancer cells, and also to induce the diffe rentiation of cancer cells and/or the enhanc ement of an immune response against cancer cells. A closely related patent, disclosing the preparation and use of NSC -derived exosomes as drugs for the treatment of CNS  diseases was filed by Shanxi University (CN) [128].  In this case, neural stem cells comprised both NSCs and NSC s induced from MSCs.  10. CURRENT & FUTURE  DEVELOPMENT   Over the past decades, we have assisted to an explo sion of inventions claiming the d iagno stic and therapeutic use of exosomes. This manuscript has mainly considered extrace llular vesicles of endosomal origins termed exosomes, but in some cases there is no possibility  to distinguish between exosomes and other extracellula r vesicles, i.e. microv esicles, extracellular vesicles, microparticles, mostly in patents d escribing the use of circulating nucleic acids as biomarkers. Currently the
characterization of exosomes is ca rried out by size determination and biochemical markers analysis, but  there is
circulating nucleic acids as biomarkers. Currently the characterization of exosomes is ca rried out by size determination and biochemical markers analysis, but  there is  a urgent need for standard exosome isolation met hods from biological fluids and cell culture medium, in order  to facilitate the co mparison of vesicles employed in clinical studies and therapeutic protocols. This is the reaso n underl ying the high number of  patents filed with this purpose, i ncluding the growing interest in the development of micro - and nano -devices for the simu ltaneous detection and analysis of exosomes that involve high profile international comp anies in the field of electronics.   After an initial boost of interest, the use of exosomes for vaccination, namely against cancer, has left the pl ace to more general applications of exosomes for immunomodulatory purposes, including tolerogenic therapies for autoi mmune disorders or transplantation. T he application of exosomes as
drug delivery systems for the treatment of several disorders has e xpanded over the last few years and inventions have provided methods to load these vesicles with differ ent therapeutic agents, from small molecule compounds for  pharm acological treatment to nucleic acids, namely small RNAs, for gene therapy. In the future, it is possib le to foresee an expa nsion of exosome -inspired production of synthetic vesicles, in order to ameliorate the prop erties of currently available lipid  vesicles in terms of stability, tissue targeting and ability to cross bi ological barriers. In this context, a relatively new issue is the discovery of  exosomal vesicles originating from plants, which will possib ly represent a relatively new, ec onomic and safe source of vesicles for therapeutics delivery. The more innovat ive frontier of the therapeutic opportun ities offered by exosomes is in field of regenerative medicine. Current evide nces
support the notion the many properties of stem cell s are mediated b y extracellular vesicles in a paracrine fashion and  several patents now disclose the r egenerative properties of exosomes originating from stem cells.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST   Authors disclose any actual or potential conflicts of interest including any financi al, pe rsonal or other relationships with other people or organizations th at could inappropriately infl uence their work.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   This work was supported by Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia Grant no. 2014.0222.021.  REFERENCES  [1] Urbanelli L, M agini A, Buratta S, Brozzi A, Sagini K, Polchi A ,  et al.  Signaling pat hways in exosomes biogenesis, secretion and fate. Genes 2013; 4: 152 -70. [2] Mathivanan S, Ji H, Simpson RJ. Exosomes: Extracellul ar organelles important in inte rcellular communication. J P roteomics 2010; 73: 1907 -20.
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    25 [3] Yang T, Martin P, Fogarty B, Brown A, Schurman K, Phipps  R,  et al . Exosome delivered anticancer drugs across the blood -brain barrier for brain cancer the rapy in danio rerio. Pharm Res 2015; 32: 2003 -14. [4] Kowal J, Tkach M, Thery  C. Biogenesis and secretion of exosomes. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2014; 29: 116 -25. [5] Lotvall J, Hill AF, Hochberg F, Buzas EI, Di Vizio D, Gardiner C , et al.  Minimal experimental requirements for definition of extrace llular vesicles and their functions: A posit ion statement from the I nternational Society for Extracellular Vesicles. J E xtracell Vesicles 2014; 3: 26913.  [6] Record M, Carayon K, Poirot M, Silvente -Poirot S. Exosomes as new vesicular lipid transporters involved in cell -cell communic ation and various pat hophys iologies. Biochim Biophys Acta 2014; 1841: 108 -20.
Acta 2014; 1841: 108 -20. [7] Subra C, Grand D, Laulagnier K, Stella A, Lambeau G, Pa illasse M, et al. Exosomes account for vesicle -mediated transcellular transport of activatable phosphol ipases and prostaglandins. J Lipid Res 20 10; 51: 2105 -20. [8] Gezer U, Ozgur E, Cetinkaya M, Isin M, Dalay N. Long no n-coding RNAs with low e xpression levels in cells are enriched in secreted exosomes. Cell Biol Int 2014; 38: 1076 -9. [9] Valadi H, Ekstrom K, Bossios A, Sjostrand M, Lee JJ, L otvall JO. Exosome -mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic e xchange between cells. Nat Cell Biol 2007; 9: 654 -9. [10] Montecalvo A, Larregina AT, Shufesky WJ, Stolz DB, Sull ivan ML, Karlsson JM , et al. Mechanism of transfer of functional microRNAs between mouse dendritic cells  via exosomes. Blood 2012; 119: 756 -66. [11] Guescini M, Guidolin D, Vallorani L, Casadei L, Gioac chini AM, Tibollo P , et al. C2C12 myoblasts release micro -vesicles
contai ning mtDNA and proteins involved in signal transducti on. Exper imental Cell R esearch 2010; 316: 1977 -84. [12] Thakur BK, Zang H, Becker A, Matei I, Huang Y, Costa -Silva B, et al . Double -stranded DNA in exosomes: A novel biomarker in cancer detection. Cell R esearch 2014; 24: 766 -9. [13] Wiley RD, Gummuluru S. Immature de ndritic cell -derived exosomes can mediate HIV -1 trans infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 738 -43. [14] Greening DW, Gopal SK, Xu R, Simpson RJ, Chen W. Exosom es and their roles in i mmune regulation and cancer. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2015; 40: 72 -81. [15] Demor y BM, Higginbotham JN, Franklin JL, Ham AJ, Halvey PJ , Imasuen IE , et al. Proteomic analysis of exosomes from mutant KRAS colon cancer cells  identifies i ntercellular transfer of mutant KRAS. Mol Cell Proteomics 2013; 12: 343 -55. [16] Martins VR, Dias MS, Hainau t P. Tumor -cell-derived microves icles as carriers of molecular information in cancer. Curr
Opin O ncol 2013; 25: 66 -75. [17] Rajendran L, Bali J, Barr MM, Court FA, Kramer -Albers EM, Picou F , et al. Emerging roles of extracellular vesicles in the nervous system.  J Neurosci 2014; 34: 15482 -9. [18] Lachenal G, Pernet -Gallay K, Chivet M, Hemming FJ, Belly A, Bodon G , et al. Release of exosomes from differentiated neurons and its regulation by synaptic glutamatergic activity . Mol Cell Neurosci 2011; 46: 409 -18. [19] Coleman BM , Hill AF. Extracellular vesicles - Their role in the packaging and spread of misfolded proteins associated with neurodegenerative di seases. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2015; 40: 89 -96. [20] Turturici G, Tinnirello R, Sconzo G, Geraci F. Extracellu lar membrane vesicles  as a mechanism of cell -to-cell communication: Advantages and disa dvantages. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2014; 306: C621 -33. [21] De Jong OG, Van Balkom BW, Schiffelers RM, Bouten CV, Verhaar MC. Extracellular vesicles: Potential roles in regen erative
medicine. F ront I mmunol 2014; 5: 608.  [22] Turchinovich A, Weiz L, Langheinz A, Burwinkel B.
Verhaar MC. Extracellular vesicles: Potential roles in regen erative medicine. F ront I mmunol 2014; 5: 608.  [22] Turchinovich A, Weiz L, Langheinz A, Burwinkel B. Characteriz ation of extracellular circ ulating microRNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2011; 39: 7223 -33. [23] Wagner J, Riwanto M, Besler C, Knau A, Fichtlscherer S, Ro xe T, et al.  Characterizatio n of levels and cellular transfer of circulating lipoprotein -bound microRNAs. A rterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2013; 33: 1392 -400. [24] Dhellin, O., Amigorena, S., Rameau, P., Crouzet, J. Met hod for preparing me mbrane vesicles. WO2000044389 ( 2000 ). [25] Lamparski, H., Ruegg, C., Le Pecq, J.B., Hsu, D.H., Yao, J.Y. Methods of producing membrane vesicles. WO2001082958 ( 2001 ). [26] Lim, S.K. Method of purifying exosomes. WO2012087241 ( 2012 ). [27] Graner MW, Alzate O, Dechkovskaia AM, Keene JD, Samps on JH, Mitchell DA , et al. Proteom ic and immunologic analyses of brain tumor exosomes. FASEB J 2009; 23: 1541 -57.
tumor exosomes. FASEB J 2009; 23: 1541 -57. [28] Vlassov, A., Zeringer, E., Conrad, R. Methods for exosome  isolation. WO2013158203 ( 2013 ). [29] Gagnon, P.S. Exosome recovery methods with low molecu lar weight zwitterions. WO2015060 784 ( 2015 ). [30] Wu, A. Methods and systems for processing exosomes. WO2014078420 ( 2014 ). [31] Lapointe, L.C., Pedersen, S.K., McEvoy, A. Method of  microves icle enric hment. WO2012054975 ( 2012 ). [32] Skog, J.K., Russo, L. Method for isolation of nucleic a cid contai ning pa rticles and extra ction of nucleic acids therefrom. WO2012064993 ( 2012 ). [33] Comper, W., Russo, L., Skog, J.K. Nucleic acids extract ion from heterogenous bi ological materials. WO2012155014 ( 2012 ). [34] Noerholm, M., Belzer, S., Romain, C., Skog, J.K., Russo, L., Comper, W. Controls for n ucleic acids assay. WO2014036391 (2014 ). [35] Enderle, D., Ramachandran, A., Yan, H., Berghoff, E., Wei,  T.F.,
Noerholm, M., Skog, J.K. Methods for isolating microves icles. WO2014107571 ( 2014 ). [36] Delcayre, A., Le Pecq, J.B. Methods and compo unds for the trage ting of proteins to exosomes. WO2003016522 ( 2003 ). [37] Bond, V.C., Powell, M., Huang, M.B., Ali, S. Compositio ns and methods for exosome ta rgeted expression. WO2013089738 ( 2013 ). [38] Laulagnier K, Motta C, Hamdi S, Roy S, Fauvelle F, Pag eaux JF,  et al . Mast cell - and dendritic cell -derived exosomes display a specific lipid composition and an unusual me mbrane organization. Biochem J 2004; 380: 161 -71. [39] Paspaliaris, B. A method of producing exosomes. WO2015 048844 (2015 ). [40] Park, D.H., Kang, H.J., Lee,  M.Y. Methods of quantifying exosomes in cell culture and method of increasing recov ery rate of exosome using the same. US20130157300 ( 2013 ). [41] Kim, M.S., Park, D.H., Yoo, C.E., Kim, G.H. Methods of analy zing exosomes using flu orescence -labeled exosomes. US20130302822 ( 2013 ).
US20130302822 ( 2013 ). [42] Park, D.H., Kang, H.J., Choi, K.B., Lee, M.Y. Method o f quantif ying recovery rate of exosome. US20130078658 ( 2013 ). [43] Christopherson, R.I., Belov, L., Wissmueller, S., Leong, C. Assay for disease dete ction. WO2012048372 ( 2012 ). [44] Ochiya, T. Method of exosome analysis, eagent for exosome analysis, and analyzer for exosome. US20150017660 ( 2015 ). [45] Wong, D.T., Wei, F., Liao, W. Method for exosomal bio marker detection by electric field induced release and measure ment. WO2012162563 ( 2012 ). [46] Ichiki, T ., Akagi, T., Shiono, H. Exosome analysis method, exosome analysis, antibody -exosome complex and exosome electrophoresis chip. WO2014030590 ( 2014 ). [47] Itonaga, M., Yagyu, S., Hasegawa, Y., Tsujita, K., O no, M. Device for sample analysis and method for exosome  capture. WO2014168020 ( 2014 ). [48] Delcayre, A., Le Pecq, J.B. Exosome ligands, their prep aration and uses. WO2007015174 ( 2007 ).
uses. WO2007015174 ( 2007 ). [49] Ohta, H., Okada, C., Murakami, T., Okamoto, H., Sonod a, H. Monoclonal antibody for d etecting exosomes. WO2013099925 (2013 ).
uses. WO2007015174 ( 2007 ). [49] Ohta, H., Okada, C., Murakami, T., Okamoto, H., Sonod a, H. Monoclonal antibody for d etecting exosomes. WO2013099925 (2013 ). [50] Azorsa,  D.O. Hybridoma clones and monoclonal antibody to CD9 . WO2014145940 ( 2014 ). [51] Azorsa, DO. Hybridoma clones and monoclonal antibodie s to tetraspannin 8. WO2014145961 ( 2014 ). [52] Properzi F, Logozzi M, Fais S. Exosomes: The future of biomar kers in medicine. Biomar k Med 2013; 7: 769 -78. [53] Brinton LT, Sloane HS, Kester M, Kelly KA. Formation an d role of exosomes in ca ncer. Cell Mol Life Sci 2014; 72: 659 -71. [54] Fais, S., Logozzi, M. A new method to measure and ch aracterize microvesicles in the human body fluids. WO2009092 386 ( 2009 ). [55] Skolnick, M., Lanchbury, J., Timms, K., Neff, C., Hoff, R., Wang, H., Wagner, S., Sangale, Z. Cancer detection markers. WO2010065968 ( 2010 ). [56] Clayton, A. Method. WO2010070276 ( 2010 ).
26    Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 2015, Vol. 10, No. 1 Urbanelli et al.  [57] Comper, W., Ramachandran, A., Yan, H., Russo, L., Skog, J.K. Use of microves icles in diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of medical diseases and conditions. WO2014055775 ( 2014 ). [58] Taylor, D., Garcel -Taylor, C. Exosome -associated microRNA as a diagnostic marker. WO2009015357 ( 2009 ). [59] Taylor, D., Garcel -Taylor, C. Exosome -associated RNA as a diagnostic marker. WO2014160032 ( 2014 ). [60] Mitsuhashi, M. Assessment of bone marrow recovery by mea suring plasma exoosme mRNAs. US20130172208 ( 2013 ). [61] Li G, Shen Q, Li C, Li D, Chen J, He M. Identification  of circula ting MicroRNAs as novel potential biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma detection: A systematic r eview and meta -analysis. Clin Transl Oncol 2015. [Epub ahead of print]  [62] Xiao, W., Wang, S., Qu, X., Li, X., Dong, W., Zhao,  H. Applic ation of miR26a. CN2014104152566 ( 2014 ).
[63] Xiao, W. , Wang, S., Qu, X., Li, X., Dong, W., Zhao, H. Applic ation of miR 199a. CN2014104152567 ( 2014 ). [64] Xiao, W., Wang, S., Qu, X., Li, X., Dong, W., Zhao,  H. Blood miRNA marker related to liver cancer and application there of. CN2014104152452 ( 2014 ). [65] Pegtel DM, va n de Garde MD, Middeldorp JM. Viral miRNAs exploiting the e ndosomal -exosomal pathway for intercellular cross -talk and immune evasion. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011; 1 809: 715 -21. [66] Belting M, Wittrup A. Nanotubes, exosomes, and nuclei c acid -binding peptides prov ide novel mechanisms of intercellular communication in eukaryotic cells: Implic ations in health and disease. J Cell Biol 2008; 183: 1187 -91. [67] Abrignani, S., Pileri, P. Method for the preparation of pu rified HCV RNA by exosome preparation. WO200136601 ( 2001 ). [68] Newman, G.W., Anyanwu, S. Exosome -mediated diagnosis of hepatitis virus infe ctions and diseases. US20140134606 ( 2014 ).
[69] De Toro J, Herschlik L, Waldner C, Mongini C. Emerging rol es of exosomes in no rmal and pathological conditions: New insights for diagno sis and therapeutic applic ations. Front Immunol 2015; 6: 203. [70] Yellon DM, Davidson SM. Exosomes Nanoparticles Involv ed in Cardioprotection? Circulation Research 2014; 114: 325 -32. [71] De Kleijn, D., Pasterkamp, G., Timmers, L., Sze, S.K.  Exosomal biomarkers for  cardi ovascular events. WO2012110253 ( 2012 ). [72] De Kleijn, D., Pasterkamp, G., Timmers, L., Sze, S.K.  Method for diagnosing Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS). WO2012126531 (2012 ). [73] Saman S, Kim W, Raya M, Visnick Y, Miro S, Saman S , et al.  Exosome -associated Tau I s Secreted in Tauopathy Models and Is Selectively Phosphorylated in Cerebrospinal Fluid in Ea rly Alzheimer Disease. J Biol Chem 2012; 287: 3842 -9. [74] Skog, J.K., Russo, L. Cerebrospinal fluid assay. US20150 038335 (2015 ).
(2015 ). [75] Pisitkun T, Shen RF, Knepper MA. Ident ification and proteomic profiling of exosomes in human urine. Proc Natl Acad Sci  USA 2004; 101: 13368 -73. [76] Zhou H, Cheruvanky A, Hu X, Matsumoto T, Hiramatsu N, Cho ME, et al.  Urinary exos omal transcription factors, a new class of biomarkers for renal disea se. Kidney Int 2008; 74: 613 -21. [77] Irarrazabal -Munoz, C.E. Method for monitoring, diagnosis and/or prognosis of acute ki dney injury in early stage. WO2013041913 (2013 ). [78] Mitsuhashi, M., Sharma, K. Urine exosome miRNAs and me thods of using same to detect diabe tic nephropathy. WO2014055687 (2014 ). [79] Russo, L. Urine biomarkers. WO2013028788 ( 2015 ). [80] Skog, J.K., Noerholm, M. Urine biomarkers cohorts, gene expre ssion signatures, and methods of use thereof. WO2015021 158 (2015 ). [81] Lorenzen JM, Thum T. Circulating and Urin ary microRNAs in Kidney Disease. Clinic J Am Soc Nephrol 2012; 7: 1528 -33.
[82] Felder, R.A., Carlson, J., Gildea, J.J. Compositions and  methods for diagnosing and trea ting salt sensitivity of blood pressure. US20150005290 ( 2015 ).
[82] Felder, R.A., Carlson, J., Gildea, J.J. Compositions and  methods for diagnosing and trea ting salt sensitivity of blood pressure. US20150005290 ( 2015 ). [83] Johnstone RM, Adam M, Hammond JR, Orr L, Turbide C. Vesicle formation during reticulocyte maturation. Association of plasma membrane activ ities with released vesicles (exosomes). J Biol Chem 1987; 262: 9412 -20. [84] Thery C, Zitvogel L, Amigorena S. Exosomes: Composition , biogenesis and fun ction. Nat Rev Immunol 2002; 2: 569 -79. [85] Raposo G, Nijman HW, Stoorvogel W, Liejendekker R, Hardi ng CV, Melief CJ , et al. B lymphocytes secrete antigen -presenting vesicles. J Exp Med 1996; 183: 1161 -72. [86] Zitvogel L, Regnault A, Lozier A, Wolfers J, Flament C , Tenza D , et al.  Eradication of e stablished murine tumors using a novel cell -free vaccine: Dendritic cell -derived exosomes. Nat Med 1998; 4: 594-600. [87] Geuze, J.J., Melief, C. Cell derived antigen presenting vesicles. WO1997005900 ( 1997 ).
WO1997005900 ( 1997 ). [88] Zitvogel, L., Rapo so, G., Regnault, A., Amigorena, S. Cellular vesicle called "exosome", preparation and use thereof i n immune stimulation. WO1999003499 ( 1999 ). [89] Andre F, Chaput N, Schartz NE, Flament C, Aubert N, Bernard  J, et al.  Exosomes as potent cell -free peptide -based vaccine. I. Dendritic cell -derived exosomes tran sfer functional MHC class I/peptide complexes to dendritic cells. J Immunol 2004 ; 172: 2126 -36. [90] Kim, C.W., Ko, J.K., Cho, J.A. Exosome containing ex ogenous antigen through gene transcfection and method for ut ilizing the same. WO 2004014954 ( 2004 ). [91] Mamoun, R. Novel chimeric polynucleotides and polypep tides enabling the secr etion of a polypeptide of interest in combination with exosomes and uses thereof. WO2011036416 ( 2011 ). [92] Andreola G, Rivoltini L, Castelli C, Huber V, Perego P, Deho P ,  et al.  Induction of lymphocyte apoptosis by tumor cell secret ion of
FasL -bearing microves icles. J Exp Med 2002; 195: 1303 -16. [93] Taylor DD, Gercel -Taylor C, Lyons KS, Stanson J, Whiteside TL. T-cell apoptosis and suppression of T -cell receptor/CD3 -zeta by Fas ligand -containing membrane vesicles shed from ovarian tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2003; 9: 5113 -9. [94] Clayton A, Mitchell JP, Court J, Linnane S, Mason MD, Tabi Z. Human tumor -derived exosomes down -modulate NKG2D expre ssion. J Immunol  2008; 180: 7249 -58. [95] Liu C, Yu S, Zinn K, Wang J, Zhang L, Jia Y , et al.  Murine mammary carcinoma exosomes promote tumor growth by suppression of NK cell function. J I mmunol 2006; 176: 1375 -85. [96] Szajnik M, Czystowska M, Szczepanski MJ, Mandapathil  M, Whites ide TL. Tumor -derived microvesicles induce, expand and up-regulate biological activities of human regulatory T ce lls (Treg). PLoS One 2010; 5: e11469.  [97] Valenti R, Huber V, Filipazzi P, Pilla L, Sovena G, V illa A , et al.
Human tumor -released microvesicles pr omote the differentiation of myeloid cells with transforming growth factor -beta-mediated suppressive activity on T lymphocytes. Cancer Res 2006; 66 : 9290 -8. [98] Xinag, J. Materials and method of modulating the immu ne response. US20060233750 ( 2006 ). [99] Xiang, J. M aterials and Method of Modulating the Immune Response. US20100111916 ( 2010 ). [100]  Taylor, D., Garcel -Taylor, C. Modification of exosomal comp onents for use as a vaccine. WO2008092153 ( 2008 ). [101]  Gabrielsson, S. Exosome based treatment of cancer. WO2011000551 ( 2011 ). [102]  Croce, C.M., Fabbri, M. Methods and compositions related  to miR -21 and miR29a, exosome inhibition and cancer metastas is WO2013090556 ( 2013 ). [103]  Wulf, G. Exosome inhibiting agents and uses thereof. WO2013014255 ( 2013 ). [104]  Aung T, Chapuy B, Vogel D, Wenzel D, Op permann M, Lahmann M, et al.  Exosomal evasion of humoral immunotherapy in
aggre ssive B -cell lymphoma modulated by ATP -binding cassette transporter A3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 15336 -41.
M, et al.  Exosomal evasion of humoral immunotherapy in aggre ssive B -cell lymphoma modulated by ATP -binding cassette transporter A3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 15336 -41. [105]  Yuyama, K., Igarashi, Y., Mitsutake, S., Yoshida, T.,  Yamamot o, S. Drugs for diseases ass ociated with amyloid β, and screening thereof . WO2013054534 ( 2013 ). [106]  Pusic, K.M., Grinberg, Y.Y., Kraig, R.P., Pusic, A.D. E xosome -based therapeutics against neurodegenerative disorders.  WO2014028763 ( 2014 ). [107]  Thibonnier, M. Cell -specific delivery of miRNA modulators for the treatment of ob esity and related disorders. WO2014022852 ( 2014 ). [108]  Mao, J.J., Wan, Y., Jiang, N., Chen, M. Exosome for oro facial diagnostics and therape utics. WO2014187747 ( 2014 ). [109]  Ochitani, T., Kosaka, N., Iguchi,  H. Nucleic acid introducing method. JP2010285426 ( 2010 ). [110]  Schmittgen, T.D., Azevedo -Pouly, A.C. Exosome delivery system. WO2015002956 ( 2015 ).
Exosome -based strategies for Diagnosis and Therapy  Recent Patents on CNS Drug D iscovery, 2015,  Vol. 10, No. 1    27 [111]  Akiyoshi, K., Sawada, S., Shiku, H., Harada, N., Seo , N. Nanogel/exosome complex and DDS. WO2014054588 ( 2014 ). [112]  Ju S, Mu J, Dokland T, Zhuang X, Wang Q, Jiang H , et al.  Grape exosome -like nanopa rticles induce intestinal stem cells and protect mice from DSS -induced col itis. Mol Ther 2013; 21: 1345 -57. [113]  Zhang, H. Exosomal compositions and methods for the t reatment of dise ase. WO2011097480 ( 2011 ). [114]  Einbond, L., Repenti, S. Growth inhibitory effects of nan oparticles containing trite rpene glycosides or triterpenes. US20130177627 (2013 ). [115]  Morrison SJ, Kimble J. Asymmetric and symmetric stem -cell divisions in develo pment and canc er. Nature 2006; 441: 1068 -74. [116]  Katsuda T, Kosaka N, Takeshita F, Ochiya T. The the rapeutic potential of mese nchymal stem cell -derived extracellular vesicles.
Proteomics 2013; 13: 1637 -53. [117]  Ratajczak J, Wysoczynski M, Hayek F, Janowska -Wieczorek A, Ratajczak  MZ. Membrane -derived microvesicles: Important and underappreciated mediators of cell -to-cell communication. Leuk emia 2006; 20: 1487 -95. [118]  Phinney DG, Prockop DJ. Concise review: Mesenchymal stem/multipotent stromal cells: The state of transdiffere ntiation a nd modes of tissue repair --current views. Stem Cells 2007; 25: 2896 -902. [119]  Lim, S.K. Mesenchymal stem cell particles. WO2009105 044 (2009 ). [120]  Lim, S.K. Methods of detecting therapeutic exosomes.  WO2012108842 ( 2012 ). [121]  Lim, S.K., Yeo, M.S.W., Chen, T.S., Lai, R.C.  Use of exosomes to promote or e nhance hair growth. WO2012053976 ( 2012 ). [122]  Beelen, D.W., Doppner, T., Felderhoff -Muser, U., Giebel, B., Hermann, D., Horn, P., Keller, M., Kordelas, L., Ludwig , A.K., Rebmann, V. Use of preparations comprising exosomes deriv ed
from Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) in the prevention and  therapy of inflammatory conditions. WO2014013029 ( 2014 ). [123]  Kornblum HI. Introduction to neural stem cells. Stroke 20 07; 38: 810-6. [124]  Einstein OBen -Hur T. The changing face of neural stem cell therapy in  neurologic di seases. Arch Neurol 2008; 65: 452 -6. [125]  Sinden, J., Stevanato, L., Corteling, R. Stem cell mic roparticles. WO2014013258 ( 2014 ). [126]  Stevanato, L., Corteling, R., Sinden, J. Stem cell mi croparticles and miRNA. WO2014125276 ( 2014 ). [127]  Hicks, C., Sinden, J., Stevanato, L., Corteling, R. Stem cell microparticles and miRNA. WO2015022545 ( 2015 ). [128]  Tian, X., Xu, W., Niu, B., Zhang, T., Chen, Y., Wang,  J., Zhou, N., Ji, C., Yang, L. Prep aration of neural stem cell -derived exosomes, and application of neural stem cell-derived exosomes in nervous system diseases. CN10386573 ( 2013 ).
