262 Current Gene Therapy, 2012,  12, 262-274     1875-5631 /12 $58.00+.00 © 2012 Bentham Science Publishers Exosomes and the Emerging Field of Exosome-Based Gene Therapy Aisling J. O’Loughlin†, Caroline A. Woffindale†and Matthew J.A. Wood* Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford,  OX1 3QX,  United Kingdom Abstract:  Exosomes are a subtype of membrane vesicle released from the endocytic compartme nt of live cells. They play an important role in endogenous cell-to-cell communication. Previously shown to be capable of traver sing biological bar-riers and to naturally transport functional nucleic acids between cells,  they potentially represent a novel and exciting drug delivery vehicle for the field of gene therapy. Existing delivery vehi cles are limited by concerns regarding their safety, toxicity and efficacy. In contrast, exosomes, as a natural cell-derived nanocarrier, are imm unologically inert if purified
from a compatible cell source and possess an intrinsic ability to cross biological barrie rs. Already utilised in a number of clinical trials, exosomes appear to be well-tolerated, even foll owing repeat administration. Recent studies have shown that exosomes may be used to encapsulate and protect exogenous oligonucleotides for delivery  to target cells. They therefore may be valuable for the delivery of RNA interference and microRNA regulatory molecules  in addition to other single-stranded oligonucleotides. Prior to clinical translation, this nanotechnology requires  further development by refinement of isolation, purification, loading, delivery and targeting protocols. Thus, exosome-mediate d nanodelivery is highly promis-ing and may fill the void left by current delivery methods for systemic gene therapy. Keywords: Exosome, gene delivery, gene therapy, nanomedicine, RNAi, stem cells, vector.  INTRODUCTION  The field of gene therapy, that is the delivery of genetic
information for therapeutic value, has seen many develop-ments in recent years. These have included viral delivery of DNA and short hairpin RNA (shRNA) for restoration of normal gene expression. In addition, bacteria and lipid-based vectors have been exploited for the delivery of short single-stranded oligonucleotides and RNA interference (RNAi) for manipulation of gene expression. However, since the dawn of the era of gene therapy, initial achievements have been overshadowed by the mounting challenges precluding thera-peutic application, primarily those concerning safety and delivery. While the risk of activating an immune response must be minimised, many regard the challenge of delivery as the major obstacle to be addressed before these advances can be translated to the clinic. An ideal gene delivery vehicle should be easily administrable, non-toxic, immunologically inert and capable of carrying a range of therapeutic cargoes.
Furthermore, it should facilitate internalisation into target cells with the potential for cell or organ specificity. Recent work suggests that exosomes have the potential to overcome many, if not all, of these issues. These membrane-bound vesicles are naturally released from cells and play a role in cell-to-cell communication, in part via nucleic acid transfer.   In this review we discuss exosomes, the biological basis underlying their potential as molecular transporters, RNA *Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QX, United Kingdom; Tel: +44 1865 272419; Fax: +44 1865 272420; E-ma il: matthew.w ood@dpag.ox.ac.uk †These authors contributed equally to this work.interference (RNAi) as a therapeutic strategy, obstacles hin-dering current methods of delivery and the potential thera-peutic applications for exosomes. Finally, we discuss the
challenges ahead which must be addressed before the excit-
dering current methods of delivery and the potential thera-peutic applications for exosomes. Finally, we discuss the challenges ahead which must be addressed before the excit-ing promise of exosome-based nanotechnologies can be real-ised for clinical use. BIOLOGY OF EXOSOMES a) Production and Origins  Exosomes are a small homogeneous (40-100nm) subtype of membrane vesicle of endocytic origin (Fig. 1) [1]. Other membrane vesicles include microvesicles and apoptotic blebs which are formed from direct budding of the cell membrane under physiological or apoptotic conditions, re-spectively. Historically viewed as nothing more than cell debris, it is now known that exosomes play important roles in many physiological and pathological processes. Exosomal release is part of the endosomal trafficking system which sorts molecules for recycling, storage or degradation via en-dosomal fusion with a lysosome.   Endocytic vesicles fuse to form an early endosome which
develops into a late endosome by acidification and altera-tions in protein content [2]. Continuous inward budding of the limiting membrane of late endosomes traps cytosol which on scission form intraluminal vesicles (ILVs). The late endosome is then defined as a multi-vesicular body (MVB) [3]. Exosomal membranes contain lipid raft microdomains which are enriched in cholesterol, sphingomyelin and cera-mide. Phosphatidylserine is externalised on some exosomes [4]. When the membrane of the MVB fuses with the plasma membrane, ILVs are released as exosomes. This is an active process from live cells and can be constitutive or induced.
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    263Fig. (1). Exosome biogenesis. 1 ) Small vesicles form following invagination of the plasma membrane. Surface proteins found on  the plasma membrane may be transferred to the surface of these small vesicles. 2) Endocytic vesicles fuse to form the early endosome. 3) Following acidification and changes in protein composition the early endosome transforms into a late e ndosome. 4) Inward budding of the limiting membrane of the late endosome generates intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) and a multivesicular body (M VB) forms from the late endoso me. Sort-ing mechanisms ensure cargoes are selectively loaded into ILVs. 5a) After processing in the nucleus, pre-miRNA is exported via Exportin-5 to the cytoplasm and undergoes further cleavage by Dicer to form a miRNA:miRN A* duplex before the guide strand is incorporated into the
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). Putative sequence motifs within the miRNA ma y mediate their selective loading into ILVs. 5b)Proteins may be selectively sorted by the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT comp lex) which targets mono-ubiquitinated proteins for inclusion into ILVs. 5c) Chaperone proteins, e.g. heat shock cognate 70 (hsc70), may selectively load proteins into ILVs via the recognition of a short amino acid sequence, such as KFERQ. 6) The MVB fuses with the plasma membrane and ILVs are re-leased as exosomes. Release may be constitutive or induced by stimuli including calcium, mit ogens, cytokines or stress. 7) Following release, exosomes travel to near and distant cells in biological fluid. A number of components may be found i n the exosomal surface memb rane. These include lipid rafts (microdomains rich in cholesterol, sphingolipid, glycoli pids, lipid raft proteins and externalised ph osphatidylserine)
and exosomal markers such as tetraspanins ( e.g. CD63), which are present across all populations of exosomes. They also contain plasma membrane proteins, including those involved in endogenous targeting and trafficking, which may be specif ic to the cell of origi n. A wide range of cargoes are transported within exosomes including mRNA, miRNA, cytoskel etal elements ( e.g. actin), proteins, enzymes, molecular chaperones and signalling molecules. Exosomes may be internalised into recipient cells via a  number of potential mechanisms. 8a) Exosomes could be endocytosed into a MVB, following which they may undergo back-fusion, fusing with the limiting membra ne and releasing their cargo into the cytoplasm of the recipient cell. 8b) The exosome membrane may fuse with the plasma membrane, releasing the c argo directly into the cytoplasm of the recipient cell. 8c) Receptor-ligand mediated interactions could result in either signal transduction or exosom al inter-nalisation.
nalisation. Exosomes retain the membrane topology of the parent cell; the cytosolic side of the lipid bilayer remains inside the vesi-cle, isolating signalling domains of membrane receptors from the cytosol, restricting their function and dampening signal transduction, while the luminal part is exposed.   Exosomes have a common evolutionarily conserved set of proteins including CD63, CD9, CD81, LAMP1 and an-nexin which may be used as exosomal markers [5]. Depend-ing on their cellular source, they also contain a set of distinct proteins which act as a molecular fingerprint [6]. Therefore, a mechanism exists which selects proteins for export in
264    Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. exosomes rather than for lysosomal degradation. The en-dosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT complex) sorts and sequesters proteins for inclusion into exosomes based on a mono-ubiqu itin tag [7]. An ESCRT-independent mechanism of sorting also exists whereby lipid raft microdomains segregate cargo laterally within the en-dosomal membrane which is then coalesced by ceramide, promoting budding [8]. A web-based database of proteins and RNAs found in exosomes can be found at ExoCarta (http://www.exocarta.org/).  Exosomes are secreted from all varieties of cells includ-ing immune cells such as B-cells, T-cells, dendritic cells, and platelets, as well as neurons and epithelial cells. They are also abundant in biological fluids including plasma, urine, malignant effusions, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, breast milk, saliva, synovial fluid and amniotic fluid. Exosomes are
involved in many cellular functions including, but not lim-ited to; immune response regulation, antigen presentation, protein secretion, transfer of infectious cargo, regulation of vascular homeostasis, transport of cytokines and reactive oxygen species transmission [9].  b) Role in Cell-to-Cell Communication  Exosomes are increasingly recognised as major players in a universal mode of cell-independent communication. They transmit important information by activation of cell surface receptors on a target cell, fusion with the recipient cell to transfer bioactive exosomal signalling molecules or through internalisation via endocytosis [10]. This novel form of communication can occur at close range or at a distance since exosomes can traffic in biological fluids.  Arguably, the most interesting finding regarding exosomes is that they are a natural carrier system, transport-ing mRNA, miRNA and proteins between cells [11]. 1300
mRNAs and 120 miRNAs were identified in exosomes from mast cells, many of which were not expressed in the donor cell cytoplasm [11]. These nucleic acids must be targeted to exosomes via a selective mechanism. The proteins AGO2, a member of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), and its binding partner GW182 are found in exosomes and could therefore influence miRNA loading [12]. Secreted RNAs have been found to share specific sequence motifs and it has been proposed that they function as cis-acting elements to selectively target RNAs to exosomes [13, 14].   RNAs delivered via exosomes are functional in the re-cipient cell. This was established by Valadi et al.  where in-cubation of human mast cells with exosomes derived from murine cells resulted in expression of donor mouse proteins in the recipient human cells [11]. This demonstrates that exosome-delivered mRNA can induce de novo  transcrip-tional and translational changes, altering protein production
in the target cell. Further evidence of the transfer of mRNA from exosomes to target cells was provided by Skog et al.where Gaussia luciferase mRNA was transferred from fluo-rescently labelled glioblastoma microvesicles to human brain endothelial cells, with subsequent production of protein in the recipient cells [15]. This exosome shuttle RNA (esRNA) has been implicated in a broad range of processes including  protein synthesis by encoding for kinases, enzymes and pro-teins regulating transcription, translation and cell develop-ment [16]. Recent evidence from Balaj et al. also implicates microvesicles in the transfer of cDNA and gDNA fragments between cells, but these microvesicles have yet to be con-firmed as exosomes [17]. While exosome purification proce-dures were utilised, magnetic bead capture with exosome specific antibodies prior to vesicle lysis would offer more conclusive evidence. The revolutionary discovery of
exosomes as natural nanocarriers of nucleic acids raises the exciting possibility that they could be harnessed for the
conclusive evidence. The revolutionary discovery of exosomes as natural nanocarriers of nucleic acids raises the exciting possibility that they could be harnessed for the transport of exogenous RNA such as RNAi. EXOSOMES AND THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES a) RNAi as a Therapeutic Strategy  RNAi refers to the highly conserved cellular mechanism in which double stranded RNA (dsRNA) mediates the deg-radation of complementary mRNA, thereby inhibiting gene expression. Many diseases are gene-based and so could be ameliorated by RNAi or replacement of a defective gene via DNA sequence delivery.  Endogenous gene regulation is mediated by miRNA, small non-coding ~19-25 nucleotide single strands of RNA that act as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. miRNAs bind predominantly to the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of target mRNA via 7-8nt sequences termed seed sites [18]. Depending on the extent of complementarity be-tween the seed site and 3’ UTR target, miRNA binding in-
duces translational repression and/or degradation of the tar-get mRNA [19-21]. Importantly, a single miRNA regulates the expression of multiple genes, while one gene may be regulated by multiple miRNA species [22, 23]. Thus, miR-NAs are powerfully placed to regulate highly complex net-works within the cell.   Our increased understanding of endogenous gene regula-tion has permitted the development of exogenous small inter-fering RNA (siRNA) molecules, which utilise the miRNA regulatory machinery to elicit targeted gene silencing. Vec-tors may also be used to deliver and express shRNA, which undergoes cleavage within the cell to generate siRNA. Alter-natively, antisense oligonucleotides, single stranded nucleic acids complementary to a target sequence, may be used to silence translation via steric blocking. The ability of genetic material to potentially silence the expression of any gene offers a valuable therapeutic strategy which may be ex-
ploited for the suppression of critical disease-associated genes. To date, at least 24 clinical trials are underway or have been completed which have applied, or aim to apply, siRNA-mediated therapy in a wide range of diseases includ-ing cancer, age-related macular degeneration and renal dis-ease [24]. However, despite the promise offered by correc-tive gene-based therapeutics, clinical translation has been impeded by a lack of specificity or ability to penetrate target tissues, thereby increasing the risk of off-target effects and activation of an immune response [25]. Un-encapsulated RNA is also subject to rapid degradation by endogenous nucleases. Thus, before the potential of RNAi-mediated therapeutics may be realised, these crucial obstacles must be overcome.
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    265b) Challenges with Current Delivery Methods for Gene Therapy Biological Barriers  The major challenge currently precluding the widespread use of systemic RNAi- and gene-based therapeutics is how to effectively deliver therapies to target cells. In addition to the plasma membrane, other biological barriers, including the blood-brain barrier (BBB), the lung-blood interface, the skin and the lining of the gastro-intestinal tract hinder the delivery of therapeutic molecules to these tissues. The most impene-trable of these barriers is the BBB, a dynamic physical inter-face separating the brain from the periphery, which protects against toxic insults and maintains central nervous system homeostasis. The BBB consists of a sealed monolayer of endothelial cells which together with the basement mem-brane provide the system with structural support. Endothelial
cells surround capillaries and interact with astrocytes and pericytes (Fig. 2) [26, 27]. Pericytes promote and maintain BBB formation during development and adulthood [28, 29], regulate vesicular trafficking in endothelial cells [26] and may help to guard against neurodegeneration [30]. Astro-cytic end-feed monitor the tight junctions between endothe-lial cells [31]. These junctions and the low rate of transcyto-sis across endothelial cells renders them almost imperme-able, inhibiting passage of even lipophilic macromolecules over 400Da [32]. Selective transport systems are therefore required for the uptake of nutrients. Existing Delivery Methods  Naked nucleic acids are hydrophobic and anionic and will not efficiently cross biological barriers. Hence, they must be encapsulated within, or conjugated to, accessory delivery vehicles capable of traversing these barriers (Fig. 2). Current methods, summarised in Table 1, include the use of
viral, bacterial and lipid-based vectors. Viruses and bacteria have evolved a mechanism for transferring their genomes to host cells and hence were considered to be ideal candidates for the delivery of therapeutic agents. Similarly, due to their cationic and lipophilic nature, lipid-based vectors are at-tracted to the negatively charged plasma membrane and so have also been explored as potential delivery vehicles. How-ever, these methods all possess their own limitations, inhibit-ing their translation from laboratory use to clinical applica-tion. Novel delivery strategies including electrotransfer and magnetic gene targeting also represent potential mechanisms of gene delivery but remain in the early stages of develop-ment [33, 34]. Furthermore, many therapeutics require tar-geting to specific cells and tissues and how to achieve this at the required dose without toxicity or eliciting an immune response has not yet been elucidated. Thus, the existing viral,
bacterial, bacteriophage and synthetic lipid-based delivery methods have not, to date, achieved all expectations and the hope surrounding initial preclinical studies is yet to be matched with clinical efficacy. This highlights the need to harness a natural delivery mechanism that is safe and effi-cient. Exosomes may prove to be the ideal candidate tech-nology to fulfil this role. c) Advantages Over Current Drug Delivery Vehicles  Exosomes are natural transporters of nucleic acids [11, 15]. Hence, due to this intrinsic function, they could repre-sent a more efficient therapeutic delivery vehicle for such compounds. While viral and bacterial vectors could com-promise the health of host cells, exosomes appear to be safe and avoid the risk of insertional oncogenesis. Exosomes may also overcome the hurdles of immunogenicity, even follow-ing repeat administration, particularly as they can be engi-neered to be immunosuppressive [62]. This is especially im-
portant for many disorders in which the immune system may
ing repeat administration, particularly as they can be engi-neered to be immunosuppressive [62]. This is especially im-portant for many disorders in which the immune system may already be active, where an immunologically inert vector is imperative.   A delivery vehicle must pass capillaries, evade recogni-tion by phagocytes, bind to their recipient cells, undergo internalisation by endocytosis, escape the endosome and reach its target while avoiding cytoplasmic degradation. Re-search indicates that exosomes can accomplish this huge feat while shielding encapsulated nucleotides from degradation [58]. One proposed mechanism for how they traverse bio-logical barriers is via internalisation into a MVB, followed by release and re-internalisation into a MVB of a secondary cell [63]. Their unique lipid and protein composition distin-guishes them from liposomes and plays an important role in their intrinsic targeting capacity. The lipid composition is
important because phosphatidylserine, a known biological docking site for signalling molecules, is exposed [64]. The proteins in the exosomal membrane are vital for fusion as synthetic vesicles comprising ratios of lipids identical to exosomes but lacking in these proteins could not fuse with cells [64]. Thus, exosomes could signify a dramatic leap in the field of gene therapy. d) Exosomes as Therapeutic Delivery Vehicles  While the field is in its infancy, the potential for exosomes to transport exogenously applied miRNA and siRNA has recently been highlighted [65, 66]. Akao et al. showed that chemically modified miR-143 was secreted in microvesicles, likely to include exosomes, from human monocytic THP-1 cells pre-transfected with modified miR-143, during incubation in serum-free medium in vitro [65]. They further showed in vivo  that miR-143 levels were sig-nificantly increased in the serum and kidney of xenografted
nude mice following intravenous injection of miR-143 pre-transfected THP-1 cells. Although no analyses were per-formed to determine whether miR-143 remained functional, these findings suggest that synthetic miRNA may be pack-aged into exosomes and transported to distant cells. Simi-larly, Zhang et al.  showed that microvesicles, isolated from the culture medium of THP-1 cells transfected with a fluo-rescently tagged synthetic miRNA oligonucleotide of miR-150, were taken up by human microvascular endothelial HMEC-1 cells [66]. Furthermore, following incubation with THP-1 microvesicles, expression of c-Myb, a target of miR-150, was significantly reduced. Again, analyses suggested that microvesicles from cultured THP-1 cells likely represent exosomes. Thus, these results offer evidence to suggest that exogenous miRNAs may be packaged into exosomes and delivered, functionally active, into recipient cells  in vivo .
Excitingly, the first proof-of-concept that the natural trans-porter properties of exosomes may be harnessed to deliver RNAi in vivo  has recently been provided [58]. Immature den-dritic cells (DCs), lacking lymphocyte stimulatory molecules
266  Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. Fig. (2). Components of the blood-brain barrier.  The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a complex multi-cellular barrier. It protects the central nervous system (CNS) by restricting the passage of molecules from the peripheral blood supply. The  BBB consists of a sealed lay er of epithe-lial cells connected by tight junctions. The epithelial cells surround capillaries and interact  with pericytes, astrocytes and the basement mem-brane. Together, these elements shield the brain from toxic insults and maintain CNS h omeostasis so that the local ionic microe nvironment surrounding neurons is stable and optimised for signa lling, necessary for correct neuronal function. Small hydrophobic, lipid-soluble mole-cules under 400Da may cross the BBB by passive diffusion. However, due to its relatively im permeable nature, specialised transp ort systems
are required for the transfer of the majority of molecules across the BBB. Recep tor-mediated transcytosis is one mechanism by w hich larger molecules may cross. Upon binding of a ligand to a receptor on the endothelial cell the receptor-li gand complex is internalised  into a vesicle capable of traversing the cell. Molecules entering the brain in this way include lipopr oteins and insulin. In addition, passive  and active solute carriers maintain an influx of nutrients such as glucose and amino acids t o the brain. Conversely, ATP-binding cassette transpo rters (ABC transporters) actively reduce brain permeability by the efflux of molecules including  drugs from the brain. Despite our growing  understanding of these mechanisms, exactly how drug delivery systems may interact with BBB components  to reach the CNS remains largely unknow n. including MHCII, CD80 and CD86, were derived from mur-ine bone marrow as a source of immunologically inert
exosomes. The vesicles were confirmed as exosomes by nanoparticle tracking analysis and electron microscopy. To reduce off-target effects following systemic delivery and to explore the potential for targeted delivery of siRNA cargoes, a novel targeting strategy was utilised. Peptides known to target the muscle (muscle specific peptide, MSP) [67] and brain, specifically the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expressed on neurons and the vascular endothelium of the BBB (rabies viral glycoprotein, RVG) [68], were fused to the extracellular N-terminus of the exosomal surface protein, LAMP2b. Plasmids encoding the LAMP2b fusion constructs were transfected into DCs 4 days prior to exosome purification, resulting in expres-sion of fusion constructs on the surface of harvested exosomes. The modified exosomes were then loaded via elec-troporation with different exogenous siRNA cargoes including siRNA against GAPDH, cyclophilin B and /g1-secretase.
Exosomes loaded with siRNA against GAPDH and cy-clophilin B were first applied to murine muscle C2C12 cells and neuronal N2A cells to investigate whether they would be capable of specifically targeting siRNA cargoes in vitro . The expression of the targeting peptides conferred specific target-ing capacities to the exosomes; the strongest knockdown in C2C12 cells was achieved with exosomes expressing the muscle targeting peptide while conversely the strongest knockdown in N2A cells was achieved with exosomes ex-pressing RVG, the neuronal targeting peptide. Importantly, both specific targeting and silencing via exosome-mediated siRNA delivery was also effective in vivo  following intrave-nous injection of exosomes electroporated with GAPDH.
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    267Table 1. Currently Used Gene Therapy Vectors Vector Advantages Disadvantages Refs Viral Vectors e.g. Adenoviruses Adeno-associated viruses Lentiviruses Retroviruses Baculoviruses Some species are non-integra ting where the DNA exists as an episomal element avoiding the risk of insertional onco-genesis. Serotypes can be generated with selective target specificity. Virus-like particles, and modified baculoviruses (BacMam), recombinant and gutless forms are less toxic and immunogenic. Some studies report them to be well tolerated. There is potential for the incorporation of a suicidal gene as a safety switch. Non-integrating viral expression may be transient. Some species may integrate DNA into the genome and cause insertional mutagenesis. May cause toxicity and generation of an immune response by antigen-mediated cytotoxicity. As some viruses are natural mammalian infectious agents
there may be widespread pre-existing immunity in individuals with prior exposure. Risk of germline transduction. Precise cell or tissue targeting is difficult. Risk of viral recombination. Variable transgene capacity. Some allow only DNA as cargo. [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] Bacterial Vectors e.g. Salmonella typhimurim Listeria monocyto-genes Escherichi coliBacterial ghosts (non-living bacte-rial envelopes created by E-mediated lysis of Gram-negative bacteria) Can be manipulated to deliver shRNAs and DNA plasmids. Can be controlled by antibiotics. Their production is cost-effective. Strains dubbed “probiotic” by manufacturing companies could limit unwanted side effects. Hold promise for diseases of the gastrointestinal tract as the gut has immune tolerance for E. coli , a native organism of the intestinal mucosa. May possess intrinsic targeting. Bacterial ghosts can be used for DNA vaccines.
Bacterial ghosts can be used for DNA vaccines. Salmonella-based therapies have the potential to treat a wide range of diseases including infectious, non-infectious diseases and cancer. Transgene expression diminishes with time as the DNA re-leased from the bacteria will have immunostimulatory, un-methylated CpG motifs in exogenous plasmi d DNA inducing epigenetic silencing of integrated DNA. Can trigger immune response via activation of B-cells and T-cells. Risk of toxicity associated with some bacterial vectors. While Salmonella-based therapies appear safe in clinical trials, success of preclinical studies has not been recapitulated. [44] [45] [46] [47] Bacteriophage Vectors e.g. Lambda T4 Can encapsulate DNA, RNA and antisense oligonucleo-tides. Robust and remain functional at low pH, suitable for oral delivery. Can be manipulated genetically to contain a bacteriophage origin of replication in a plasmid within phage particles.
Tissue tropism is inducible by incorporation of targeting ligands in capsid proteins. Phage display allows discovery of novel targeting ligands. Potent antigens. Cleared by the reticuloendothelial system, limiting their effi-cacy. [48] [49] [50] [51] Lipid-based Vec-tors  e.g. Lipoplexes Lipidoids Cationic liposomes Stable nucleic acid lipid particles (SNALPs) May display low IC50 values. Can carry a broad range of therapeutic cargos including small molecules, RNA and large DNA plasmids. SNALPs appear to be well tolerated. Development of degradable forms may be less toxic. Some are unsuitable for clinical use as cationic complexes attract serum proteins and blood cells, interfering with their activity. Some have been associated with toxicity. Efficacy unknown for most tissues. Low efficiency of loading. Short duration of gene expression and rapidly cleared.  Costly. Non-biodegradable vectors may accumulate after repeated
administration increasing the likelihood of toxicity. [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] Exosomes Natural transporters of nucleic acids.
Non-biodegradable vectors may accumulate after repeated administration increasing the likelihood of toxicity. [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] Exosomes Natural transporters of nucleic acids. Can be loaded with exogenous cargos. Can cross biological barriers. Intrinsic and modifiable targeting specificity. Confer anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects. May possess inherent therapeutic potential ( e.g. in cardio-vascular disease). Well tolerated with low immunogenicity. In the early stages of development. Protocols for isolation, purification, loading, targeting and delivery require refinement. Known to be involved in the pathogenesis of several diseases. Endogenous role not fully elucidated. [11] [58] [59] [60] [61]
268    Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. While naked siRNA resulted in GAPDH silencing in organs associated with drug degradation and excretion, including the spleen, liver and kidney, there was no significant knock-down in these organs following exosome-mediated delivery. Instead, gene silencing was observed in several brain regions which express the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor including the striatum, midbrain and cortex. Furthermore, confocal fluorescence microscopy revealed that RVG-expressing exosomes primarily delivered siRNA to neurons, microglia, oligodendrocytes and their precursors. Thus, these results suggest that it may indeed be possible to target specific cells or tissues, a key challenge which limits the application of existing siRNA delivery methods.   Most intriguingly, the authors also directly examined the potential of exosome-mediated delivery as a therapeutic
strategy by assessing the ability to alter /g1-secretase expres-sion both in vitro  and in vivo ./g1-secretase has been high-lighted as a key therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [69, 70]. Application of increasing doses of exosome-encapsulated /g1-secretase siRNAs to N2A cells in vitro  re-sulted in dose-dependent knockdown while blocking the acetylcholine receptor with /g1-bungarotoxin significantly attenuated knockdown. These results confirm that expression of RVG is important for exosome targeting, as the acetylcho-line receptor was required for the specific targeting and cel-lular uptake of RVG exosomes. Encouragingly, exosome-mediated delivery of siRNA against /g1-secretase  in vivo  fol-lowing intravenous injection in wild-type mice was also suc-cessful, resulting in >60% knockdown of cortical /g1-secretase RNA and protein levels, which in turn resulted in a 55% de-crease in total /g1-amyloid1-42 levels. Together with the in
vitro  data, these results suggest that receptor-mediated inter-actions may be important for targeted uptake of exosomes across the BBB (Fig. 2). Exosomes did not induce an im-mune response as there were no significant alterations in inflammatory cytokine markers in vivo  and no evidence for the proliferation of T lymphocytes in vitro . Furthermore, repeated administration also appeared to be well tolerated, with little reduction in silencing efficiency following read-ministration as has been reported for existing viral delivery methods [39]. Thus, this study provides the first evidence that exosomes may provide a safe and effective delivery vec-tor for the application of therapeutic nucleic acids specifi-cally targeting the brain.  Recently, Pan et al.  also published data supporting the value of exosome-mediated transmission of siRNA [71]. This study investigated whether the transfer of vector-delivered siRNA between hepatic cells could extend the
therapeutic effect of RNAi treatment for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Silencing of HCV replication and expres-sion of the viral entry receptor CD81 was first assessed  in vitro  in a human hepatic cell line and primary B-lymphocytes transduced with siRNA-expressing vectors. Consistent with the findings outlined above, human and mouse hepatic cells and primary B-lymphocytes exchanged exogenously applied siRNA against HCV and CD81 via exosomes. The authors also investigated in vivo  transmission in immunocompromised mice engrafted with human hepa-toma cells producing CD81 siRNA and found exosome-mediated regulation of CD81 expression in mouse hepato-cytes. Together with the previous findings, this suggests that exosomes might have clinical potential not only as a direct method to deliver nucleic acid-based therapeutics but also that once delivered, the therapeutic extent of such treatments may be enhanced by exosome-mediated transfer to other cells.
cells.  While this technology remains in the early stages of de-velopment, exosome-mediated therapy may have applicabil-
may be enhanced by exosome-mediated transfer to other cells.  While this technology remains in the early stages of de-velopment, exosome-mediated therapy may have applicabil-ity to a wide range of disorders. Indeed, ongoing work in a wide variety of diseases highlights the value of exosome-based therapies by further supporting their clinical feasibil-ity, safety and efficiency. Neurological Disease  Considering the ability of exosomes to infiltrate the brain and carry cargoes regulating gene expression [58], they may be especially suited to the treatment of neurological disor-ders, many of which remain untreatable. Many neurodegen-erative diseases are associated with the progressive loss of specific neuronal subgroups due to the dysfunction or aber-rant accumulation of an often ubiquitously expressed protein. A reduction in the levels of such proteins would be predicted to have a therapeutic effect. However, treatment of these
diseases has proven challenging due to the difficulties in-volved in selectively silencing a ubiquitously expressed pro-tein only within certain tissues. Thus, exosomes could poten-tially prove useful by bestowing the ability to specifically target therapeutic molecules to certain cell populations and hence avoid toxicity from off-target effects.  Exosomes may also be useful in the treatment of sporadic acquired disorders such as focal ischemia, for which the sup-pression of specific genes has been suggested as a potential therapeutic intervention [72, 73]. For example, siRNA against ASK1 has been shown to prevent ischaemic neuronal cell death and in turn reduce infarct size, raising the possibil-ity that silencing ASK1 may provide a potential therapeutic strategy for stroke [72]. However, in this study the siRNA was applied by osmotic pump. Thus, if siRNA against ASK1 could be loaded into exosomes and specifically targeted this
may present a much more feasible and less invasive therapy.  Dysfunction of miRNA regulatory pathways in a range of neurological disorders has now been widely reported [74]. Profiling studies have revealed that a number of these regu-late key genes and proteins associated with specific disor-ders. For example, the expression of miR-29a/b-1 and miR-107 is decreased in AD and is associated with increased /g1-secretase expression [75, 76]. Similarly, miR-133b expres-sion, a key negative regulator of dopaminergic neuron devel-opment, is altered in Parkinson’s disease (PD) [77, 78], while at least 9 miRNAs are downregulated in Huntington’s disease (HD) including miR-9 and miR-9* [79, 80]. Regulat-ing miRNA expression either by the replacement of down-regulated miRNAs by delivery of miRNA mimics or con-versely by the downregulation of upregulated miRNAs using antagomirs or microRNA sponges may therefore represent a potential therapeutic strategy [81]. Consequently, exosome-
mediated delivery may offer a method for targeting such therapies. Inflammatory Disease  Exosomes have been shown to confer anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects. They therefore may have
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    269intrinsic therapeutic utility in the context of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. For example, exosomes derived from immature DCs treated with recombinant murine IL-10 suppressed the onset of murine collagen-induced arthritis and reduced the severity of established arthritis [60]. Similarly, exosomes derived from immature DCs genetically engi-neered via adenoviral vectors to express IL-4, FasL, in-doleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) or CTLA-4Ig, an inducer of IDO, suppressed the inflammatory response in delayed-type hypersensitivity and partially reversed established col-lagen-induced arthritis via a MHCII-dependent mechanism [62, 82, 83]. In these studies, the derived exosomes were found to be as, if not more, immunosuppressive than the DCs from which they were derived. The use of exosomes to de-liver anti-inflammatory drugs to the brain, bypassing the
BBB via intranasal application, has recently been explored [84]. Exosomes were used to transport curcumin, an anti-inflammatory drug or JSI124, a signal transducer and activa-tor of transcription 3 (STAT3) inhibitor, via a non-invasive intranasal route in three experimental models; lipopolysac-charide-induced brain inflammation, experimental autoim-mune encephalitis and a GL26 glioblastoma tumour model. Across all three models, exosome-mediated delivery elicited therapeutic effects, resulting from the increased stability and concentration of anti-inflammatory drugs and their rapid delivery to microglia cells [84, 85]. These findings therefore suggest that exosome-mediated delivery may offer a non-invasive and effective strategy for bypassing the BBB to treat inflammatory-related diseases.  Cardiovascular Disease  Unmodified exosomes may also possess inherent thera-peutic potential. Paracrine secretions from human embryonic
stem cell-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hESC-MSCs) are cardioprotective in the treatment of myocardial ischae-mia/reperfusion injury and reduce infarct size in both pig and murine models [86]. Subsequently, exosomes were found to mediate this therapeutic effect as purified exosomes har-vested from hESC-MSCs were capable of reducing infarct size in a mouse model of myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury [61]. Intriguingly, the same group have since pro-duced an immortalised line of hESC-MSCs by transfection of the oncogene, MYC [87]. Exosomes derived from MYC-transformed MSCs were still capable of ameliorating infarct size, suggesting that the therapeutic potential for exosomes had not been affected. While the authors allay concerns re-garding the risk of transfer of the oncogene to recipient cells by reporting that the MYC protein was not detectable in the exosomes, this warrants further investigation. Cancer  Exosomes derived from DCs, tumours and ascitic fluid
may have potential as a cell-free cancer vaccine by priming the immune system to evoke anti-tumour immunity. DC-derived exosomes (Dex) induce antigen-specific T-cell re-sponses by the direct and indirect display of antigens to T-cells [88-90] while tumour-derived exosomes (Tex) may function as antigen delivery systems [91, 92]. Two clinical trials assessing the safety and efficiency of Dex were per-formed in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer [93] and metastatic melanoma [94]. The treatments were well-tolerated, suggesting that Dex represents a promising strategy. A further clinical trial in which patients with colo-rectal cancer were treated with ascites-derived exosomes (Aex) in combination with the granulocyte-macrophage col-ony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) produced beneficial anti-tumour cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses, validating the safety of this treatment [95]. Furthermore, studies in which
tumour cells have been genetically modified to express either IL-2 or glycolipid-anchored IL-12 have revealed that these
safety of this treatment [95]. Furthermore, studies in which tumour cells have been genetically modified to express either IL-2 or glycolipid-anchored IL-12 have revealed that these exosomes have enhanced anti-tumour and anti-immunogenicity effects [96, 97]. This suggests that genetic modification of parent cells to enhance exosomal expression of desired cytokines may improve therapeutic effects. To-gether, these findings highlight the promise of exosome-mediated vaccination therapy for cancer and serve as evi-dence that exosomes may be delivered safely and efficiently in human clinical trials.   Dysregulation of miRNAs also contributes to pathogene-sis in a variety of cancers [98]. Indeed, the miRNA profile may be useful for identifying both the type and extent of cancer progression [99]. Loss of miRNAs thought to func-tion as tumour suppressor genes including miR-15a and miR-16-1 was found in ~70% of chronic lymphocytic leu-
kaemia while loss of let-7 was observed across many malig-nancies including lung and breast cancer [100-102]. miRNAs may also function as oncogenes and their upregulation can trigger tumorigenesis. The miR-17-92 cluster is thought to induce proliferation and is upregulated in numerous malig-nancies including lymphomas, lung and breast cancer [98]. Thus, targeted replacement of tumour suppressor or silencing of oncogene-related miRNAs via miRNA mimics, an-tagomirs and microRNA sponges may represent a potential treatment strategy. Together, these findings support both the safety and efficacy of exosomes as nanocarriers capable of delivering a wide range of therapeutic cargoes in a variety of diseases. e) The Future of Exosome-Mediated Therapy  Before the potential of exosome-mediated therapy can be achieved a number of challenges must be resolved. These include the development of a scalable and sustainable source of well-characterised homogenous exosomes and improve-
ment of isolation, purification, loading, delivery and target-ing protocols (Fig. 3). While these relate to technological issues, a lack of understanding of the biological basis of exosome-mediated delivery also limits clinical translation.  Currently, exosomes are commonly derived from mesen-chymal stem cells (MSCs), DCs and tumour cells. However, a wide variety of cells produce exosomes which may have varying characteristics and innate targeting abilities. It will therefore be important to identify an optimum scalable source capable of providing the required quantities for each clinical application (Fig. 3.1). In this respect, embryonic stem cells (ESC) which may be differentiated into DCs [103] and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), which may be derived from patient skin fibroblasts and differentiated along different lineage pathways, are potential sources [104]. These patient-derived exosomes are likely to be immu-
nologically compatible and differentiation along a specific lineage may confer innate targeting abilities and hence
270    Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. greater delivery specificity to the subsequently derived exosomes. As mentioned above, MSCs have been immor-talised following their transfection with an oncogene [87]. Although this source requires further safety validation it could provide a sustainable and expandable exosome source.  Methods utilised for the isolation and purification of exosomes vary not only by the tissue from which they are extracted but also between different research groups. A wide range of techniques including ultrafiltration, serial ultracen-trifugation and linear sucrose gradients are currently used for exosomal isolation and purification. However, these require optimisation and standardisation to allow comparability be-tween studies (Fig. 3.2). Exosomes must also be produced to clinical grade standards to ensure a safe and homogenous source of exosomes, devoid of small size contaminants. One
potential strategy is the use of large scale immunoaffinity capture based on specific exosome markers of interest. How-ever, this requires comprehensive understanding of the bio-logical characteristics of exosomes to further distinguish them from other membrane vesicles.  The use of exosomes may be applicable to a wide range of disorders and a variety of therapeutic molecules may be suitable for exosome-mediated delivery including siRNA, miRNA, antagomirs, miRNA sponges, anti-inflammatory drug, shRNA expression plasmids and proteins such as anti-bodies. However, exosomal loading protocols require re-finement (Fig. 3.3). While Alvarez-Erviti et al.  utilised elec-troporation to load siRNA, this represents a relatively expen-sive and inefficient method [58]. Thus, prior to clinical trans-lation, more cost-effective and sustainable methods are re-quired. In this respect, the report that secreted RNAs share specific sequence motifs that may selectively target RNAs to
exosomes is intriguing [13, 14]. If such sequences may be used to selectively sequester RNA into vesicles by exploiting endogenous enrichment mechanisms this offers a potential mechanism for loading. Alternatively, short membrane-anchored DNA strands, which mimic SNARE (Soluble NSF Attachment Protein Receptor) proteins, could possibly be used to induce fusion between an exosome and a loaded liposome [105]. This technique may be beneficial given that loading protocols are further developed for liposomes. Con-versely, it will also be important to determine how therapeu-tic agents are released from exosomes once they are taken up by recipient cells. An understanding of this process may al-low for the modification of exosomes to ensure an optimal release.  Related to the challenges associated with drug loading are concerns regarding dosage. While siRNA and miRNA therapies may prove effective by regulating gene expression
and restoring natural regulatory networks it will be crucial to ensure that the endogenous miRNA processing machinery is not overwhelmed to avoid serious adverse effects. The pre-cise exosome-mediated dose required depends upon careful calculation and an understanding of the efficiency with which exosomes are delivered and taken up, the stability of the target and of the exosome-encapsulated therapy and the extent to which therapeutics may be repackaged and trans-ported to other cells. In this respect it will be critically im-portant to explore the effect of repeated administration in terms of toxicity and attenuated therapeutic efficiency.  Intravenous and intranasal routes of delivery have been investigated thus far [58, 84]. However, oral delivery may represent a promising strategy given that breast-milk is en-riched in exosomes which may modulate immunity in the newborn [106]. While this and other potential routes of de-
livery remain to be investigated, determining the optimal method of delivery is a prerequisite for developing this
newborn [106]. While this and other potential routes of de-livery remain to be investigated, determining the optimal method of delivery is a prerequisite for developing this nanotechnology (Fig. 3.4). Additional targeting strategies will also be required to allow clinical translation to a wider array of target tissues. Thus, while targeting via the RVG peptide has been reasonably successful, the same success was not achieved for targeting via the muscle specific pep-tide in vivo [58, 68]. While this is surprising given the suc-cess of previous targeting efforts utilising this peptide [107], Alvarez-Erviti et al.  suggest that this may be due to the rela-tively low targeting efficiency of this peptide and the high quantity of muscle, diluting any silencing effects [58]. Poten-tial future strategies may explore the use of novel peptides targeting additional receptors and antibody-mediated target-ing. Again, a greater understanding of the inherent properties
which mediate endogenous exosome targeting is also likely to guide the development of targeting strategies.   We have little understanding of how exosomes cross bar-riers and how specific RNAs are selected for secretion and subsequently loaded into exosomes before transportation and uptake. Elucidation of the controlling factors will aid devel-opment of knowledge-based solutions to the questions out-lined above. Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that exosomes are crucially involved in the pathogenesis of dis-ease including cancer [15], rheumatoid arthritis [108], human immunodeficiency virus [109], AD [110], PD [59] and prion diseases [111]. Thus, detailed transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of exosomes and an analysis of the effect of treat-ment upon recipient cells must be conducted to identify en-dogenous materials that potentially may elicit adverse ef-fects. Detailed characterisation may allow for strategies to
decrease the risk of any possible inherent tropism mediating off-target effects. Furthermore, delineating how exosomes are involved in the spread of pathogenesis may trigger the development of novel strategies to attenuate the negative role of exosomes in these diseases.  Understanding the biological aspects of loading, tar-geting, delivery and the endogenous content of exosomes will elucidate the com ponents which endow exosomes with the capacity for drug delivery. This may facilitate the design of artificial exosomes comprising only the factors required for their su ccess as nanocarriers.   This may be especially valuable given the unknown func-tion of a large array of endogenous RNAs which may be transported by natural exosomes. Thus, artificially created exosomes would represent a safe, homogenous and well-characterised population, containing only those characteris-tics required for drug delivery and devoid of any materials
that may mediate adverse effects. The development of such artificial exosome-like vesicles is already underway. De La Peña et al. showed that artificial exosomes, created by coat-ing liposomes with an optimised number of MHC Class I/peptide complexes and immunostimulatory ligands, were active and stimulated antigen specific T-cells [112]. More recently, Martinez-Lostao et al.  developed artificial
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    271Fig. (3). Key challenges for the development of exosome-based gene therapy. 1 ) Exosomes can be harvested from a number of sources including dendritic cells derived from bone marrow. The optimum source may vary depending on the specif ic treatment and target.  Alterna-tive sources must therefore be explored to provide a sustainable and scalable source of  exosomes. Induced pluripotent stem cell s (iPSC) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs) differentiated along different lineages may offer a promi sing source as specific lineages may provi de intrinsic targeting abilities. 2) To ensure clinical grade preparations, isolation and purification protocols mu st be refined. A range of methods are cur-rently in use and include ultrafiltration, serial ultracentrifugation, sucrose density gradient a nd magnetic bead affinity capt ure. 3) To realise
the full therapeutic potential of exosome-mediated therapy, loading techniques f or a wider repertoire of cargoes require optimi sation. Current methods centre upon the use of electroporation and simple mixing to load cargoes directly into e xosomes or transfection of the parent cell for increased exosomal expression. Short DNA oligonucleotides designed to mimic the SNARE proteins could also pot entially be used t o induce fusion between an exosome and a loaded liposome as loading mechanisms for liposomes are fur ther developed. Alternatively, it ma y be pos-sible to exploit the endogenous loading mechanisms which underlie the selective load ing of natural cargoes. 4) Incorporation of a targeting peptide into an exosomal surface protein ( e.g. RVG into LAMP2b) has been shown to enhance targeting to the brain. The ability to target a wide range of cells will require the development of additional targeting strategies which c ould potentially include antibody-me diated targeting
or chemical modification of the exosomal surface to induce binding to glycoproteins found on the plasma membrane of the  recipie nt cell. Finally, the most efficient exosome delivery method must be investigated. Potential m ethods may include intravenous and intrana sal admini-stration or oral delivery. exosomes using liposomes designed to replicate the lipid composition of exosomes [113]. Conjugation of APO2L /TRAIL, proteins that are reduced in the synovial fluid of patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, to the artificial exosome-like liposomes increased their bioactivity resulting in more effective treatment. Thus, a more detailed under-standing of the biology of exosomes will serve to refine the development of artificial exosome-like drug delivery vehi-cles. CONCLUSION  A key challenge to realising the promise offered by RNAi- and other gene-based therapies depends upon the development of vehicles capable of delivery across natural
biological barriers with high levels of efficacy and specific-ity while avoiding toxicity and immune system activation. Exosomes have been heralded as an exciting new potential tool which may be used to combine the delivery of exoge-
272    Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. nous therapeutic cargoes with the advantages of a natural nanocarrier. Such advantages include the specificity of de-livery that may be afforded by inherent targeting abilities and an ability to cross biological barriers paired with low immunogenicity and toxicity. Indeed, the first proof-of-concept studies have demonstrated the potential of an exosome-mediated strategy. Furthermore, clinical studies within the cancer field highlight the safety and potential broad therapeutic applications for which this nanotechnology may be beneficial. Several obstacles must be overcome and a greater understanding of the biological nature and function of exosomes achieved. However, if these challenges can be met, exosomes may represent an elegant novel technology harnessing a natural intercellular delivery method which may transform the field of gene therapy. CONFLICT OF INTEREST
CONFLICT OF INTEREST  Authors are funded by the Wellcome Trust and Margaret Pelly scholarship. Authors report no conflict of interest. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  Aisling O’Loughlin, Caroline Woffindale and Matthew Wood prepared the manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr. Samir El Andaloussi for comments and critical reading of the manuscript and Mr. Matthew Booth for assis-tance with figure preparation.  ABBREVIATIONS AD = Alzheimer’s Disease Aex = Ascites-Derived Exosomes AGO2 = Argonaute2 ABC transporter = ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters BBB = Blood-Brain Barrier CNS = Central Nervous System DC = Dendritic Cell Dex = DC-Derived Exosomes dsRNA = Double Stranded RNA ESC = Embryonic Stem Cell ESCRT = Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport esRNA = Exosome Shuttle RNA HCV = Hepatitis C Virus  HD = Huntington’s Disease hESC-MSC = Human Embryonic Stem Cell Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cell IDO = Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase ILV = Intraluminal Vesicle
ILV = Intraluminal Vesicle IL = Interleukin iPSC = Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell MHC = Major Histocompatibility Complex miRNA = microRNA MSC = Mesenchymal Stem Cell MSP = Muscle Specific Peptide MVB = Multivesicular Body PD = Parkinson’s Disease RISC = RNA-Induced Silencing Complex RNAi = RNA Interference RVG = Rabies Viral Glycoprotein  siRNA = Small Interfering RNA shRNA = Short Hairpin RNA SNARE = Soluble NSF Attachment Protein Re-ceptor Tex = Tumour-Derived Exosomes UTR = Untranslated Region REFERENCES [1] Conde-Vancells J, Rodriguez-Suarez E, Embade N, et al.  Charac-terization and comprehensive proteome profiling of exosomes se-creted by hepatocytes. J Proteome Res 2008; 7[12]: 5157–66. [2] Stoorvogel W, Strous GJ, Geuze HJ, Oorschot V, Schwartz AL. Late endosomes derive from early endosomes by maturation. Cell 1991; 65[3]: 417–27.  [3] Futter CE, Collinson LM, Backer JM, Hopkins CR. Human VPS34
is required for internal vesicle formation within multivesicular en-dosomes. J Cell Biol 2001; 155[7]: 1251–64.  [4] Zakharova L, Svetlova M, Fomina AF. T cell exosomes induce cholesterol accumulation in human monocytes via phosphatidylser-ine receptor. J Cell Physiol 2007; 212[1]: 174–81.  [5] Simpson RJ, Jensen SS, Lim JWE. Proteomic profiling of exosomes: current perspectives. Proteomics 2008; 8[19]: 4083–99.  [6] Mathivanan S, Lim JWE, Tauro BJ, Ji H, Moritz RL, Simpson RJ. Proteomics analysis of A33 immunoaffinity-purified exosomes re-leased from the human colon tumor cell line LIM1215 reveals a tis-sue-specific protein signature. Mol Cell Proteomics 2010; 9[2]: 197–208.  [7] Reggiori F, Pelham HR. Sorting of proteins into multivesicular bodies: ubiquitin-dependent and -independent targeting. EMBO J 2001; 20[18]: 5176–86.  [8] Trajkovic K, Hsu C, Chiantia S, et al. Ceramide triggers budding of exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes. Science 2008;
319[5867]: 1244–7.  [9] Simpson RJ, Lim JW, Moritz RL, Mathivanan S. Exosomes: pro-teomic insights and diagnostic potential. Expert Rev Proteomics
319[5867]: 1244–7.  [9] Simpson RJ, Lim JW, Moritz RL, Mathivanan S. Exosomes: pro-teomic insights and diagnostic potential. Expert Rev Proteomics 2009; 6[3]: 267–83.  [10] Morelli AE, Larregina AT, Shufesky WJ, et al.  Endocytosis, intra-cellular sorting, and processing of exosomes by dendritic cells. Blood 2004; 104[10]: 3257–66.  [11] Valadi H, Ekström K, Bossios A, Sjöstrand M, Lee JJ, Lötvall JO. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat Cell Biol 2007; 9[6]: 654–9.  [12] Gibbings DJ, Ciaudo C, Erhardt M, Voinnet O. Multivesicular bodies associate with components of miRNA effector complexes and modulate miRNA activity. Nat Cell Biol 2009; 11[9]: 1143–9.  [13] Batagov AO, Kuznetsov, Vladimir A, Kurochkin, Igor V. Identifi-cation of nucleotide patterns enriched in secreted RNAs as putative cis-acting elements targeting them to exosome nano-vesicles. BMC Genomics 2011; 12[Suppl 3]: S18.
Genomics 2011; 12[Suppl 3]: S18.  [14] Bolukbasi MF, Mizrak A, Ozdener GB,  et al.  miR-1289 and “Zip-code”-like Sequence Enrich mRNAs in Microvesicles. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 2012; 1[2]: e10. [15] Skog J, Würdinger T, van Rijn S, et al.  Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and proteins that promote tumour growth and pro-vide diagnostic biomarkers. Nat Cell Biol 2008; 10[12]: 1470–6.  [16] Lotvall J, Valadi H. Cell to cell signalling via exosomes through esRNA. Cell Adh Migr 2007; 1[3]: 156–8.
Exosome-Mediated Gene Therapy Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4    273[17] Balaj L, Lessard R, Dai L, et al.  Tumour microvesicles contain retrotransposon elements and amplified oncogene sequences. Nat Commun 2011; 2: 180.  [18] Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell 2004; 116[2]: 281–97.  [19] Baek D, Villén J, Shin C, et al. The impact of microRNAs on pro-tein output. Nature 2008; 455[7209]: 64–71.  [20] Guo H, Ingolia NT, Weissman JS, Bartel DP. Mammalian mi-croRNAs predominantly act to decrease target mRNA levels. Na-ture 2010; 466[7308]: 835–40.  [21] Djuranovic S, Nahvi A, Green R. A parsimonious model for gene regulation by miRNAs. Science 2011; 331[6017]: 550–3.  [22] Lewis BP, Burge CB, Bartel DP. Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets. Cell 2005; 120[1]: 15–20.  [23] Selbach M, Schwanhäusser B, Thierfelder N, Fang Z, Khanin R,
Rajewsky N. Widespread changes in protein synthesis induced by microRNAs. Nature 2008; 455[7209]: 58–63.  [24] Available from: http:// clinicaltrials. gov/ ct2/ results? term=siRNA&pg=1. [25] Burnett JC, Rossi JJ, Tiemann K. Current progress of siRNA/shRNA therapeutics in clinical trials. Biotechnol J 2011; 6[9]: 1130–46.  [26] Armulik A, Genové G, Mäe M, et al.  Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 2010; 468[7323]: 557–61.  [27] Willis CL. Imaging in vivo  astrocyte/endothelial cell interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Methods Mol Biol 2012; 814: 515–29.  [28] Daneman R, Zhou L, Kebede AA, Barres BA. Pericytes are re-quired for blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Na-ture 2010; 468[7323]: 562–6.  [29] Bell RD, Winkler EA, Sagare AP, et al . Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult brain and during brain aging. Neuron 2010; 68[3]: 409–27.
[30] Quaegebeur A, Segura I, Carmeliet P. Pericytes: blood-brain bar-rier safeguards against neurodegeneration? Neuron 2010; 68[3]: 321–3.  [31] Araya R, Kudo M, Kawano M, et al.  BMP signaling through BMPRIA in astrocytes is essential for proper cerebral angiogenesis and formation of the blood-brain-barrier. Mol Cell Neurosci 2008; 38[3]: 417–30.  [32] Pardridge WM. Blood-brain barrier delivery. Drug Discov Today 2007; 12[1-2]: 54–61.  [33] Schwerdt JI, Goya GF, Calatayud MP, Hereñú CB, Reggiani PC, Goya RG. Magnetic field-assisted gene delivery: achievements and therapeutic potential. Curr Gene Ther 2012; 12[2]: 116–26.  [34] Andre FM, Mir LM. Nucleic acids electrotransfer in vivo : mecha-nisms and practical aspects. Curr Gene Ther 2010; 10[4]: 267–80.  [35] Lee SW, Trapnell BC, Rade JJ, Virmani R, Dichek DA. In vivoadenoviral vector-mediated gene transfer into balloon-injured rat carotid arteries. Circ Res 1993; 73[5]: 797–807.
[36] Byrnes AP, MacLaren RE, Charlton HM. Immunological instabil-ity of persistent adenovirus vectors in the brain: peripheral expo-sure to vector leads to renewed inflammation, reduced gene expres-sion, and demyelination. J. Neurosci. 1996 May 1;16[9]:3045–55.  [37] Amalfitano A, Hauser MA, Hu H, Serra D, Begy CR, Chamberlain  JS. Production and characterization of improved adenovirus vectors with the E1, E2b, and E3 genes deleted. J Virol 1998; 72[2]: 926–33.  [38] Gonzalez SC, McMenamin MM, Charlton HM, et al.  Readminis-tration of adenoviral gene delivery to dopamine neurons. Neurore-port 2007; 18[15]: 1609–14.  [39] Marks WJ Jr, Ostrem JL, Verhagen L, et al. Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin) to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s dis-ease: an open-label, phase I trial. Lancet Neurol 2008; [5]: 400–8.  [40] Kost TA, Condreay JP, Ames RS. Baculovirus gene delivery: a flexible
assay development tool. Curr Gene Ther 2010; 10[3]: 168–73.
[40] Kost TA, Condreay JP, Ames RS. Baculovirus gene delivery: a flexible assay development tool. Curr Gene Ther 2010; 10[3]: 168–73.  [41] Mitchell AM, Nicolson SC, Warischalk JK, Samulski RJ. AAV’s anatomy: roadmap for optimizing vectors for translational success. Curr Gene Ther. 2010 Oct;10 [5]:319–40.  [42] Yi Y, Jong Noh M, Hee Lee K. Current Advances in Retroviral Gene Therapy. Curr Gene Ther 2011; 11[3]: 218–28.  [43] Khare R, Chen CY, Weaver EA, Barry MA. Advances and future challenges in adenoviral vector pharmacology and targeting. Curr Gene Ther 2011; 4: 241–58.  [44] Pannell D, Ellis J. Silencing of gene expression: implications for design of retrovirus vectors. Rev Med Virol 2001; 11[4]: 205–17.  [45] Kruis W, Fric P, Pokrotnieks J, et al . Maintaining remission of ul-cerative colitis with the probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 is a s effective as with standard mesalazine. Gut 2004; 53[11]: 1617–2 3.
[46] Paukner S, Kudela P, Kohl G, Schlapp T, Friedrichs S, Lubitz W. DNA-Loaded Bacterial Ghosts Efficiently Mediate Reporter Gene Transfer and Expression in Macrophages. Mol Ther 2005; 11[2]: 215–23.  [47] Moreno M, Kramer MG, Yim L, Chabalgoity JA. Salmonella as live trojan horse for vaccine development and cancer gene therapy. Curr Gene Ther 2010; 10[1]: 56–76.  [48] Geier MR, Trigg ME, Merril CR. Fate of bacteriophage lambda in non-immune germ-free mice. Nature 1973; 246[5430]: 221–3.  [49] Larocca D, W itte A, Johnson W, Pierce GF, Baird A. Targeting bacteriophage to mammalian cell surface receptors for gene deliv-ery. Hum Gene Ther 1998; 9[16]: 2393–9. [50] Larocca D, Jensen-Pergakes K, Burg MA, Baird A. Receptor-targeted gene delivery using multivalent phagemid particles. Mol Ther 2001; 3[4]: 476–84. [51] Jepson CD, March JB. Bacteriophage lambda is a highly stable DNA vaccine delivery vehicle. Vaccine 2004; 22[19]: 2413–9.
[52] Li S, Tseng WC, Stolz DB, Wu SP, Watkins SC, Huang L. Dy-namic changes in the characteristics of cationic lipidic vectors after exposure to mouse serum: implications for intravenous lipofection. Gene Ther 1999; 6[4]: 585–94.  [53] Zimmermann TS, Lee ACH, Akinc A, Bramlage B, Bumcrot D, Fedoruk MN, et al.  RNAi-mediated gene silencing in non-human primates. Nature 2006; 441[7089]: 111–4. [54] Schaffert D, Wagner E. Gene therapy progress and prospects: syn-thetic polymer-based systems. Gene Therapy 2008; 15[16]: 1131–8.  [55] Semple SC, Akinc A, Chen J, et al. Rational design of cationic lipids for siRNA delivery. Nat Biotechnol 2010; 28[2]: 172–6.  [56] Khurana B, Goyal AK, Budhiraja A, Arora D, Vyas SP. siRNA delivery using nanocarriers - an efficient tool for gene silencing. Curr Gene Ther 2010; 10[2]: 139–55.  [57] Tiera MJ, Shi Q, Winnik FM, Fernandes JC. Polycation-based gene therapy: current knowledge and new perspectives. Curr Gene Ther
2011; 11[4]: 288–306. [58] Alvarez-Erviti L, Seow Y, Yin H, Betts C, Lakhal S, Wood MJA. Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain by systemic injection of tar-geted exosomes. Nat Biotechnol 2011; [4]: 341–5.  [59] Alvarez-Erviti L, Seow Y, Schapira AH, et al. Lysosomal dysfunc-tion increases exosome-mediated alpha-synuclein release and transmission. Neurobiol Dis 2011; 42[3]: 360–7.  [60] Kim S-H, Lechman ER, Bianco N, et al.  Exosomes derived from IL-10-treated dendritic cells can suppress inflammation and colla-gen-induced arthritis. J Imm unol 2005; 174[10]: 6440–8. [61] Lai RC, Arslan F, Lee MM, Sze NSK, Choo A, Chen TS, et al.Exosome secreted by MSC reduces myocardial ische-mia/reperfusion injury. Stem Cell Res 2010; 4[3]: 214–22. [62] Kim SH, Bianco N, Menon R, et al.  Exosomes derived from ge-netically modified DC expressing FasL are anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive. Mol Ther 2006; 13[2]: 289–300.
[63] Record M, Subra C, Silvente-Poirot S, Poirot M. Exosomes as intercellular signalosomes and pharmacological effectors. Biochem Pharmacol 2011; 81[10]: 1171–82.
[63] Record M, Subra C, Silvente-Poirot S, Poirot M. Exosomes as intercellular signalosomes and pharmacological effectors. Biochem Pharmacol 2011; 81[10]: 1171–82.  [64] Subra C, Laulagnier K, Perret B, Record M. Exosome lipidomics unravels lipid sorting at the level of multivesicular bodies. Bio-chimie 2007; 89[2]: 205–12.  [65] Akao Y, Iio A, Itoh T, et al. Microvesicle-mediated RNA molecule delivery system using monocytes/macrophages. Mol Ther 2011; 19[2]: 395–9.  [66] Zhang Y, Liu D, Chen X, Li J, Li L, Bian Z, et al.  Secreted mono-cytic miR-150 enhances targeted endothelial cell migration. Mol Cell 2010; 39[1]: 133–44.  [67] Flint PW, Li ZB, Lehar M, Saito K, Pai SI. Laryngeal muscle sur-face receptors identified using random phage library. Laryngoscope 2005; 115[11]: 1930–7.  [68] Kumar P, Wu H, McBride JL,  et al . Transvascular delivery of small interfering RNA to the central nervous system. Nature 2007; 448[7149]: 39–43.
448[7149]: 39–43.  [69] Dominguez DI, De Strooper B, Annaert W. Secretases as therapeu-tic targets for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Amyloid 2001; 8[2]: 124–42.  [70] Kao S-C, Krichevsky AM, Kosik KS, Tsai L-H. BACE1 suppres-sion by RNA interference in primary cortical neurons. J Biol Chem 2004; 279[3]: 1942–9.
274    Current Gene Therapy, 2012 , Vol. 12, No. 4 O’Loughlin et al. [71] Pan Q, Ramakrishnaiah V, Henry S, et al.  Hepatic cell-to-cell transmission of small silencing RNA can extend the therapeutic reach of RNA interference (RNAi). Gut 2011; doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300449  [72] Kim H-W, Cho K-J, Lee SK, Kim GW. Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (Ask1) targeted small interfering RNA on ischemic neuronal cell death. Brain Res 2011; 1412: 73–8.  [73] He Z, Ostrowski RP, Sun X, et al.  CHOP Silencing Reduces Acute Brain Injury in the Rat Model of Subarachnoid Hemorrhage. Stroke 2012; 43[2]: 484-90 [74] Junn E, Mouradian MM. MicroRNAs in neurodegenerative dis-eases and their therapeutic potential. Pharmacol Ther 2012; 133[2]: 142-50. [75] Hébert SS, Horré K, Nicolaï L, et al. Loss of microRNA cluster miR-29a/b-1 in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease correlates with in-creased BACE1/beta-secretase expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2008; 105[17]: 6415–20.
U.S.A. 2008; 105[17]: 6415–20.  [76] Wang W-X, Rajeev BW, Stromberg AJ, et al. The expression of microRNA miR-107 decreases early in Alzheimer’s disease and may accelerate disease progression through regulation of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1. J Neurosci 2008; 28[5]: 1213–23.  [77] Kim J, Inoue K, Ishii J, et al. A MicroRNA feedback circuit in midbrain dopamine neurons. Science 2007; 317[5842]: 1220–4.  [78] Miñones-Moyano E, Porta S, Escaramís G, et al.  MicroRNA profil-ing of Parkinson’s disease brains identifies early downregulation of miR-34b/c which modulate mitochondrial function. Hum Mol Genet 2011; 20[15]: 3067–78.  [79] Lee S-T, Chu K, Im W-S, et al . Altered microRNA regulation in Huntington’s disease models. Exp Neurol 2011; 227[1]: 172–9.  [80] Packer AN, Xing Y, Harper SQ, Jones L, Davidson BL. The bi-functional microRNA miR-9/miR-9* regulates REST and CoREST and is downregulated in Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 2008;
28[53]: 14341–6.  [81] Ebert MS, Neilson JR, Sharp PA. MicroRNA sponges: compe titive inhibitors of small RNAs in mammalian cells. Nat Methods 2007; 4[9]: 721–6.  [82] Bianco NR, Kim SH, Ruffner MA, Robbins PD. Therapeutic effect of exosomes from indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-positive dendritic cells in collagen-induced arthritis and delayed-type hypersens itivity disease models. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60[2]: 380–9.  [83] Kim SH, Bianco NR, Shufesky WJ, Morelli AE, Robbins PD. Effective treatment of inflammatory disease models with exosomes derived from dendritic cells genetically modified to express IL-4. J Immunol 2007; 179[4]: 2242–9.  [84] Zhuang X, Xiang X, Grizzle W, et al.  Treatment of brain inflam-matory diseases by delivering exosome encapsulated anti-inflammatory drugs from the nasal region to the brain. Mol Ther 2011; 19[10]: 1769–79.  [85] Sun D, Zhuang X, Xiang X, et al.  A novel nanoparticle drug deliv-
ery system: the anti-inflammatory activity of curcumin is enhanced when encapsulated in exosomes. Mol Ther 2010; 18[9]: 1606–14.  [86] Timmers L, Lim SK, Arslan F, et al.  Reduction of myocardial infarct size by human mesenchymal stem cell conditioned medium. Stem Cell Research 2008; 1[2]: 129–37.  [87] Chen TS, Arslan F, Yin Y, et al.  Enabling a robust scalable manu-facturing process for therapeutic exosomes through oncogenic im-mortalization of human ESC-derived MSCs. J Transl Med 2011; 9: 47.  [88] Zitvogel L, Regnault A, Lozier A, et al. Eradication of established murine tumors using a novel cell-free vaccine: dendritic cell-derived exosomes. Nat Med 1998; 4[5]: 594–600.  [89] Théry C, Duban L, Segura E, Véron P, Lantz O, Amigorena S. Indirect activation of naïve CD4+ T cells by dendritic cell-derived exosomes. Nat Immunol 2002; 3[12]: 1156–62.  [90] André F, Chaput N, Schartz NEC, et al. Exosomes as potent cell-
free peptide-based vaccine. I. Dendritic cell-derived exosomes transfer functional MHC class I/peptide complexes to dendritic
[90] André F, Chaput N, Schartz NEC, et al. Exosomes as potent cell-free peptide-based vaccine. I. Dendritic cell-derived exosomes transfer functional MHC class I/peptide complexes to dendritic cells. J Immunol 2004; 172[4]: 2126–36.  [91] Chaput N, Schartz NEC, André F, et al . Exosomes as potent cell-free peptide-based vaccine. II. Exosomes in CpG adjuvants effi-ciently prime naive Tc1 lymphocytes leading to tumor rejection. J Immunol 2004; 172[4]: 2137–46.  [92] Wolfers J, Lozier A, Raposo G, et al. Tumor-derived exosomes are a source of shared tumor rejection antigens for CTL cross-priming. Nat Med 2001; 7[3]: 297–303. [93] Morse MA, Garst J, Osada T,  et al.  A phase I study of dexosome immunotherapy in patients with advanced non-small cell lung can-cer. J Transl Med 2005; 3[1]: 9.  [94] Escudier B, Dorval T, Chaput N, et al. Vaccination of metastatic melanoma patients with autologous dendritic cell (DC) derived-
exosomes: results of the first phase I clinical trial. J Transl Med 2005; 3[1]: 10. [95] Dai S, Wei D, Wu Z, et al.  Phase I clinical trial of autologous as-cites-derived exosomes combined with GM-CSF for colorectal cancer. Mol Ther 2008; 16[4]: 782–90.  [96] Yang Y, Xiu F, Cai Z, et al. Increased induction of antitumor re-sponse by exosomes derived from interleukin-2 gene-modified tu-mor cells. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2007; 133[6]: 389–99.  [97] Zhang Y, Luo C-L, He B-C, Zhang J-M, Cheng G, Wu X-H. Exosomes derived from IL-12-anchored renal cancer cells increase induction of specific an titumor response in vitro : a novel vaccine for renal cell carcinoma. Int J Oncol 2010; 36[1]: 133–40.  [98] Croce CM. Causes and consequences of microRNA dysregulation in cancer. Nat Rev Genet 2009; 10[10]: 704–14.  [99] Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, et al.  MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. Nature 2005; 435[7043]: 834–8.
[100] Calin GA, Dumitru CD, Shimizu M, et al . Frequent deletions and down-regulation of micro- RNA genes miR15 and miR16 at 13q14 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2002; 99[24]: 15524–9.  [101] Johnson SM, Grosshans H, Shingara J, et al.  RAS is regulated by the let-7 microRNA family. Cell 2005; 120[5]: 635–47.  [102] Yu F, Yao H, Zhu P,  et al.  let-7 regulates self renewal and tumori-genicity of breast cancer cells. Cell 2007; 131[6]: 1109–23.  [103] Tseng S-Y, Nishimoto KP, Silk KM, et al. Generation of immuno-genic dendritic cells from human embryonic stem cells without se-rum and feeder cells. Regen Med 2009; 4[4]: 513–26.  [104] Park I-H, Arora N, Huo H, et al. Disease-specific induced pluripo-tent stem cells. Cell 2008; 134[5]: 877–86.  [105] Stengel G, Zahn R, Höök F. DNA-induced prog rammable fusion of phospholipid vesicles. J Am Chem Soc 2007; 129[31]: 9584–5.  [106] Admyre C, Johansson SM, Qazi KR, et al. Exosomes with immune
modulatory features are present in human breast milk. J Immunol 2007; 179[3]: 1969–78.  [107] Yin H, Moulton HM, Betts C, et al.  A fusion peptide directs en-hanced systemic dystrophin exon skipping and functional restora-tion in dystrophin-deficient mdx mice. Hum Mol Genet 2009; 18[22]: 4405–14.  [108] Skriner K, Adolph K, Jungblut PR, Burmester GR. Association of citrullinated proteins with synovial exosomes. Arthritis Rheum 2006; 54[12]: 3809–14.  [109] Nguyen DG, Booth A, Gould SJ, Hildreth JEK. Evidence that HIV budding in primary macrophages occurs through the exosome re-lease pathway. J Biol Chem 2003; 278[52]: 52347–54.  [110] Rajendran L, Honsho M, Zahn TR, et al.  Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid peptides are released in association with exosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2006; 103[30]: 11172–7.  [111] Fevrier B, Vilette D, Archer F, et al.  Cells release prions in associa-tion with exosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2004; 101[26]: 9683–8.
9683–8.  [112] De La Peña H, Madrigal JA, Rusakiewicz S, et al. Artificial
tion with exosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 2004; 101[26]: 9683–8.  [112] De La Peña H, Madrigal JA, Rusakiewicz S, et al. Artificial exos omes as tools for basic and clinical immunology. J Immunol. Methods 2009; 344[2]: 121–32.  [113] Martinez-Lostao L, García-Alvarez F, Basáñez G, et al.  Liposome-bound APO2L/TRAIL is an effective treatment in a rabbit model of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2010; 62[8]: 2272–82. Received: February 08, 2012 Revised: June 14, 2012 Accepted: June 15, 2012
