September 15, 2017  ◆ Volume 96, Number 6  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  371Hair loss is often distressing and can have a significant effect on the patient’s quality of life. Patients may present to their family physician first with diffuse or patchy hair loss. Scarring alopecia is best evaluated by a dermatolo -gist. Nonscarring alopecias can be readily diagnosed and treated in the family physician’s office. Androgenetic alopecia can be diagnosed clinically and treated with minoxidil. Alopecia areata is diagnosed by typical patches of hair loss and is self-limited . Tinea capitis causes patches of alopecia that may be erythematous and scaly and must be treated systemically. Telogen effluvium is a nonscarring, noninflammatory alopecia of relatively sudden onset caused by physiologic or emotional stress. Once the precipitating cause is removed, the hair typically will regrow.
Trichotillomania is an impulse-control  disorder; treatment is aimed at controlling the underlying psychiatric condition. Trichorrhexis nodosa occurs when hairs break secondary to trauma and is often a result of hair styling or overuse of hair products. Anagen effluvium is the abnormal diffuse loss of hair during the growth phase caused by an event that impairs the mitotic activity of the hair follicle, most commonly chemotherapy. Physician support is especially important for patients in this situation. ( Am Fam Physician . 2017;96(6): 371-378 . Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians.)Hair Loss: Common Causes and TreatmentT. GRANT PHILLIPS, MD; W. PAUL SLOMIANY, MD; and ROBERT ALLISON, DO  Washington Health Systems Family Medicine Residency, Washington, PennsylvaniaPatients with hair loss will often consult their family physician first. Hair loss is not life threaten -ing, but it is distressing and sig -nificantly affects the patient’s quality of
nificantly affects the patient’s quality of life. The pattern of hair loss may be obvi -ous, such as the bald patches that occur in alopecia areata, or more subtle, such as the diffuse hair loss that occurs in telogen efflu -vium. As with most conditions, the physi -cian should begin the evaluation with a detailed history and physical examination. It is helpful to determine whether the hair loss is nonscarring (also called noncicatri -cial), which is reversible, or scarring (also called cicatricial), which is permanent. Scarring alopecia is rare and has various etiologies, including autoimmune diseases such as discoid lupus erythematosus. If the follicular orifices are absent, the alopecia is probably scarring; these patients should be referred to a dermatologist. This article will discuss approaches to nonscarring causes of alopecia.Physiology of Hair GrowthHair grows in three phases: anagen (active growing, about 90% of hairs), catagen
growing, about 90% of hairs), catagen (degeneration, less than 10% of hairs) and telogen (resting, 5% to 10% of hairs). Hair is shed during the telogen phase.Approach to the Patient  with Nonscarring AlopeciaThe history and physical examination are often sufficient to determine a specific eti -ology for hair loss. It is convenient to divide the various causes into focal (patchy) and diffuse etiologies, and proceed accordingly. Patchy hair loss is often due to alopecia areata, tinea capitis, and trichotillomania. Diffuse hair loss is commonly due to telo -gen or anagen effluvium. Androgenetic alo -pecia may be diffuse or in a specific pattern, and may progress to complete baldness.HISTORYImportant clues to the etiology of differ -ent patterns and types of hair loss are listed in Tables 1 and 2 . Hair that comes out in clumps suggests telogen effluvium. Sys -temic symptoms such as fatigue and weight gain suggest hypothyroidism, whereas a
gain suggest hypothyroidism, whereas a febrile illness, stressful event, or recent pregnancy may account for the diffuse hair loss of telogen effluvium. The use of hair products such as straightening agents or certain shampoos suggests a diagnosis of
pregnancy may account for the diffuse hair loss of telogen effluvium. The use of hair products such as straightening agents or certain shampoos suggests a diagnosis of trichorrhexis nodosa. A family history of hypothyroidism may warrant laboratory testing for this condition, whereas a family history of hair loss supports the diagnosis of androgenetic alopecia.CME This clinical content conforms to AAFP criteria for continuing medical education (CME). See  CME Quiz Questions on page 360.Author disclosure: No rel -evant financial affiliations.▲ Patient information : A handout on this topic is available at http://www.aafp.org/afp/2009/0815/p373.html .Downloaded from the American Family Physician website at www.aafp.org/afp. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians. For the private, noncom -mercial use of one individual user of the website. All other rights reserved. Contact copyrights@aafp.org for copyright questions and/or permission requests.
Hair Loss372 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 96, Number 6  ◆ September 15, 2017PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONThe physical examination should focus on the hair and scalp, but attention should be given to physical signs of any comorbid disease indicated by the review of systems. If only the scalp is involved, the physician should look for typical male or female pattern to determine the presence of androgenetic alopecia. Whole body hair loss is consistent with alopecia totalis. Dry, broken hair sug -gests trichorrhexis nodosa, whereas scaling, pustules, crusts, erosions, or erythema and local adenopathy suggest infection. The pull test may be used to diagnose hair loss conditions.1 The examiner grasps Table 1. Summary of Nonscarring AlopeciaType Significant features Treatment and commentsAlopecia areata Acute, patchy hair loss; examination shows short, vellus
hairs, yellow or black dots, and broken hair shaftsIntralesional triamcinolone acetonide injected intradermallyHigh rate of spontaneous remissionAnagen effluviumDiffuse hair loss days to weeks after exposure to a chemotherapeutic agent; incidence after chemotherapy is estimated at 65%No pharmacologic intervention has been proven effective;  scalp cooling not recommendedMinoxidil may help during regrowth periodAndrogenetic alopeciaFamily history of hair loss; gradually progressive courseMen: bitemporal thinning of the frontal and vertex scalp, complete hair loss with some hair at the occiput and temporal fringesWomen: diffuse hair thinning of the vertex with sparing of the frontal hairlineMen: topical minoxidil (2% or 5% solution)Women: topical minoxidil (2% solution)Treatment should continue indefinitely because hair loss reoccurs when treatment is discontinuedAdverse effects include hypertrichosis (excessive hair growth
for age, sex, and race) and irritant or contact dermatitisTelogen effluviumClumps of hair come out in the shower or in hairbrush; associated with physiologic or emotional stressTreatment involves removing the underlying cause and providing reassurance Condition is usually self-limited and resolves within two to  six monthsTinea capitis Dermatophyte infection of the hair shaft and follicles; patients present with patchy alopecia with or without scalingRequires systemic treatment because topical antifungals do not penetrate hair folliclesTrichophyton  species: oral terbinafine (Lamisil), itraconazole (Sporanox), fluconazole (Diflucan), or griseofulvinMicrosporum  species: griseofulvinTrichorrhexis nodosaHairs break secondary to trauma or because of fragile hair (congenital or genetic); causative traumas include excessive brushing, heat application, hairstyles that pull on hairs, and conditions that cause excessive scalp scratchingStop offending actions
Trichotillomania     Patches of alopecia, typically frontoparietal, that progress backward and may include the eyelashes and eyebrows   Optimal treatment is unknown; strong evidence is lacking for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; cognitive behavior therapy with habit reversal and medications may be more effective than either approach alonePsychiatric referral may be indicatedSORT: KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICEClinical recommendationEvidence rating ReferencesTopical minoxidil is safe and effective for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in women.B 5Alopecia areata can be treated with intralesional corticosteroids. B 11 Oral terbinafine (Lamisil), itraconazole (Sporanox), fluconazole (Diflucan), or griseofulvin is recommended for treatment of children with tinea capitis caused by Trichophyton  infections. B 2 Cognitive behavior therapy is effective for the treatment of trichotillomania, and medical therapy may be more effective when combined
therapy may be more effective when combined with cognitive behavior therapy.B 19 A = consistent, good-quality  patient-oriented  evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-
therapy may be more effective when combined with cognitive behavior therapy.B 19 A = consistent, good-quality  patient-oriented  evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality  patient-oriented  evidence; C = consensus, disease-oriented  evidence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information about the SORT evidence rating system, go to http://www.aafp.org/afpsort.
Hair LossSeptember 15, 2017  ◆ Volume 96, Number 6  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  373approximately 40 to 60 hairs at their base using the thumb, index, and middle fingers and applies gentle traction away from the scalp. A positive result is when more than 10% of hairs (four to six) are pulled from the scalp; this implies active hair shedding and suggests a diagnosis of telogen efflu -vium, anagen effluvium, or alopecia areata. However, a negative test result does not nec -essarily exclude those conditions. The pull test is difficult to standardize because the pulling force is not distributed uniformly and because it is difficult to approximate the number of hairs grasped, thereby leading to false interpretations.LABORATORY STUDIESBecause many conditions can cause hair loss, there are no routine tests to evaluate hair loss. Laboratory testing is indicated when the history or physical examination findings suggest an underlying comorbidity.
suggest an underlying comorbidity.Table 2. Common Findings, Related Diagnoses, and Workup for Hair LossCommon findings Related diagnosis Diagnostic workup and commentsAbrupt onset of hair loss Telogen effluvium related to a specific event Inquire about inciting eventGradual onset of hair loss Alopecia areata History and physical examination findings are diagnosticPull test: increased telogen-to-anagen ratio (greater than the normal ratio of 1:10)Androgenetic alopecia Family history and specific patterns are importantScarring alopecias Refer if scarring is suspectedDiffuse hair loss Alopecia totalis if more than scalp  is involvedConsider referralSystemic disease (e.g., hypothyroidism, iron deficiency, other nutritional disorder)Laboratory testing depends on history and physical examination findings: complete blood count, thyroid-stimulating hormone levelTelogen effluvium History and physical examination findings are diagnostic
Patchy hair loss Alopecia areata, trichotillomania History and physical examination findings are diagnostic Tinea capitis Obtain fungal cultures; itching, scaling, pustules, and lymphadenopathy may be presentMale or female pattern Androgenetic alopecia History and physical examination findings are diagnostic; scalp appears normal History of anxiety or psychiatric diseasesTrichotillomania Obtain psychiatric history; patient may not be forthcoming about pulling hair; pattern and appearance of hair are diagnosticHistory of extensive use of hair products or tight hairstylesTrichorrhexis nodosa History and physical examination findings are diagnostic; broken hairs seen on slight magnificationMedication use Several types of hair loss, especially telogen effluviumIf a particular medicine is suspected, a discontinuation trial  is reasonableRecent physical or emotional traumaTelogen effluvium History and physical examination findings are diagnostic; scalp
appears normal; hair loss may not be obviousSkin condition Scarring alopecia, tinea capitis; most nonscarring alopecias are associated with a relatively normal scalpHistory and physical examination findings are diagnostic Systemic symptoms  Related to systemic disease  Laboratory testing depends on history and physical  examination findings
Hair Loss374 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 96, Number 6  ◆ September 15, 2017Specific DisordersANDROGENETIC ALOPECIAAndrogenetic alopecia is the most common form of hair loss in men and women and is a normal physiologic variant. It is most preva -lent in white men, with 30%, 40%, and 50% experiencing androgenetic alopecia at 30, 40, and 50 years of age, respectively 2 (Figure 1) . Although this condition is less common in women, 38% of women older than 70 years may be affected3 (Figure 2 4). Many patients with androgenetic alopecia have a family history of this condition.Hair thinning occurs in a sex-specific  pat-tern. Men typically present with bitemporal thinning, thinning of the frontal and vertex scalp, or complete hair loss with residual hair at the occiput and temporal fringes.5 Women typically present with diffuse hair thinning of the vertex with sparing of the frontal hairline. Some women experience thinning
hairline. Some women experience thinning over the lateral scalp. Common conditions that mimic androgenetic alopecia include thyroid disease, iron deficiency anemia, and malnutrition.Treatment is based on patient preference. Topical minoxidil (2% or 5% solution) is approved for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in men. Hair regrowth is more robust at the vertex than in the frontal area, and will take six to 12 months to improve.5 Treatment should continue indefinitely because hair loss reoccurs when treatment is discontin -ued. Minoxidil 2% solution is recommended for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in women.6 Adverse effects include irritant and contact dermatitis.Finasteride (Propecia), 1 mg per day orally, is approved to treat androgenetic alopecia in men for whom topical minoxidil has been ineffective. Adverse effects of finasteride include decreased libido, erectile dysfunc -tion, and gynecomastia.7Minoxidil and oral finasteride are the
Minoxidil and oral finasteride are the only treatments currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia. Both of these drugs stimulate hair regrowth in some men, but are more effective in preventing progression of hair loss. Although there are a number of other treatments listed in various texts, there is not good evidence to support their use.8 ALOPECIA AREATAAlopecia areata is an acute, patchy alope -cia that affects up to 2% of the population with no difference between sexes 9 (Figure 3) . Approximately 20% of affected patients are children.10 The etiology is unknown, but the pathogenesis is likely autoimmune. Patients may have a single episode, or they may have remission and recurrence. The diagnosis can Figure 3.  Alopecia areata.Figure 1.  Male pattern hair loss.Figure 2.  Female pattern hair loss.Reprinted with permission from Mounsey AL, Reed SW. Diagnosing and treating hair loss. Am Fam Physician.
2009;80(4):360.
Hair LossSeptember 15, 2017  ◆ Volume 96, Number 6  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  375usually be made clinically.Hair loss in alopecia areata occurs in three different patterns: patchy alopecia is circum -scribed, oval-shaped , flesh-colored  patches on any part of the body; alopecia totalis involves the entire scalp; and alopecia uni -versalis involves the whole body. Evaluation of the scalp may reveal short vellus hairs, yellow or black dots, and broken hair shafts (which are not specific to alopecia areata). Microscopic examination of the hair follicles demonstrates exclamation mark hair (i.e., hairs that are narrower closer to the scalp and mimic an exclamation point; Figure 4 4). Nail pitting is also associated with alopecia areata. Treatment for adults with less than 50% of scalp involvement is intralesional triamcino -lone acetonide injected intradermally using a 0.5-inch , 30-gauge  needle. Maximal volume
0.5-inch , 30-gauge  needle. Maximal volume  is 3 mL per session.11 Treatment may be repeated every four to six weeks until resolu -tion or for a maximum of six months. Local adverse effects include transient atrophy and telangiectasia.Other therapies for the treatment of alope -cia areata include topical mid- to high-potency  corticosteroids, minoxidil, anthralin, immu -notherapy (diphenylcyclopropenone, squaric acid dibutylester), and systemic corticoste -roids.12 Currently available therapies often yield unsatisfactory results, and some clini -cians rely on the high rate of spontaneous remission or recommend a hairpiece or wig if remission does not occur.13TINEA CAPITISTinea capitis is a dermatophyte infection of the hair shaft and follicles that primarily affects children (Figure 5).  Risk factors include household exposure and exposure to contam -inated hats, brushes, and barber instruments. Trichophyton tonsurans  is the most common
Trichophyton tonsurans  is the most common etiology in North America.14 Transmission occurs person-to -person or from asymptom -atic carriers. Infectious fungal particles may remain viable for many months; other vectors include fallen infected hairs, animals, and fomites. Microsporum audouinii  is commonly spread by dogs and cats.Patients with tinea capitis typically present with patchy alopecia with or without scaling, although the entire scalp may be involved. Other findings include adenopathy and pruri -tus. Children may have an associated kerion, a painful erythematous boggy plaque, often Figure 5.  Hair loss from tinea capitis.Distal shaft  (normal caliber)Proximal shaft  (thinned)Club-shaped  hair rootFigure 4.  Exclamation point hair showing dis -tal broken end of shaft and proximal club-shaped  hair root.Reprinted with permission from Mounsey AL, Reed SW. Diagnosing and treating hair loss. Am Fam Physician.  2009;80(4):358.ILLUSTRATION BY DAVID KLEMM
Hair Loss376 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 96, Number 6  ◆ September 15, 2017with purulent drainage and regional lymph -adenopathy. Posterior auricular lymphade -nopathy may help differentiate tinea capitis from other inflammatory causes of alopecia. If the diagnosis is not clear from the history and physical examination, a skin scraping taken from the active border of the inflamed patch in a potassium hydroxide prepara -tion can be examined microscopically for the presence of hyphae. Skin scrapings can also be sent for fungal culture, but this is less helpful because the fungi can take up to six weeks to grow.Tinea capitis requires systemic treat -ment; topical antifungal agents do not pen -etrate hair follicles. If the causative agent is a Trichophyton  species, treatment options include oral terbinafine (Lamisil), itracon -azole (Sporanox), fluconazole (Diflucan), and griseofulvin.15 These agents have similar
and griseofulvin.15 These agents have similar efficacy rates and potential adverse effects, but griseofulvin requires a longer treatment course. Griseofulvin is the preferred treat -ment for infections caused by Microsporum  species, but definitive studies are lacking.15,16 There are limited data about empiric treat -ment before culture results are available. Because griseofulvin may have lower cure rates in the treatment of T. tonsurans  infec -tions, it may not be as effective when used empirically.15 All close contacts of patients with tinea capitis should be examined for signs of infection and treated, if necessary.TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM Telogen effluvium is a nonscarring, nonin -flammatory alopecia of relatively sudden onset, with similar incidences between sexes and age groups. It occurs when large num -bers of hairs enter the telogen phase and fall out three to five months after a physiologic or emotional stressor. The list of inciting fac -
or emotional stressor. The list of inciting fac -tors is extensive and includes severe chronic illnesses, pregnancy, surgery, high fever, mal -nutrition, severe infections, and endocrine disorders. Causative medications include retinoids, anticoagulants, anticonvulsants, beta blockers, and antithyroid medications; discontinuation of oral contraceptive agents is another possible cause.17Patients with telogen effluvium may have symptoms of an underlying condition, but are often asymptomatic. They often notice clumps of hair coming out in the shower or in their hairbrush. They should be asked to recall any potential trigger two to five months before the onset of the condition.Examination of the scalp in patients with telogen effluvium typically shows uniform hair thinning. The presence of erythema, scaling, or inflammation; altered or uneven hair distribution; or changes in shaft caliber, length, shape, or fragility may suggest other
length, shape, or fragility may suggest other diagnoses. Laboratory investigations are indi -cated if the history and physical examination findings suggest underlying systemic disor -ders (e.g., iron deficiency anemia, zinc defi -ciency, renal or liver disease, thyroid disease).Telogen effluvium is usually self-limited  and resolves within two to six months. Treat -ment involves eliminating the underlying cause and providing reassurance. Potentially causative medications should be discontin -ued, if possible. Telogen effluvium may last for years if the underlying stress continues.TRICHOTILLOMANIATrichotillomania is an impulse-control  dis-order with a mean age of onset of approxi -mately 13 years (Figure 6) . Patients with this condition consciously or unconsciously pull, twist, or twirl their hair. Trichotillomania is reported to affect as much as 4% of the pop -ulation, with the highest incidence in child -hood and adolescence.18
hood and adolescence.18Trichotillomania may be difficult to diag -nose if the patient is not forthcoming about pulling at his or her hair. Patients typically Figure 6.  Hair loss from trichotillomania.
Hair LossSeptember 15, 2017  ◆ Volume 96, Number 6  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  377present with frontoparietal patches of alope -cia that progress posteriorly and may include the eyelashes and eyebrows. Bare patches are typical, and the hair may appear uneven, with twisted or broken off hairs. Trichotil -lomania may lead to problems with self-esteem  and social avoidance. Complications include infection, skin damage, and perma -nent scarring.18The optimal treatment for this condition is not known, and psychiatric referral may be indicated. Treatment options include cogni -tive behavior therapy 19 and selective sero -tonin reuptake inhibitors, although strong evidence of a treatment effect has not been demonstrated. Preliminary evidence suggests positive treatment effects with acetylcysteine, olanzapine (Zyprexa), and clomipramine (Anafranil).19 A combination of cognitive behavior therapy and medications may be
behavior therapy and medications may be more effective than either approach alone.19 TRICHORRHEXIS NODOSATrichorrhexis nodosa occurs when hairs break secondary to trauma or because of frag -ile hair (Figure 7) . It affects the proximal hair shaft, although the distal shaft may also be involved.20 Causative traumas include exces -sive brushing, heat application, tight hair -styles, trichotillomania, and conditions that cause excessive scalp scratching. Chemical traumas include harsh hair treatments (e.g., excessive use of bleach, dye, shampoo, perms, or relaxers21) and excessive exposure to salt water. Examples of congenital or genetic conditions that may cause trichorrhexis nodosa include trichorrhexis invaginata (bamboo hair), intussusception of the hair shaft at the keratinization zone, Menkes dis -ease, keratinization defects due to defective copper metabolism, and argininosuccinic aciduria.22 Rarely, trichorrhexis nodosa can
aciduria.22 Rarely, trichorrhexis nodosa can be a manifestation of hypothyroidism.23On examination, hairs appear to have white nodes; on closer inspection, these are shown to be fracture sites along the shaft and cortex that have split into several strands. On dermoscopy, hairs look like two brooms or paint brushes thrust together.If the diagnosis is not clear, laboratory testing should include a complete blood count, iron studies, copper level, liver func -tion testing, thyroid-stimulating  hormone level, and serum and urine amino acid levels. Treatment includes avoiding or minimizing physical and chemical trauma.ANAGEN EFFLUVIUMAnagen effluvium is abnormal diffuse hair loss (usually abrupt) during the ana -gen phase due to an event that impairs the mitotic or metabolic activity of the hair folli -cle. The incidence of anagen effluvium after chemotherapy is approximately 65%24; it is most commonly associated with cyclophos -
most commonly associated with cyclophos -phamide, nitrosoureas, and doxorubicin (Adriamycin). Other causative medications include tamoxifen, allopurinol, levodopa, bromocriptine (Parlodel), and toxins such as bismuth, arsenic, and gold. Other medi -cal and inflammatory conditions, such as mycosis fungoides or pemphigus vulgaris, can lead to anagen effluvium.25 Patients typically present with diffuse hair loss that begins days to weeks after exposure to a chemotherapeutic agent and is most apparent after one or two months.26 Approx -imately 50% of women with cancer consider hair loss to be the most traumatic aspect of chemotherapy and nearly 10% would decline treatment for fear of hair loss.26,27Anagen effluvium is usually reversible, with regrowth one to three months after ces -sation of the offending agent. Permanent alo -pecia is rare. A large meta-analysis  of clinical trials concluded that scalp cooling was the  Figure 7.  Hair loss from trichorrhexis nodosa.
Hair Loss378 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 96, Number 6  ◆ September 15, 2017only intervention that significantly reduced the risk of chemotherapy-induced  anagen effluvium.27 However, scalp cooling should be discouraged because it may minimize deliv -ery of chemotherapeutic drugs to the scalp, leading to cutaneous scalp metastases.27This article updates previous articles on this topic by Mounsey and Reed4; Springer, et al.28; and Thiedke.29 Data Sources:  We searched PubMed using the key words alopecia areata, tinea capitis, trichotillomania, trichorrhexis nodosa, anagen effluvium, and telogen effluvium. We also searched reference lists from relevant articles and textbooks. Figures 1, 3, and 5 through 7 courtesy of Neil Fenske, MD, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine. The AuthorsT. GRANT PHILLIPS, MD, is the associate director of resi -dent education for the Washington (Pa.) Health Systems Family Medicine Residency Program.
Family Medicine Residency Program.W. PAUL SLOMIANY, MD, is the associate program director for the Washington Health Systems Family Medicine Resi -dency Program.ROBERT ALLISON, DO, is a clinical instructor for the Washington Health Systems Family Medicine Residency Program.Address correspondence to T. Grant Phillips, MD, Wash -ington Health Systems Family Medicine Residency, 95 Leonard Ave., Washington, PA 15304 ( e-mail : tphillips@whs.org ). Reprints are not available from the authors. REFERENCES 1. Dhurat R, Saraogi P. Hair evaluation methods:  merits and demerits. Int J Trichology. 2009; 1(2):  108-119 . 2. Wang TL, Zhou C, Shen YW, et al. Prevalence of andro -genetic alopecia in China:  a community-based  study in six cities. Br J Dermatol . 2010;  162(4):  843-847 . 3. Shapiro J. Clinical practice. Hair loss in women. N Engl  J Med . 2007;  357(16): 1620-1630 . 4. Mounsey AL, Reed SW. Diagnosing and treating hair
loss. Am Fam Physician . 2009;  80(4):  356-362 . 5. Price VH. Treatment of hair loss. N Engl J Med . 1999; 341(13): 964-973 .  6. van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Schoones J. Interventions for female pattern hair loss. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;  (5): CD007628. 7. Rittmaster RS. Finasteride. N Engl J Med . 1994;  330(2): 120-125 . 8. Banka N, Bunagan MJ, Shapiro J. Pattern hair loss in men:  diagnosis and medical treatment. Dermatol Clin . 2013;  31(1):  129-140 . 9. Gordon KA, Tosti A. Alopecia:  evaluation and treat -ment. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol . 2011;  4: 101-106 . 10. Alkhalifah A. Alopecia areata update. Dermatol Clin . 2013;  31(1): 93-108 . 11. Kumaresan M. Intralesional steroids for alopecia areata. Int J Trichology . 2010;  2(1): 63-65 . 12. Gilhar A, Etzioni A, Paus R. Alopecia areata. N Engl  J Med . 2012;  366(16):  1515-1525 . 13. Delamere FM, Sladden MM, Dobbins HM, Leonardi-Bee  J. Interventions for alopecia areata. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev . 2008;  (2): CD004413. 14. Abdel-Rahman  SM, Farrand N, Schuenemann E, et al. The prevalence of infections with Trichophyton ton -surans  in schoolchildren:  the CAPITIS study. Pediatrics . 2010;  125(5): 966-973 . 15. Chen X, Jiang X, Yang M, et al. Systemic antifungal therapy for tinea capitis in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2016; (5):  CD004685. 16. Kakourou T, Uksal U;  European Society for Pediat -ric Dermatology. Guidelines for the management of tinea capitis in children. Pediatr Dermatol . 2010;  27(3): 226-228 . 17. Goodheart HP. Goodheart’s Photoguide to Common Skin Disorders:  Diagnosis and Management.  3d ed. Phil -adelphia, Pa.:   Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;   2009:  323.  18. Franklin ME, Flessner CA, Woods DW, et al.;  Trichotil -lomania Learning Center-Scientific  Advisory Board. The child and adolescent trichotillomania impact project:  descriptive psychopathology, comorbidity, functional
impairment, and treatment utilization. J Dev Behav Pediatr . 2008;  29(6):  493-500 .
child and adolescent trichotillomania impact project:  descriptive psychopathology, comorbidity, functional impairment, and treatment utilization. J Dev Behav Pediatr . 2008;  29(6):  493-500 . 19. Ninan PT, Rothbaum BO, Marsteller FA, Knight BT, Eccard MB. A placebo-controlled  trial of cognitive-behavioral  therapy and clomipramine in trichotilloma -nia. J Clin Psychiatry . 2000;  61(1):  47-50 . 20. James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM, Neuhaus IM, eds. Diseases of the skin appendages. In:  Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin:  Clinical Dermatology. 12th ed . Philadelphia, Pa.:  Elsevier;  2016:  747-788 .  21. Mubki T, Rudnicka L, Olszewska M, Shapiro J. Evalua -tion and diagnosis of the hair loss patient:  part I. History and clinical examination. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2014; 71(3):  415.e1-415 .e15.  22. Fichtel JC, Richards JA, Davis LS. Trichorrhexis nodosa secondary to argininosuccinicaciduria. Pediatr Derma -tol. 2007;  24(1):  25-27 .
tol. 2007;  24(1):  25-27 . 23. Lurie R, Hodak E, Ginzburg A, David M. Trichorrhexis nodosa:  a manifestation of hypothyroidism. Cutis . 1996;  57(5):  358-359 . 24. Trüeb RM. Chemotherapy-induced  alopecia. Semin Cutan Med Surg . 2009;  28(1):  11-14 . 25. Kanwar AJ, Narang T. Anagen effluvium. Indian J Der -matol Venereol Leprol . 2013;  79(5):  604-612 . 26. McGarvey EL, Baum LD, Pinkerton RC, Rogers LM. Psy -chological sequelae and alopecia among women with cancer. Cancer Pract . 2001;  9(6):  283-289 . 27. Münstedt K, Manthey N, Sachsse S, Vahrson H. Changes in self-concept  and body image during alopecia induced cancer chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer . 1997;  5(2): 139-143 . 28. Springer K, Brown M, Stulberg DL. Common hair loss disorders. Am Fam Physician . 2003;  68(1):  93-102 . 29. Thiedke CC. Alopecia in women. Am Fam Physician . 2003;  67(5):  1007-1014 .
