Research paperLipophilic salts of poorly soluble compounds to enable high-dose lipidicSEDDS formulations in drug discoveryMichael Morgena,⇑, Ajay Saxenab, Xue-Qing Chenc, Warren Millera, Richard Nkansaha, Aaron Goodwina,Jon Capea, Roy Haskelld, Ching Suc, Olafur Gudmundssonc, Michael Hagemanc, Anoop Kumare,Gajendra Singh Chowanb, Abhijith Raoe, Vinay K. HolenarsipureaBend Research Inc., a division of Capsugel, 64550 Research Road, Bend, OR 97703, USAbBiopharmaceutics, Biocon Bristol-Myers Squibb R&D Centre (BBRC), Syngene International Ltd., Biocon Park, Plot 2 & 3, Bommasandra IV Phase, Bangal ore 560099, IndiacDiscovery Pharmaceutics, Bristol-Myers Squibb USA, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Route 206, Province Line Road P.O. B ox 4000, Princeton, NJ 08543, USAdDiscovery Pharmaceutics, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Bristol-Myers Squibb USA, 5 Research Pkwy, Wallingford, CT 06 492, USA
ePharmaceutical Candidate Optimization, Biocon Bristol-Myers Squibb R&D Centre (BBRC), Syngene International Ltd., Biocon Park, Plot 2 & 3, Bommas andra IV Phase,Bangalore 560099, Indiaarticle infoArticle history:Received 31 December 2016Revised 16 March 2017Accepted in revised form 20 April 2017Available online 21 April 2017Chemical compounds studied in this article:Atazanavir (PubChem CID: 198904-31-3)Keywords:Lipophilic saltAtazanavir2-naphthalene sulfonic acidDioctyl sulfosuccinic acidSEDDS formulation developmentEmulsionabstractSelf-emulsifying drug delivery systems (SEDDS) have been used to solubilize poorly water-soluble drugsto improve exposure in high-dose pharmacokinetic (PK) and toxicokinetic (TK) studies. However, theabsorbable dose is often limited by drug solubility in the lipidic SEDDS vehicle. This study focuses onincreasing solubility and drug loading of ionizable drugs in SEDDS vehicles using lipophilic counterions
to prepare lipophilic salts of drugs. SEDDS formulations of two lipophilic salts—atazanavir-2-naphthalenesulfonic acid (ATV-2-NSA) and atazanavir-dioctyl sulfosuccinic acid (ATV-Doc)—were characterized andtheir performance compared to atazanavir (ATV) free base formulated as an aqueous crystalline suspen-sion, an organic solution, and a SEDDS suspension, using in vitro ,in vivo , and in silico methods. ATV-2-NSAexhibited /C246-fold increased solubility in a SEDDS vehicle, allowing emulsion dosing at 12 mg/mL. In ratPK studies at 60 mg/kg, the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS emulsion had comparable exposure to the free-base solu-tion, but with less variability, and had better exposure at high dose than aqueous suspensions of ATV freebase. Trends in dose-dependent exposure for various formulations were consistent with GastroPlusTMmodeling. Results suggest use of lipophilic salts is a valuable approach for delivering poorly soluble com-pounds at high doses in Discovery.
pounds at high doses in Discovery./C2112017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).1. IntroductionDriven by the complexity of pharmacological targets, pharma-ceutical pipelines are increasingly ﬁlled with poorly water-soluble compounds. The factors contributing to this trend includethe addition of lipophilic residues to increase ligand-receptor afﬁn-ity, the broadening of the chemical space using combinatorialchemistry, and the use of high-throughput screening [1,2] . Highlypotent compounds may be discovered through these means, buttheir poor water solubility can lead to numerous challenges duringdevelopment—particularly, reduced systemic exposure after oraladministration [3].Poorly water-soluble molecules present a particular formula-tion challenge for high-dose studies—both in Discovery and in later
stages of development. In Discovery, high-dose studies are invalu-able in aiding early identiﬁcation of toxicity—the leading cause of
stages of development. In Discovery, high-dose studies are invalu-able in aiding early identiﬁcation of toxicity—the leading cause ofattrition at all stages of drug development [4]. High doses are alsorequired in pharmacokinetic (PK) studies, especially toxicokinetic(TK) studies, where high-exposure multiples are required to evalu-ate safety margins over the entire range of efﬁcacious exposure.Advances in the pharmaceutical sciences have producednumerous approaches to address the challenges presented bypoorly water-soluble compounds, which are designated Class IIand IV compounds in the Biopharmaceutics Classiﬁcation System(BCS). These strategies include reducing particle size to increasehttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2017.04.0210939-6411/ /C2112017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Abbreviations: 2-NSA, 2-naphthalene sulfonic acid; ATV, atazanavir; ATF-2-NSA,atazanavir-2-naphthalene sulfonic acid; ATV-Doc, atazanavir-dioctyl sulfosuccinicacid; Doc, dioctyl sulfosuccinic acid.⇑Corresponding author.E-mail address: michael.morgen@capsugel.com (M. Morgen).European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223Contents lists available at ScienceDirectEuropean Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceuticsjournal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/ejpb
the surface area and dissolution rate [5]; solubilization in cosol-vents [6]; complexation [7,8] ; formulation as solid amorphous dis-persions [9]; formation of salt forms [10]; and the use of lipidicsystems for lipophilic drugs [11]. Each approach has its limitations.For example, reducing particle size has little impact on solubility-limited exposure, solubilization in cosolvents is restricted to a lim-ited range of pharmaceutically acceptable excipients, and the bind-ing constant of inclusion complexes is often insufﬁcient tosolubilize the required dose using acceptable amounts of complex-ing agents. Solid amorphous dispersions offer improved solubiliza-tion, but are not as facile to prepare as liquid lipid-basedformulations.The formation of salt forms and the use of lipidic systems forlipophilic drugs offers particular promise in addressing the need
for stable, high-dose formulations. Salt formation using small,often inorganic, counterions is a well-established technique toincrease the dissolution rate and kinetic solubility of drug com-pounds [12–17] . Although these high-energy salts can increasethe oral bioavailability of poorly soluble ionizable compounds, thisapproach can be limited by the disproportionation of salt to thefree-drug form, with concomitant crystallization to a low-energycrystal. To prevent this, many investigators have proposed modify-ing the physiochemical properties of poorly water-soluble drugcompounds using lipophilic counterions to form lipophilic salts(sometimes referred to as ‘‘ionic liquids”) as an alternative tohigh-energy salt forms, to enable more effective formulation, deliv-ery, and oral absorption [18–23] .Lipid-based formulations have numerous desirable features;they are easy to manufacture and can increase stability, enhance
absorption, and improve bioavailability [24]. However, the drugsolubility in the lipid often limits the maximum dose deliverableusing lipid vehicles. It would be advantageous to extend the appli-cability of lipid formulations to a broader range of compounds, par-ticularly those with lower log P values (e.g., between 2 and 5) andhigher melting-point (Tm) values, such as atazanavir, the modeldrug used in the work described here.Lipophilic ion-drug pairs can markedly increase solubility inlipidic phases through a combination of two mechanisms: (1) thelipophilicity of the counterion, which can help pull the drug intoa lipid phase; and (2) the reduced crystalline forces (and T m)o fthe ion-drug pair, which tends to increase solubility in all solvents.The increased lipid solubility of such salts can facilitate develop-ment of stable, high-concentration formulations for high-dosepharmacokinetic or toxicokinetic studies, which in turn can result
in higher exposures than those achievable with formulations ofother salts or free forms of the drug. Reports have detailed theuse of lipophilic counterions to form ion-drug pairs that enablehigher drug loadings in solid lipid nanoparticles [25–27] or intooil-in-water emulsion droplets [28]. More recently, Shadid et al.showed a 2.5-fold increase in oral exposure in rats for sulfasalazinewhen formulated as an ‘‘ionic liquid” [23]. In addition, Sahbaz et al.demonstrated improved oral exposure in rats for three poorly sol-uble compounds by formulating them with a variety of lipophiliccounterions [22].The purpose of the work described here is to demonstrate thefeasibility of using lipophilic ion-drug pairs (i.e., salts) in lipid vehi-cles to enable dosing of poorly water-soluble drugs at high concen-trations for preclinical studies. Demonstrating that this promisingapproach is suitable for high-dose testing, particularly in a Discov-
ery setting, would be valuable, since solubilizing high doses of suchdrugs is difﬁcult in lipid vehicles using free-acid/free-base drugforms or typical high-energy salt forms.This study describes the use of lipophilic counterions to prepare
drugs is difﬁcult in lipid vehicles using free-acid/free-base drugforms or typical high-energy salt forms.This study describes the use of lipophilic counterions to preparelipophilic salt forms of a weakly basic drug—atazanavir (ATV)—toincrease drug solubility in a self-emulsifying drug-delivery system(SEDDS) vehicle (above that achievable with the free base and typ-ical inorganic salts of the drug) to increase the deliverable dose,enabling high-dose testing. The synthesis, characterization, formu-lation development, and in vivo PK proﬁles of the lipophilic saltsatazanavir 2-naphthalene sulfonic acid (ATV-2-NSA) andatazanavir-dioctyl sulfosuccinic (‘‘docusate”) acid (ATV-Doc) aredescribed. ATV, which is an antiretroviral drug of the protease inhi-bitor class [29–32] , was chosen as a model compound due to itslow aqueous solubility ( /C241.5lg/mL at pH 6.5) and weakly basicpKa (/C244.6). 2-naphthalene sulfonic acid (2-NSA) and dioctyl sulfo-
succinic acid (Doc) were chosen as counteracids because of theirlow pKa values [16], which result in complete protonation of ATVat intestinal pH, as well as for their pharmaceutical precedence[33,34] and low toxicity [35]. The SEDDS formulation chosen istypical of a Type II formulation in the lipid formulation classiﬁca-tion system (LFCS) described in the literature [36,37] , but wasnot optimized for ATV.2. Materials and methods2.1. MaterialsAll reagents and solvents were used as received. ATV wasobtained from Bristol-Myers Squibb (New York, New York). 2-NSA was purchased from TCI Fine Chemicals (Portland, Oregon).Docusate sodium and polysorbate 80 (Tween/C21080) were purchasedfrom Spectrum Chemical (Gardena, California). Tetrahydrofuran(THF, anhydrous) and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 1.25 M) in methanolwere obtained from Aldrich Chemical (Milwaukee, Wisconsin).Miglyol/C210812, a mixture of medium-chain triglycerides, was a kind
gift from Cremer Oleo (Hamburg, Germany). Glyceryl monocaprate(Capmul/C210MCM C10) was obtained from Abitec Corporation(Columbus, Ohio). Dimethylacetamide (DMAC), polyethylene gly-col 400 (PEG 400), and d 6dimethyl sulfoxide (d 6DMSO, 99.8%deuterated) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Belgium andUSA). Hydroxypropyl bcyclodextrin (Kleptose/C210HPB) was sourcedfrom Roquette (France). Citric acid monohydrate and sodiumhydroxide (NaOH) were purchased from Merck (India). High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade acetonitrile(ACN) and methanol were obtained from Honeywell, Burdick,and Jackson (Muskegon, Michigan). Triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) waspurchased from Thermo Scientiﬁc (Rockford, Illinois). Phosphatebutter solution (PBS) consisted of 82.1 mM NaCl, 20 mM Na 2HPO 4-/C17H2O, and 46.7 mM KH 2PO4, adjusted to pH 6.5 with 30% NaOH,and had an osmolarity adjusted to 290 mOsm/kg with 1:20.4KCl:NaCl. Methylcellulose (MethocelTMA4M) was a kind gift from
The Dow Chemical Company.2.2. Methods2.2.1. Preparation of amorphous ATV free baseAmorphous ATV free base was prepared by spray-drying ATVfree base from solution on a custom mini spray dryer designedand built at Bend Research, a division of Capsugel [9]. ATV free basewas dissolved in methanol at a concentration of 18 mg/mL andspray-dried at an inlet temperature of 65 /C176C and a nitrogen ﬂowrate of 30 standard liters per min.2.2.2. Preparation of ATV saltsThe ATV salts were prepared quantitatively by stoichiometricaddition of strong acids to the ATV free base. The 2-NSA and Docsalts were both isolated in the amorphous form. The 2-NSA saltwas also separately isolated as crystalline material. The Doc saltwas not easily isolated in the crystalline form, so only the amor-phous form was characterized.M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 213
2.2.3. Preparation of ATV-2-NSA saltAmorphous ATV-2-NSA salt was prepared by dissolving 2.27 gof ATV free base in 50 mL of methanol. To this solution, 0.74 g of2-NSA was added with stirring. The resulting solution was rotoe-vaporated to dryness and placed under vacuum overnight, yieldingan off-white solid.Crystalline ATV-2-NSA salt was prepared by dissolving 1.22 g ofATV free base in 50 mL of methanol. To this solution, 0.42 g of 2-NSA in 10 mL of methanol was added with stirring. The resultingsolution was rotoevaporated to dryness. The solid was dissolvedin 30 mL of methyl acetate with mild heating, and then cooled toambient temperature. The mixture was allowed to sit at ambienttemperature while being monitored for the appearance of crystalsover time. After 3 days, there being no further apparent increase inprecipitate, the white crystalline solid was isolated by ﬁltration,rinsed with 50 mL of methyl acetate, and then rinsed with 30 mLof diethyl ether and dried.
of diethyl ether and dried.2.2.4. Preparation of ATV-Doc saltAmorphous ATV-Doc salt was prepared by converting docusatesodium to docusic acid followed by reaction with ATV free base.Docusate sodium (1.380 g) was dissolved in 25 mL of anhydrousTHF. Methanolic HCl (2.005 g, 1.25 M) was added with stirring toproduce a white precipitate of sodium chloride. The mixture waschilled to 0 /C176C and then ﬁltered through a 0.45-lm ﬁlter, resultingin a clear solution of docusic acid. The docusic acid was added withstirring to a solution of ATV free base, 2.04 g in 75 mL of methanol,giving a clear solution that was rotoevaporated to dryness and fur-ther dried under vacuum to give an amorphous solid.Unsuccessful attempts were made to isolate crystalline ATV-Doc salt. ATV-DOC (0.445 g) was dissolved in methyl acetate(1.096 g) and placed in a freezer overnight. As this resulted in noprecipitation of crystals, diethyl ether (10.34 g), was then added
to the solution, which remained clear at room temperature. Thissolution was then placed in a freezer overnight, with solids beingobserved the next day. The sample was kept in the freezer for atotal of 4 days. Solids were harvested and analyzed by PXRD toconﬁrm the amorphous nature of the solid.2.2.5. Measurement of ATV content of saltsSolid samples of ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc salts were dissolvedin methanol in triplicate, and the concentration of the active com-pound (i.e. ATV free base equivalent) was measured using the HPLCmethod described below.2.2.6. Preparation of SEDDS vehicleThe SEDDS vehicle was prepared by combining Miglyol 812(35% w/w), Capmul MCM C10 (15% w/w), and Tween 80 (50% w/w) and heating to 80 /C176C, followed by stirring and cooling to roomtemperature.2.2.7. Measurement of solubilityTo determine the solubility of ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, andATV-Doc in the SEDDS vehicle, SEDDS vehicles containing excess
solids of each drug form were stirred for six days at ambient tem-perature. Aliquots (900 lL) were taken from each suspension induplicate and centrifuged using a Beckman OptimaTMMax ultracen-trifuge (Beckman-Coulter Inc., Danvers, Massachusetts) at470,000 gfor 20 min at 23 /C176C. The supernatants were sampledand diluted 1:10 in methanol and analyzed by HPLC. The amor-phous solubility of ATV in PBS at pH 6.5 was determined by addinga concentrated DMSO solution (5 mg/mL) of ATV free base into PBS,and using ultraviolet (UV) probes to measure the maximum con-centration reached before light scattering occurred due to phaseseparation of drug from solution [38–41] .2.2.8. Evaluation of SEDDS and SEDDS emulsion stabilityTo determine the physical stability of SEDDS formulations, solu-tions of ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc were prepared inthe SEDDS vehicles at up to 100 mg/mL and observed visually forprecipitation. The clear SEDDS formulations were diluted 1:4 by
weight with 0.01 N HCl to prepare SEDDS emulsions. The resultingemulsions were then placed onto a nutating mixer at 24 rpm at
precipitation. The clear SEDDS formulations were diluted 1:4 byweight with 0.01 N HCl to prepare SEDDS emulsions. The resultingemulsions were then placed onto a nutating mixer at 24 rpm atroom temperature. Aliquots (500 lL) were taken immediately afterpreparation and at 1- and 2-h time points and transferred to micro-centrifuge tubes. The samples were then centrifuged for 1 min at16,000 g. The supernatant was sampled and diluted 1:10 in metha-nol and analyzed by HPLC. Any precipitate was isolated and char-acterized by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD). In addition to thestability of the emulsion with respect to crystallization of the drug,the size and size stability of the emulsion droplet size of SEDDSemulsions were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS)using a BI-200SM particle size analyzer with a BI-9000AT correla-tor (Brookhaven Instruments Inc., Holtsville, NY). Measurementswere made of SEDDS emulsions at low drug concentration (1–
2 mg/mL) immediately after preparation, and after storage atambient for 24 h, in order to assess the stability of the lipid dropletsize in the emulsion.2.2.9. Measurement of composition by HPLCThe compositions of the isolated ATV salts were determined bymeasuring the amount of ATV free base equivalent in a given massof each isolated solid. Drug-containing samples were analyzed byreverse-phase (RP) HPLC using a Hewlett Packard instrument (Ser-ies 1100, Hewlett Packard Development Corp., Palo Alto, California)with a C18 column (Agilent Zorbax/C210SB-C18, 3.5 lm,75 mm /C24.6 mm) using an injection volume of 10 lL, columntemperature of 25 /C176C, and ﬂow rate of 1.5 mL/min with UV detec-tion at 254 nm. ATV had a retention time of approximately1.8 min using an isocratic method and a mobile phase of 60:40ACN:0.1% TFA in water.2.2.10. Evaluation of physical state by PXRDATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc were analyzed by
PXRD using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer (BrukerCorp., Billerica, Massachusetts) with a LynxeyeTMXE position-sensitive detector and Cu K-alpha radiation (1.54 Å). Approxi-mately 10–20 mg of powder was placed in a zero-background-holder (ZBH) sample cup containing a single-crystal silicon surfaceand covered with a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) dome. The sam-ple cup was rotated at 30 rpm in the horizontal plane, while thegoniometer was stepped through a 2 hangle of 4 /C176to 40 /C176with a0.04/C176step size at 1 s/step. The primary beam optics included a Goe-bel mirror, 1-mm dispersive slit, and a 2.5 /C176soller slit. The diffractedbeam optics included a 5.84 mm antiscatter slit and a 2.5 /C176sollerslit.2.2.11. Evaluation of thermal characteristics by modulated differentialscanning calorimetry (mDSC)The glass-transition temperatures (T g) of the amorphous spray-dried ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc isolated by rotoe-
vaporation were determined using a TA Q-1000 mDSC instrument(TA Instruments, New Castle, Delaware). Samples were prepared as5-mm compacts in hermetic T zeroTMpans (TA Instruments) withopen lids, and were equilibrated at room temperature at <5% rela-tive humidity (RH) overnight. Samples were sealed and then run inmodulated mode from /C020/C176C to 200 /C176C at 2.5 /C176C/min with ±1.5 /C176C/min modulation. T gvalues were determined using TA Instrumentsoftware and quantiﬁed as the half-height of the thermal transitionin the reversing heat-ﬂow curve.214 M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223
2.2.12. Assessment of salt formation by nuclear magnetic resonance(NMR)ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc were dissolved at 15–40 mg/mL in d 6DMSO. d1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian600-MHz Fourier transform (FT) instrument with 64 scans. Chem-ical shifts were reported in parts per million (ppm).2.2.13. Preparation of SEDDS formulations for PK studiesThe SEDDS formulations were prepared by ﬁrst dissolvingamorphous ATV free base (at 10 and 30 mg/mL); amorphousATV-2-NSA (at 10, 30, and 60 mg/mL); and amorphous ATV-Doc(at 10 and 30 mg/mL) separately in the SEDDS vehicle. SEDDSemulsions were then prepared by diluting the SEDDS formulations1:4 in 0.01 N HCl before administration. The SEDDS formulationswere diluted in acidic media instead of in media of higher pH inorder to limit the concentration of ATV free base in the aqueousphase, in which it has a propensity to crystallize. The SEDDS for-mulations were emulsiﬁed prior to dosing in order to ensure accu-
rate transfer of the dose, as the high viscosity of the (un-emulsiﬁed) SEDDS solution can make it difﬁcult to transfer the for-mulations from the dosing device to the animal during in vivo stud-ies, leading to variability in exposure. Solution formulations ofcrystalline ATV free base were prepared (at 10 and 30 mg/mL)using 10% v/v DMAC, 40% v/v PEG 400, and 15% v/v KleptoseHPB, and 35% v/v citrate buffer (citric acid monohydrate, pH 4.0,50 mM). ATV free base was not soluble at 60 mg/mL in this vehicle,so the highest dose was prepared using amorphous ATV free basein 100% PEG 400. ATV free base was also dosed as an aqueous sus-pension prepared (at 2 and 20 mg/mL, respectively, for 10 and100 mg/kg doses) in 0.5% w/w Methocel A4 M, 0.1% w/w Tween80, and 99.4% w/w water.2.3. AnimalsMale Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 280 ± 40 g were obtainedfrom the Syngene International Ltd. in-house breeding facility(Bangalore, India). All animal experiments were conducted in the
animal research Syngene facility (Bangalore, India), which is regis-tered by the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervisionof Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) and accredited by the Associ-ation for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal CareInternational (AAALAC), after approval by the Institutional AnimalEthics Committee (IAEC). The animals were fed with a standardlaboratory rodent diet (Tetragon Chemie Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India)and housed at room temperature (22 /C176C±3 /C176C) and 50% RH ± 20%RH on a 12-h light-dark cycle. All animals were fasted overnightbefore dosing. Water was provided ad libitum throughout thestudy.2.4. PK studiesTest Preparation: Cannulas were implanted in the jugular vein ofall rats and a recovery period of 24 h was provided after surgery.Cannulated rats (n = 3 per group) were fasted for approximately16 h before peroral dosing and fed 3 h after dosing. ATV free-
base suspension (at 10 and 100 mg/kg); ATV free-base solution(at 10, 30, and 60 mg/kg); ATV free-base SEDDS (at 10 and30 mg/kg); ATV-2-NSA SEDDS (at 10, 30, and 60 mg/kg); andATV-Doc SEDDS (at 10 and 30 mg/kg) formulations were adminis-tered by oral gavage using a feeding needle (5 mL/kg). Blood sam-ples (150lL) were collected from the jugular-vein catheter 0.25,0.5, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 24 h after dosing. The blood sample volumewas replaced with an equal volume of 0.9% saline. Blood sampleswere collected into tubes containing K 2EDTA (1.33 mM) and wereinverted several times to disperse the anticoagulant. They werethen kept chilled on ice until centrifugation, which occurred within30 min of sample collection. Blood was centrifuged at 10,000 gfor5 min at 4 /C176C. Plasma was harvested and transferred into tubes,which were then stored at /C070/C176C (±10 /C176C) until the samples wereanalyzed.Sample preparation for bioanalysis: An ATV calibration standard
was prepared in rat plasma by a serial dilution method for the con-
analyzed.Sample preparation for bioanalysis: An ATV calibration standardwas prepared in rat plasma by a serial dilution method for the con-centration range of 1.22–5000 nM. Aliquots (25 lL) of plasma stan-dards/study samples were quenched with 125 lL of ACNcontaining an internal standard (200 nM, ritonavir) in a MilliporeSolvinert hydrophilic plate and vortexed for 30 s. The samples werethen centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min at 4 /C176C. The eluent (2 lL)was injected onto a mass spectrometry (MS) instrument foranalysis.Ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC)-MS/MS method:A Waters Acquity UPLC/C210Integrated System (Milliford, USA) wasused to analyze samples on an RP column (Waters BEH C18,1.7lm, 2.1 /C250 mm) maintained at 4 /C176C±2 /C176C. Samples were ana-lyzed in a shallow gradient (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in 10-mMammonium formate; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a ﬂowrate of 0.5 mL/min, with a total run time of 2.5 min.
Quantitation was achieved by MS/MS detection in positive-ionmultiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode using an API 4000 MSinstrument (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) withan electrospray positive ionization (ESI) source at a capillary volt-age of 5.5 kV and a source temperature of 500 /C176C. Quadrupoles Q1and Q3 were set at unit resolution with a dwell time of 30 ms foreach MRM (705.5/335.2). Analytical data were acquired and pro-cessed using Analyst/C210software (Version 1.5, Sciex, Framingham,Massachusetts, USA). The accuracy and precision of the ATV cali-brations standard was well within the acceptance limit for the bio-analytical method (<±20% at lower limit of quantiﬁcation [LOQ]and <±15% at other concentrations).PK Data Analysis: The PK parameters for ATV were determinedby noncompartmental analysis of plasma concentration-versus-time data using KineticaTMsoftware (Version 5.1, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entiﬁc Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA). The peakconcentration (C max) and time for C max (Tmax) were recordeddirectly from experimental observations. The area under theplasma concentration-time curve (AUC 0-t) was calculated usingmixed log-linear trapezoidal rule up to the last detectable concen-tration (C last) and extrapolated to inﬁnity (AUC 0-1) by adding C last/kz to AUC 0-t.Estimation of the terminal elimination rate constant(kz) was made using a minimum of three time points with quan-tiﬁable concentrations.PK parameters were expressed as the mean plus or minus thestandard deviation (SD). An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was per-formed to assess differences between more than two groups, fol-lowed by a Tukey multiple comparisons test, whereverappropriate. Comparison between two groups was conductedusing the two-tailed t-test using GraphPad Prism/C210software (Ver-sion 5.02, (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, California, USA). A
p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.2.5. In silico PK modelingIn silico simulations used to predict drug plasma concentrationsfrom an oral dose in a fasted rat animal model were performedusing the GastroPlusTMadvanced compartmental and transit (ACAT)model (Version 9.0) by Simulations Plus Inc. Clearance and com-partment rate constants were obtained for a three-compartmentmodel, by ﬁtting intravenous (IV) bolus PK data (collected in-house) for 1- and 5-mg/kg doses. Given the extensive cytochromeP450 (CYP) metabolism of ATV [42–44] , we also ﬁt Michaelis-Menton kinetic parameters—V max(the maximum rate achievedby the enzymatic system, at saturating substrate concentration)and k m(the substrate concentration at which the enzymaticM. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 215
reaction rate is half of V max)—for liver metabolism to the IV bolusdata. The PK curves for ATV-2-NSA SEDDS and ATV solution at10, 30, and 60 mg/kg, and the ATV free-base aqueous suspensionadministered at 100 mg/kg were used in a global optimization rou-tine to ﬁt Michaelis-Menton kinetic terms for CYP metabolism inthe gut and efﬂux transporters in the gut enterocytes [45]. A pat-tern search method using the Hooke and Jeeves method was usedto match predicted AUC 0-tand predicted drug plasma concentra-tion for the average of three sets of in vivo data consisting of theSEDDS and PEG solution formulations dosed at 10, 30, and60 mg/kg. An overall effective permeability value (P eff)o f0.45 cm/s was estimated from single-pass perfusion studies of ratintestinal segments [45]. A solubility of 1.5 lg/mL at a pH of 6.5was used for the crystalline free base, and the measured ‘‘amor-phous solubility” of 65 lg/mL at pH 6.5 was used for the SEDDS
formulation. We assumed this solubility was maintained whenthe drug was in the un-ionized state. Drug partitioning from thedispersed SEDDS oil phase is expected to be rapid, and thus wastaken to be instantaneous in the model. Additionally, it wasassumed that the solubilities of the crystalline and amorphousdrug forms followed the Henderson-Hasselbalch relationship [46].3. ResultsThe purpose of this study was to demonstrate the utility of lipo-philic salts to enable dosing of poorly soluble drugs at high concen-trations. ATV was used as a model weakly basic drug compound,and 2-NSA and Doc were selected as model lipophilic counterions.The chemical structure and properties of ATV free base, 2-NSA, andDoc are shown in Fig. 1 . The solid salt forms of ATV-2-NSA andATV-Doc were characterized by PXRD, mDSC, and d1H NMR, evalu-ated for solubility and physical stability in the SEDDS vehicle, andassessed for in vivo performance.3.1. Characterization of the lipophilic salts
3.1. Characterization of the lipophilic saltsReaction of ATV free base with the two sulfonic acids, 2-NSAand Doc, gave the corresponding salt forms in high yield. TheATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc salts formed readily, as expected, sincethe pKa of ATV (4.7) is more than four units higher than the pKavalues of the strongly acidic sulfonic acid groups of 2-NSA andDoc. The ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc salts were isolated by rotoevap-oration followed by drying under high vacuum, producing solidsthat were characterized by PXRD. As shown in Fig. 2 , diffrac-tograms of the solid powders showed amorphous ‘‘halos” withno evidence of distinct diffraction peaks.The amorphous nature of ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc suggestedby PXRD analysis was supported by mDSC data, showing clear T gevents in the reversing heat ﬂow of the thermal scans. As showninFig. 3 and Table 1 , the Tgof amorphous ATV-2-NSA was 15 /C176Chigher than that of the amorphous ATV free base, and the T gof
ATV-Doc was more than 30 /C176C below that of the amorphous ATVfree base. The lower T gof ATV-Doc relative to the free base maybe due to the highly ﬂexible nature of the docusate moiety. Thedocusate sodium itself has a low T g(/C013/C176C) (data not shown).Only the ATV free base showed a recrystallization, at /C24162/C176C.The lack of a T mfor the 2-NSA salt in Fig. 3 is consistent with theamorphous nature of this sample. The 2-NSA salt sample thatwas crystallized from methyl acetate did show a T mof 172 /C176C (datanot shown).The thermal data and ATV free base content of the salts is sum-marized in Table 1 . As the table shows, the measured free baseequivalent content of the ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc salt sampleswas consistent with their theoretical values.d1H NMR spectroscopy was performed to conﬁrm the formationof ATV lipophilic salts. The aromatic region of the d1H NMR spectraof ATV free base, 2-NSA, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc are shown in
Fig. 4 , and data on the chemical shifts are shown in Table 2 . Thespectra were assigned based on the spectrum of 2-phenyl pyridine
of ATV free base, 2-NSA, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc are shown inFig. 4 , and data on the chemical shifts are shown in Table 2 . Thespectra were assigned based on the spectrum of 2-phenyl pyridine[47] in conjunction with two-dimensional correlation spectroscopy(COSY), total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY), and heteronuclearsingle-quantum correlation (HSAC) spectroscopy of the ATV freebase, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc (data not shown). As shown inthe spectra of Fig. 4 and the shift data in Table 2 , for ATV-2-NSAand ATV-Doc, the pyridyl protons (A, B, C, and D) shifted signiﬁ-cantly downﬁeld (by up to 0.52 ppm) relative to those of ATV freebase. The phenyl protons (E and F), which are further removedfrom the protonatable pyridyl ring, shifted only slightly upﬁeldand downﬁeld, respectively. The benzyl protons (G, HR, and I),which are far removed from the protonatable pyridyl group,showed essentially no shift for the two salt forms relative to their
chemical shift for the free-base form.The solubility of ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc in theSEDDS vehicle was determined by adding excess solids of eachFig. 1. Chemical structures and physicochemical properties of ATV free base, 2-NSA,and Doc.Fig. 2. PXRD results for crystalline ATV free base and amorphous ATV-2-NSA andATV-Doc.216 M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223
drug form to the SEDDS vehicle and stirring for several days toreach equilibrium. For ATV free base and ATV-2-NSA, the crys-talline form was used. For ATV-Doc, the amorphous solid was used,since crystalline ATV-Doc could not be isolated. The results aresummarized in Table 1 . Crystalline ATV-2-NSA had a 5.7-foldhigher solubility than crystalline ATV free base in the SEDDS vehi-cle. The amorphous solubility ATV-Doc in the SEDDS vehicle wasapproximately 3.7-fold higher than the crystalline solubility ofATV free base.3.2. Physical stability in SEDDS vehicle and as emulsionsThe physical stability of the various drug forms in SEDDS for-mulations at several concentrations was assessed by dissolvingthe amorphous forms of ATV free base (at 10, 30, and 60 mg/mL); ATV-2-NSA (at 30 and 60 mg/mL); and ATV-Doc (at 10, 30,and 60 mg/mL) in the SEDDS vehicle. The resulting supersaturatedsolutions were monitored for precipitation. As anticipated, the pre-
cipitation rate increased as the concentration of drug in the SEDDSvehicle increased. ATV free base at 10 and 30 mg/mL stayed insolution for up to 6 and 1.5 h, respectively, whereas at 60 mg/mL,precipitation was observed within 0.25 to 0.5 h. Due to the rapidprecipitation, no further tests were conducted with ATV free baseat 60 mg/mL. ATV-Doc had better stability in the SEDDS vehicle.At 10, 30, and 60 mg/mL, ATV-Doc solution formulations did notprecipitate for up to 6, 3.5, and 1 h, respectively. Of the three drugforms, ATV-2-NSA had the best stability in the SEDDS vehicle. Noprecipitation was observed for up to 30 h, even at 60 mg/mL.To determine if changes in physical form occurred when thesalts were added to the SEDDS vehicle, PXRD was used to comparethe crystalline precipitates isolated from the ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc SEDDS formulations to those for two controls: crystalline ATV-2-NSA (prepared by crystallization from methyl acetate) and ATV
free base. As the results in Fig. 5 show, the diffraction patternsfor crystalline solids obtained from the ATV-2-NSA and ATV-DocSEDDS vehicle match those of the crystalline ATV-2-NSA and ATVfree-base forms, respectively. This conﬁrms that ATV-2-NSA is amore stable salt in the SEDDS vehicle than ATV-Doc, which dispro-portionates to a larger extent, precipitating as the ATV free base.SEDDS emulsions were diluted to make dosing easier and toensure accurate transfer of the dose during in vivo testing. Twopotential diluents—0.01 N HCl and water—were tested. A signiﬁ-cant improvement in the emulsion stability was observed whenthe ATV-NSA SEDDS vehicle was diluted with 0.01 N HCl (5% pre-cipitation) versus water (33% precipitation). Based on these results,1:4 dilution with 0.01 N HCl was used for subsequent tests.SEDDS emulsion formulations were tested for stability toensure minimal precipitation of drug occurred between prepara-
tion of the emulsion and dosing. Table 3 summarizes the stabilityresults of SEDDS emulsions of different formulations as a functionof concentration. In this study, the potency of ATV in the super-natant of the SEDDS emulsion after centrifugation was measuredFig. 3. Reversing (top) and nonreversing (bottom) mDSC heat ﬂows for amorphous ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc.Table 1Thermal properties, ATV free base equivalent, and solubility of amorphous ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc.Physical form T m(/C176C) T g(/C176C) Theoretical ATVcontent (mgA/g)aMeasured ATVcontent (mgA/g)bATV solubility inSEDDS vehicle (mg/mL)Form isolated aftersolubility assessmentATV free base 204 105 1000 N/Ac0.75 ATV free baseATV-2-NSA 172 120 772 796 ± 3 4.30 ATV-2-NSAATV-Doc (amorph.) 73 625 613 ± 2 2.8dATV free baseamgA = mg active of ATV free base equivalent.bUncertainty shown is the SD of triplicate measurements.cN/A = not applicable.
cN/A = not applicable.d‘‘Solubility” of the amorphous form.M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 217
immediately after preparation (i.e., initial), after 1 h, and after 2 h,and the results were compared to the total potency. As the tableshows, at 10 mg/mL, the ATV free-base SEDDS emulsion concentra-tion was stable over 2 h, but signiﬁcant ATV precipitation (77%)was observed at 2 h for the 30 mg/mL ATV free-base SEDDS emul-sion. After dilution, the 30 mg/mL ATV-Doc SEDDS emulsion wasmore stable than the ATV free-base emulsion at the same concen-tration, but 1:4 dilution of the 60 mg/mL ATV-Doc SEDDS solutionwith 0.01 N HCl resulted in 82% precipitation of the ATV by 2 h.When diluted similarly, the 30 and 60 mg/mL ATV-2-NSA SEDDSsolutions resulted in emulsions that were fairly stable, with only5% to 15% loss of ATV due to precipitation. Similar dilutions of100 mg/mL ATV-2-NSA resulted in more than half the drug precip-itating from the resulting emulsion within 2 h. The emulsion dro-plet size for SEDDS emulsions, as determined by effective
diameter from DLS, was typically 200–300 nm, and did not changeappreciably over the course of 24 h after preparation.3.3. Initial PK studiesSEDDS formulations showing acceptable in vitro stability wereselected for in vivo assessment in rats: ATV free base (at 10 and30 mg/mL), ATV-2-NSA (at 10, 30, and 60 mg/mL), and ATV-Doc(at 10 and 30 mg/mL). Two control formulations—an aqueous sus-pension containing crystalline ATV free base and an organic solu-tion of ATV free base—were also tested (at 10 and 100 mg/kg,and 10, 30, and 60 mg/kg, respectively for the suspension and solu-tion). The ATV free-base solution was used as a positive control toFig. 4. d1H NMR spectra of 2-NSA, ATV-2-NSA, ATV-Doc, and ATV free base in d 6DMSO, showing that aromatic protons of the pyridyl ring and, to a lesser extent the phenylring, are shifted by protonation of the pyridyl ring by the counteracids.Table 2
Table 2Chemical shifts of aromatic protons for ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc by d1H NMR analysis.Proton position Proton designation ATV (ppm, multiplet) ATV-2-NSA (ppm, multiplet) ATV-Doc (ppm, multiplet)Pyr A 8.62 (d) 8.78 (d) 8.68 (d)Pyr B 7.29 (t) 7.75 (t) 7.50Pyr C 7.83 (t) 8.35 (t) 8.06 (t)Pyr D 7.88 (d) 8.19 (d) 8.02 (d)Ph E 7.94 (d) 7.91 (d) 7.92 (d)Ph F 7.39 (d) 7.53 (d) 7.46 (d)Bz G, H 7.16 (m) 7.16 (m) 7.16 (m)Bz I 7.10 (m) 7.10 (m) 7.10 (m)218 M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223
show the maximum exposure achievable when the dissolved-drugconcentration was maximized, whereas the ATV free-base crys-talline suspension was used as a second control to show the expo-sure resulting from the very low dissolved-drug levels supplied bythe low-energy crystalline drug form.Exposure increased with increasing dose for all three SEDDS for-mulations and for the ATV free-base solution formulations. Higher-than-dose-proportional exposure was observed for SEDDS formu-lations containing ATV free base and ATV-Doc at 10 and 30 mg/kg. This is shown by the data in Table 4 and Fig. 6 . However, afterdose normalization at 10 mg/kg, the difference between the 10 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg dose groups for these two formulations was notstatistically signiﬁcant, due to high variability observed at 30 mg/kg and the small number of animals in each group (n = 3). Due toTable 3
Kinetic stability of aqueous emulsions prepared from ATV free base, ATV-2-NSA, and ATV-Doc SEDDS formulations after dilution.Drug form SEDDS formulationconcentration (mg/mL)Total ATV concentration ofSEDDS emulsiona(mg/mL)ATV concentration in the supernatantafter centrifugation (mg/mL)Unprecipitated ATVAt 2 h (%)Initial t = 1 h t = 2 hATV free base 10 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.7 8530 6.0 1.9 1.4 1.4 23ATV-2-NSA 30 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.7 9560 12.0 12.3 11.6 10.1 84100 20.0 9.5 9.1 9.0 45ATV-Doc 30 6.0 6.3 5.9 4.8 8060 12.0 3.2 2.6 2.2 18aAfter 1:4 dilution with HCl.Table 4PK parameters (mean ± SD) of ATV following oral administration of ATV SEDDS emulsions, ATV free-base crystalline suspensions, and ATV free-base solu tions.Formulation Dose (mg/kg) C max (lg/mL) T max(h) AUC 0-1(lg/[mL h])ATV free-base SEDDS 10 0.6 (0.1) 0.8 (0.4) 1.4 (0.0)30 1.6 (0.6) 1.0 (0) 6.8 (2.4)ATV free-base crystalline suspension (control) 10 0.4 (0.1) 1.0 (0) 0.8 (0.0)100 0.5 (0.3) 0.9 (0.2) 1.6 (1.1)
100 0.5 (0.3) 0.9 (0.2) 1.6 (1.1)ATV-Doc SEDDS 10 0.7 (0.1) 1.7 (1.1) 2.0 (0.8)30 2.3 (0.4) 2.3 (1.2) 7.3 (2.0)ATV-2-NSA SEDDS 10 0.6 (0.1) 1.0 (0) 1.7 (0.4)30 2.1 (1.1) 2.2 (1.4) 8.1 (4.4)60 11.4 (1.1) 3.0 (0) 45.0 (5.6)ATV free-base solution (control) 10a0.9 (0.2) 0.5 (0) 1.6 (0.2)30a3.6 (1.3) 1.0 (0) 14.7 (3.2)60b6.7 (4.1) 3.0 (0) 33.7 (18.2)Conditions: Dosed in rats with jugular-vein cannulas (n = 3).aThe ATV free-base solutions at 10 and 30 mg/kg (i.e., 2 mg/mL and 6 mg/mL) were prepared using 10% v/v DMAC, 40% v/v PEG 400, 15% v/v Kleptose/C210HPB, and 35% v/vcitrate buffer (pH 4.0, 50 mM).bThe ATV free-base solution formulation at 60 mg/kg (i.e., 12 mg/mL) was prepared in 100% v/v PEG 400.Fig. 5. PXRD results for (a) ATV free base, (b) ATV-2-NSA crystallized from methyl acetate, (c) precipitate from ATV-2-NSA dissolved in SEDDS vehicle (100 mg /mL), and (d)
precipitate from ATV-Doc dissolved in SEDDS vehicle (120 mg/mL).M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 219
limited stability of the ATV free-base SEDDS formulation and theATV-Doc SEDDS formulation at 60 mg/mL (as shown by the datainTable 3 ), neither of these formulations was evaluated at thisconcentration.Like the ATV free-base SEDDS and ATV-Doc SEDDS formula-tions, the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation and ATV free-base solu-tion exhibited higher-than-dose-proportional exposure between10 mg/kg and 60 mg/kg. The interanimal variability for the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation at 60 mg/kg was substantially lower (acoefﬁcient of variation [CV] of 13% for AUC 0-1) than for the ATVfree-base solution (a CV of 54% for AUC 0-1), as shown by the datainTable 4 and Fig. 6 . Exposure from the ATV free-base crystallinesuspension was low at both doses tested, likely due to solubility-limited absorption.The dose responses (i.e., exposure) for the ATV-2-NSA SEDDSformulations and the two control formulations are shown inFig. 7 . Also plotted are the simulated dose responses predicted by
GastroPlusTMsimulations (note that since the simulated curves forthe ATV-2-NSA SEDDS and the ATV free-base solution overlay, onlythe former is plotted). As shown, the simulated curves for the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation, the ATV free-base solution, and the ATVfree-base suspension overlay the data well. In particular, the modelpredicts the nonlinear increase in exposure seen in the PK data forthe ATV-2-NSA SEDDS and ATV free-base solution formulations,and the low, ﬂat exposure for the ATV free-base suspension.4. DiscussionA number of technologies are available for increasing the disso-lution rate or kinetic solubility of compounds with poor aqueoussolubility to increase oral exposure in toxicology studies. However,most of these techniques have limitations in formulating for high-dose studies—both in early discovery and in later stages of preclin-ical and clinical drug development. Lipid-based formulations, in
particular, are typically most applicable to highly lipophilic com-pounds (log P > 5). Because of the desirable features of lipid-based formulations, including ease of preparation, it would beadvantageous to extend the applicability of this approach to com-pounds with lower log P values.In this study, 2-NSA and Doc lipophilic counterions were usedto prepare lipophilic ion-drug pairs to markedly increase solubilityin lipid solvents and facilitate development of stable, high-concentration formulations for high-dose studies in discovery.The physical properties of ATV-2-NSA and ATV-Doc are signiﬁ-cantly different from those of the free-base form or the commonsalt forms of ATV. For example, inorganic salt forms of weakly basicdrug compounds typically have Tmvalues greater than or equal tothat of the free base. This is true for ATV, where bisulfate and chlo-ride salts melt at approximately 213 /C176C and 204 /C176C, respectively –
much higher than the 2-NSA salt (172 /C176C). ATV-2-NSA’s lower T mrelative to the T mof the free base, chloride, and bisulfate formssuggests that ATV-2-NSA has a lower crystal lattice energy. The2-NSA may interfere with the ATV intra- or intermolecular bond-ing. In addition, the steric hindrance imposed by the bulky naph-thalene group of the 2-NSA anion likely results in a crystalstructure that is less tightly packed.The crystalline form of ATV-Doc was not easily isolated, likelydue to the ﬂexible nature of the docusate moiety, which hindersshort- and long-range ordering of the salt. Nevertheless, consistentwith the discussion above for the 2-NSA crystalline form, onewould also expect a crystalline Doc salt to have a low T m. Thelow T ms of the lipophilic salts and their resultant reduced tendencyto crystallize increase their solubility in lipid vehicles and enhanceemulsion stability, allowing effective formulation at high concen-trations to enable high doses.
trations to enable high doses.The two lipophilic salts described here have increased solubilityin the SEDDS vehicle. ATV-2-NSA has a 5.7-fold higher solubility
trations to enable high doses.The two lipophilic salts described here have increased solubilityin the SEDDS vehicle. ATV-2-NSA has a 5.7-fold higher solubilitythan ATV free base in the SEDDS vehicle. The increased lipid solu-bility of ATV-2-NSA versus ATV free base was evident in the phys-ical stability of supersaturated solutions in SEDDS vehicle preparedby dissolving the respective amorphous forms into the lipid. ATV-2-NSA prepared at 60 mg/mL, or a supersaturation ratio (c/S) ofapproximately 12.6, did not undergo any crystallization within30 h, whereas amorphous ATV free base and ATV-Doc both initiallydissolved to 60 mg/mL in the SEDDS vehicle, but crystallized to thefree base within 0.5 h and 1.5 h, respectively. This conversion tothe free base may suggest ATV-Doc undergoes a larger degree ofsalt dissociation in the vehicle than does ATV-2-NSA.As discussed in Section 3, the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS emulsion,formed by diluting the SEDDS solution 1:4 in 0.01 N HCl, had better
physical stability than either the free-base or ATV-Doc SEDDS for-mulations (as shown by the data in Table 3 ). In addition, the phys-ical stability of the SEDDS formulation diluted in HCl was betterthan that of the SEDDS formulation diluted in water. The improvedstability of the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation versus the ATV free-base SEDDS formulation in HCl, and the improved stability of ATV-2-NSA SEDDS diluted in HCl versus in water are both likely due tothe tendency of the free base to crystallize in an aqueous environ-ment. The use of the ATV-2-NSA salt, particularly in HCl, minimizesthe concentration, and therefore the crystallization rate, of the freebase.Fig. 6. Plasma concentration versus time proﬁle of ATV following oral administra-tion in rats (n = 3) from an ATV free-base solution and an ATV-2-NSA SEDDSformulation at 60 mg/kg.Fig. 7. ATV exposure in rats for ATV free-base crystalline suspension, free base
solution, and ATV-2-NSA SEDDS at different doses. The solid curves show thesimulated AUC (GastroPlusTM) as a function of dose.220 M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223
The improved physical stability of the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS emul-sion relative to the ATV free-base formulation suggests that the 2-NSA salt form can facilitate oral dosing at higher drug concentra-tions than the free-base form. Here the increased solubility of the2-NSA salt allowed effective dosing at six times higher concentra-tions than the ATV free base. That is, the 2-NSA could be dissolvedat 60 mg/mL in the lipid vehicle versus 10 mg/mL for the free base,enabling dosing of the SEDDS formulations at 60 mg/kg for the 2-NSA versus 10 mg/kg for the free base.Differences in SEDDS solubility and emulsion stability for theATV-2-NSA, ATV-Doc and ATV free-base formulations did not man-ifest in exposure differences in vivo at the two lower doses tested(i.e., 10 and 30 mg/kg). Likely, all three formulations sustained dis-solved drug concentrations long enough in vivo to allow good
absorption of the compound at these lower doses, as evident bythe similar AUC values. The exposure for the aqueous suspensionof free-base crystals was similar to that of the SEDDS formulationsat low dose, suggesting that at these doses, the crystalline solubil-ity is sufﬁcient to provide good absorption. The high permeabilityof ATV results in rapid absorption to mitigate the limitation of lowdissolved drug levels [48].At 60 mg/kg, the exposure for the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formula-tion was similar to that of the ATV free-base solution, and higherthan that of the ATV free-base suspension in SEDDS, suggestingthat the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation provided maximum dis-solved drug levels in the GI tract to drive absorption. Interanimalvariability in exposure was higher for the ATV free-base solutionformulation than for the ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation, possiblydue to precipitation of the solution formulation in vivo . This high-
lights the fact that even when high drug concentrations in cosol-vents can be achieved, the risk of in vivo precipitation, which canlead to a reduced or variable exposure, can be signiﬁcant. Ofcourse, cosolvent intolerability is another common drawback ofsuch solutions, which can limit their use in early preclinicalstudies.The ATV-crystalline aqueous suspension formulation, which is asurrogate for a clinical solid (tablet or capsule) dosage form, gave a50% lower AUC at 30 mg/kg compared to SEDDS formulations,likely due to lower solubility and dissolution rate of the crystallineform of ATV. Even at 100 mg/kg, no increase in exposure wasobserved for the crystalline suspension, limiting its utility for tox-icology studies.In this study, ATV exposure increased more than dose propor-tionally, as the dose increased from 10 to 60 mg/kg in ATV solutionand ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulations ( Fig. 7 ). For solution formula-
tions, 3- and 6-fold increases in dose resulted in 9- and 20-foldincreases in AUC0-1, respectively, as the data in Table 4 show.The observed nonlinear PK may have resulted from multiple fac-tors, including saturation of efﬂux and uptake transporters [45]and enzymatic metabolism [49]. ATV is a known substrate forefﬂux transporters, such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrugresistance-associated proteins (MRPs) [45,50] . Kis et al. showedthat in the presence of a P-gp inhibitor, the ATV efﬂux ratio wasreduced to 1.5 from 11.7 [45]. Moreover, when the ATV concentra-tion was increased substantially (to 100lM from 1 lM), the efﬂuxratio was reduced to 1, suggesting a saturable process. ATV is asubstrate and moderate inhibitor of CYP3A4 and a competitiveinhibitor of UGT1A1 [51]. Therefore, along with efﬂux saturation,saturation of enzymatic metabolism at higher doses may have alsocontributed to an increase in exposure that was higher than dose
proportional [49].In silico modeling was done in an attempt tounderstand the dose-dependent exposure seen in the rat PKstudies.Results from in silico modeling suggests that the absorption of
proportional [49].In silico modeling was done in an attempt tounderstand the dose-dependent exposure seen in the rat PKstudies.Results from in silico modeling suggests that the absorption ofcrystalline ATV is solubility-limited. In particular, the model pre-dicts the ﬂat exposure of the aqueous crystalline suspension as afunction of dose from 10 to 100 mg/kg. If absorption was primarilylimited by dissolution rate, increasing the crystalline surface areaby increasing the dose would be expected to increase the exposureacross this range. The increased exposure with dose for the SEDDSand solution formulations is therefore likely due to the higher dis-solved drug concentrations for these formulations relative to crys-talline solubility. The simulations likewise support the hypothesisthat metabolism and efﬂux contribute to the nonlinear PK, as themetabolism and efﬂux are overcome as dose increases, leading toa superlinear response with dose for the solution and ATV-2-NSA
SEDDS formulations.The increase in exposure with dose is predicted to roll overeventually due to (amorphous) solubility-limited absorption fromthe ATV-2-SEDDS and ATV free-base solution formulations. Basedon the modeling, this roll-off is not expected to occur until abovethe doses tested in this study. Experimentally, it was shown thatthe ATV tends to crystallize from the SEDDS formulation beforereaching the dose concentrations at which absorption is limitedby the amorphous solubility. The present ATV-2-SEDDS formula-tion precipitates rapidly at the 20 mg/mL dose concentration thatwould be needed to achieve 100 mg/mL (assuming the typical5 mg/kg dose volume used here). Because of this, the roll-off inexposure for the current (unoptimized) SEDDS formulation occursbetween 12 mg/mL and 20 mg/mL (60 and 100 mg/kg at 5 mL/kgdose volume) due to the limited physical stability of the supersat-urated formulations. Increasing the dose volume and/or further
optimizing the SEDDS formulation would increase the dose atwhich the roll-off in exposure occurs. The interpretation of thedose response for various formulations was aided by simulationsthat demonstrated the impact of metabolism and efﬂux, particu-larly at low dose.The results shown here demonstrate that the use of lipophilicsalts can enable high doses and dose concentrations of ATV in lipidformulations. Lipophilic salts can be formed for a variety of weaklyacidic or weakly basic drug compounds, typically using a counterion having a pKa at least several units higher (lower) than thepKa of the corresponding acidic (basic) drug molecule, to ensurerobust association. The use of lipophilic salts in lipid vehicles isespecially attractive for compounds that have moderate to lowlipophilicities and/or compounds with high lipophilicities and highTm. For these compounds, the effective lipophilicity of the com-pound can be increased, and/or the T mdecreased, both of which
raise the solubility of the drug compound in lipophilic formulationvehicles, and in the use environment following dispersion anddigestion of the vehicle.Lipophilic salts may ﬁnd utility in other formulation approachesas well, including in solid amorphous dispersions, in which theycan increase the solid state stability by increasing drug solubilityin a polymeric dispersion matrix, for example. Based on resultshere, it is expected that for weakly basic drugs, lipophilic saltsincorporated into a liquid lipid-based formulation or into a soliddispersion may limit dissolved drug concentrations in the low pHgastric environment, and therefore the resulting supersaturationand concomitant likelihood of crystallization in the intestine.5. ConclusionWe have shown that increasing the lipophilicity of an ionizablecompound by preparing a lipophilic salt is a viable approach forincreasing its lipid solubility and improving the stability of the
associated SEDDS formulation. In this study, lipophilic salts of
compound by preparing a lipophilic salt is a viable approach forincreasing its lipid solubility and improving the stability of theassociated SEDDS formulation. In this study, lipophilic salts ofATV with 2-NSA and Doc were prepared as model systems forstudying the utility of lipophilic salts of weakly basic active com-pounds with poor aqueous solubility. The physical properties ofthe two salts—including Tg,Tm, and solubility—were shown to besigniﬁcantly different from those of the ATV free base. MostM. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 221
signiﬁcantly, the solubility of crystalline ATV-2-NSA in a SEDDSformulation was determined to be 5- to 6-fold higher than thatof the crystalline free base. The ATV-2-NSA SEDDS formulation alsohad better physical stability than corresponding SEDDS ATV free-base or ATV-Doc formulations.The plasma exposure in rats provided by ATV-2-NSA at a givendose was equivalent to that provided by an ATV free-base SEDDSformulation. However, ATV-2-NSA can be dosed at a higher levelusing this formulation approach, due to its higher solubility inthe lipid SEDDS vehicle. Compared to the ATV free-base solutionformulation, the ATV-2-NSA salt at high dose had comparableexposure while reducing interanimal variability in exposure.While these in vivo results are preliminary, with limited animalnumbers and an unoptimized vehicle, they suggest this approachshows promise in enabling high-dose testing of low-solubility drugcompounds both in early Discovery and in later stages of preclini-
cal and clinical drug development. The comparison of the SEDDSformulation of the ATV-2-NSA lipophilic salt with a suspension ofATV free base in SEDDS or in aqueous vehicles, and with the solu-tion formulation of the free base, shows the potential advantage ofusing lipophilic salts paired with lipid-based formulations fordelivering high doses of low-solubility compounds. In particular,the increased solubility of the lipophilic salt in the lipid vehicleallows higher effective dosing for TK and dose-escalation studiesrelative to free-base suspensions in either aqueous or lipid vehi-cles. In addition, lipophilic salts in lipid vehicles provide highdissolved-drug levels that resist precipitation without the use ofcosolvents that can lead to uncontrolled precipitation and toadverse effects that interfere with toxicology readouts.The work described here represents a systematic approachusing in vitro ,in vivo , and in silico assessment that can be used to
guide rational selection of lipophilic-salt SEDDS formulations withresulting utility in the drug-development process. In addition, thisstudy provides a framework for using in vitro ,in vivo , and in silicoassessment to understand and select formulations for toxicologystudies.Conﬂict of interestThe authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge the contributions ofSheelendra Pratap Singh, Priyanka Ghule, and Sandhya Mandlekarfor the work described in this manuscript.This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from fundingagencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.References[1] C.A. Lipinski, Drug-like properties and the causes of poor solubility and poorpermeability, J. Pharm. Tox. Methods 44 (2000) 235–249, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s1056-8719(00)00107-6 .[2] C.A. Lipinski, F. Lombardo, B.W. Dominy, P.J. Feeney, Experimental and
computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in drugdiscovery and development settings, Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 64 (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0196-409x(96)00423-1 , 644–17.[3] C.J.H. Porter, N.L. Trevaskis, W.N. Charman, Lipids and lipid-basedformulations: optimizing the oral delivery of lipophilic drugs, Nat. Rev. DrugDisc. 6 (2007) 231–248, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrd2197 .[4] J.A. Kramer, J.E. Sagarz, D.L. Morris, The application of discovery toxicology andpathology toward the design of safer pharmaceutical lead candidates, Nat. Rev.Drug Disc. 6 (2007) 636–649, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrd2378 .[5]J.C. Chaumeil, Micronization: a method of improving the bioavailability ofpoorly soluble drugs, Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol. 20 (3) (1998) 211 .[6] Y. Miyako, N. Khalef, K. Matsuzaki, R. Pinal, Solubility enhancement ofhydrophobic compounds by cosolvents: role of solute hydrophobicity on the
solubilization effect, Int. J. Pharm. 393 (1–2) (2010) 48–54, http://dx.doi.org/
hydrophobic compounds by cosolvents: role of solute hydrophobicity on thesolubilization effect, Int. J. Pharm. 393 (1–2) (2010) 48–54, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2010.03.059 .[7] T. Loftsson, M.E. Brewster, Pharmaceutical applications of cyclodextrins. 1.Drug solubilization and stabilization, J. Pharm. Sci. 85 (10) (1996) 1017–1025,http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/js950534b .[8] R.A. Rajewski, V.J. Stella, Pharmaceutical applications of cyclodextrins. 2. Invivo drug delivery, J. Pharm. Sci. 85 (11) (1996) 1142–1169, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/js960075u .[9] W.B. Curatolo, J.A.S. Nightingale, S.M. Herbig, Utility of hydroxypropylmethylcellulose acetate succinate (HPMCAS) for Initiation and maintenanceof drug supersaturation in the GI milieu, Pharm. Res. 26 (2009) 1419–1431,http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-009-9852-z .
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-009-9852-z .[10] S. Agharkar, S. Lindenbaum, T. Higuchi, Enhancement of solubility of drug saltsby hydrophilic counterions: properties of organic salts of an antimalarial drug,J. Pharm. Sci. 65 (5) (1976) 747–749.[11] A.J. Humberstone, W.N. Charman, Lipid-based vehicles for the oral delivery ofpoorly water soluble drugs, Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 25 (1997) 103–128, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0169-409x(96)00494-2 .[12] A.T.M. Serajuddin, Salt formation to improve drug solubility, Adv. Drug Del.Rev. 59 (2007) 603–616, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j2007.05.010 .[13] S.M. Berge, L.D. Bighley, D.C. Monkhouse, Pharmaceutical salts, J. Pharm. Sci.66 (1) (1977) 1–19, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jps.2600660104 .[14] P.L. Gould, Salt selection for basic drugs, Int. J. Pharm. 33 (1–3) (1986) 201–217, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0378-5173(86)90055-4 .
[15] L.D. Bighley, S.M. Berge, D.C. Monkhouse, Salt forms of drug and absorption, in:J. Swarbrick, J.C. Boylan (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Pharmaceutical Technology,vol. 13, Marcel Dekker Inc, New York, 1996, pp. 453–499.[16] Anon, in: P.H. Stahl, C.G. Wermuth (Eds.), Handbook of Pharmaceutical Salts;Properties, Selection and Use, VHCA and Wiley-VCH, Zurich, Switzerland,2011, p. 363 .[17] G.S. Paulekuhn, J.B. Dressman, C. Saal, Trends in active pharmaceuticalingredient salt selection based on analysis of the orange book database, J.Med. Chem. 50 (26) (2007) 6665–6672, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jm701032y .[18] W.L. Hough, R.D. Rogers, Ionic liquids then and now: from solvents tomaterials to active pharmaceutical ingredients, Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan 80 (12)(2007) 2262–2269, http://dx.doi.org/10.1246/bcsj.80.2262 .[19] W.L. Hough, M. Smiglak, H. Rodríguez, R.P. Swatloski, S.K. Spear, D.T. Daly, R.D.Rogers, The third evolution of ionic liquids: active pharmaceutical ingredients,
New J. Chem. 31 (8) (2007) 1429, http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/b706677p .[20] J. Stoimenovski, D.R. MacFarlane, K. Bica, R.D. Rogers, Crystalline vs. ionicliquid salt forms of active pharmaceutical ingredients: a position paper,Pharm. Res. 27 (4) (2010) 521–526, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-009-0030-0 .[21] H.D. Williams, Y. Sahbaz, L. Ford, T.-H. Nguyen, P.J. Scammells, C.J.H. Porter,Ionic liquids provide unique opportunities for oral drug delivery: structureoptimisation and in viv o evidence of utility, Chem. Comm. 50 (2014) 1688–1690, http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c3cc48650h .[22] Y. Sahbaz, H.D. Williams, T.-H. Nguyen, J. Saunders, L. Ford, S.A. Charman, P.J.Scammells, C.J.H. Porter, Transformation of poorly water-soluble drugs intolipophilic ionic liquids enhances oral drug exposure from the lipid basedformulations, Mol. Pharm. 12 (6) (2015) 1980–1991, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/mp500790t .[23] M. Shadid, G. Gurau, J.L. Shamshina, B.-C. Chuang, S. Hailu, E. Guan, S.K.
Chowdhury, J.-T. Wu, S.A.A. Rizvi, R.J. Grifﬁn, R.D. Rogers, Sulfasalazine in ionicliquid form with improved solubility and exposure, Med. Chem. Comm. 6(2015) 1837–1841, http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c5md00290g .[24] C.J.H. Porter, H.D. Williams, N.L. Trevaskis, Recent advances in lipid-based
(2015) 1837–1841, http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c5md00290g .[24] C.J.H. Porter, H.D. Williams, N.L. Trevaskis, Recent advances in lipid-basedformulation technology, Pharm. Res. 30 (12) (2013) 2971–2975, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-013-1229-7 .[25] G.P. Zara, R. Cavalli, A. Fundarò, A. Bargoni, O. Caputo, M.R. Gasco, PK ofdoxorubicin incorporated in solid lipid nanospheres (SLN), Pharmacol. Res. 40(3) (1999) 281–286, http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/phrs.1999.0509 .[26] L. Serpe, M.G. Catalano, R. Cavalli, E. Ugazio, O. Bosco, R. Canaparo, Cytotoxicityof anticancer drugs incorporated in solid lipid nanoparticles on ht-29colorectal cancer cell line, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 58 (3) (2004) 673–680,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2004.03.026 .[27] R.S. Kalhapure, C. Mocktar, D.R. Sikwal, S.J. Sonawane, M.K. Kathiravan, A.Skelton, T. Govender, Ion pairing with linoleic acid simultaneously enhancesencapsulation efﬁciency and antibacterial activity of vancomycin in solid lipid
nanoparticles, Colloid Surf. B 117 (2014) 303–311, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.02.045 .[28] T. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Q. Peng, X. Cao, T. Gong, Z. Zhang, A novel submicronemulsion system loaded with vincristine-oleic acid ion-pair complex withimproved anticancer effect: in vitro and in vivo studies, Int. J. Nanomed. 8(2013) 1185–1196, http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/ijn.s41775 .[29] P.J. Piliero, Atazanavir: a novel HIV-1 protease inhibitor, Expert Opin. Investig.Drugs 11 (9) (2002) 1295–1301, http://dx.doi.org/10.1517/13543784.11.9.1295 .[30]D.R. Goldsmith, C.M. Perry, Atazanavir. Drugs 63 (16) (2003) 1679–1693 .[31] B.L. Musial, J.K. Chojnacki, C.I. Coleman, Atazanavir: a new protease inhibitorto treat HIV infection, Am. J. Health – Syst. Pharm. 61 (13) (2004) 1365–1374 .[32] K.F. Croom, S. Dhillon, S.J. Keam, Atazanavir—a review of its use in themanagement of HIV-1 infection, Drugs 69 (8) (2009) 1107–1140 .
[33] G. Davies, Changing the salt, changing the drug, Pharm. J. 266 (7138) (2001)322–323.[34] United States Pharmacopeia: Monograph for Docusate Sodium, < http://www.pharmacopeia.cn/v29240/usp29nf24s0_m27920.html >.[35] G.E. Woody, A.T. McLellan, C.P. O’Brien, F.S. Tennant, J. Mintz, Lack of toxicity ofhigh dose propoxyphene napsylate when used for maintenance treatment of222 M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223
addiction, Clin. Toxicol. 16 (4) (1980) 473–478, http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/15563658008989976 .[36] K. Mohsin, M. Long, C. Pouton, Design of lipid-based formulations for oraladministration of poorly water-soluble drugs: precipitation of drug afterdispersion of formulations in aqueous solution, J. Pharm. Sci. 98 (10) (2009)3582–3595, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jps.21659 .[37] C. Porter, C. Pouton, J. Cuine, W. Charman, Enhancing intestinal drugsolubilisation using lipid-based delivery systems, Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 60(2008) 673–692, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2007.10.014 .[38] S.B. Murdande, M.J. Pikal, R.M. Shanker, R.H. Bogner, Solubility advantage ofamorphous pharmaceuticals: 1. A thermodynamic analysis, J. Pharm. Sci. 99(3) (2010) 1254–1265, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jps.21903 .[39] S.B. Murdande, M.J. Pikal, R.M. Shanker, R.H. Bogner, Solubility advantage ofamorphous pharmaceuticals: II. Application of quantitative thermodynamic
relationships for prediction of solubility enhancement in structurally diverseinsoluble pharmaceuticals, Pharm. Res. 27 (2010) 2704–2714, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-010-0269-5 .[40] L. Almeida e Sousa, S.M. Reutzel-Edens, G.A. Stephenson, L.S. Taylor,Assessment of the amorphous ‘‘solubility” of a group of diverse drugs usingnew experimental and theoretical approaches, Mol. Pharm. 12 (2) (2015) 484–495, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/mp500571m .[41] G.A. Ileybare, L.S. Taylor, Liquid–liquid phase separation in highlysupersaturated aqueous solutions of poorly water-soluble drugs:implications for solubility enhancing formulations, Cryst. Growth Des. 13(2013) 1497–1509, http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/cg301679h .[42] Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Clinical Pharmacology and BiopharmaceuticsReview, Application No. 21-567, 2002. Available from < http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2003/21-567_Reyataz_BioPharmr_P1.pdf > and < http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2003/21-567_Reyataz_BioPharmr_P2.pdf >.[43] P.L. Anderson, C.L. Aquilante, E.M. Gardner, J. Predhomme, P. McDaneld, L.R.Bushman, J.H. Zheng, M. Ray, S. MaWhinney, Atazanavir pharmacokinetics ingenetically determined CYP3A5 expressors versus non-expressors, J.Antimicrob. Chemother. 64 (2009) 1071–1079, http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/15563658008989976 .[44] M.F. Wempe, P.L. Anderson, Atazanavir metabolism according to CYP3A5status: an in vitro-in vivo assessment, Drug Metab. Dispos. 39 (2011) 522–527,http://dx.doi.org/10.1124/dmd.110.036178 .[45] O. Kis, J.A. Zastre, M.T. Hoque, S.L. Walmsley, R. Bendayan, Role of drug efﬂuxand uptake transporters in atazanavir intestinal permeability and drug-druginteractions, Pharm. Res. 30 (4) (2013) 1050–1064, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11095-012-0942-y .
s11095-012-0942-y .[46] K.A. Hasselbalch, Calculation of blood pH based on the free and bound carbonicacid, and oxygen binding of blood as function of pH, Biochem. Z. 78 (1916)112–144 .[47] SBDS Database, < http://sdbs.db.aist.go.jp/sdbs/cgi-bin/cre_list.cgi >.[48] R. Meergans, R. Stefan, Dry processing of atazanavir, U.S. Patent PublicationNo. US20130224294A1, 2013, < http://www.google.com/patents/US20130224294 >.[49] M. Berlin, A. Ruff, F. Kesisoglou, W. Xu, M.H. Wang, J.B. Dressman, Advancesand challenges in PBPK modeling – analysis of factors contributing to the oralabsorption of atazanavir, a poorly soluble weak base, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm.93 (2015) 267–280, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.03.031 .[50] M.T. Huisman, J.W. Smit, K.M. Crommentuyn, N. Zelcer, H.R. Wiltshire, J.H.Beijnen, A.H. Schinkel, Multidrug resistance protein 2 (MRP2) transports HIVprotease inhibitors, and transport can be enhanced by other drugs, AIDS 16(17) (2002) 2295–2301 .
(17) (2002) 2295–2301 .[51] Bristol-Myers Squibb, Atazanavir Brieﬁng Document No. 232262, May 2003,<http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/03/brieﬁng/3950B1_01_
(17) (2002) 2295–2301 .[51] Bristol-Myers Squibb, Atazanavir Brieﬁng Document No. 232262, May 2003,<http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/03/brieﬁng/3950B1_01_BristolMyersSquibb-Atazanavir.pdf >.M. Morgen et al. / European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 117 (2017) 212–223 223
