930 www.newphytologist.orgReviewSummaryThe threat to plant survival presented by light limitation has driven the evolution ofhighly plastic adaptive strategies to either  tolerate or avoid shading by neighbouringvegetation. When subject to vegetational shading, plants are exposed to a varietyof informational signals, which include altered light quality and a reduction in lightquantity. The former includes a decrease in the ratio of red to far-red wavelengths(low R : FR) and is detected by the phytochrome family of plant photoreceptors.Monitoring of R : FR ratio can provide an  early and unambiguous warning of thepresence of competing vegetation, thereb y evoking escape responses before plantsare actually shaded. The molecular mech anisms underlying physiological responsesto alterations in light quality have now st arted to emerge, with major roles suggested
for the PIF (PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR) and DELLA families oftranscriptional regulators. Such studies suggest a complex interplay between endog-enous and exogenous signals, mediated by multiple photoreceptors. The phenotypicsimilarities between physiological responses habitually referred to as ‘the shadeavoidance syndrome’ and other abiotic stress  responses suggest plants may integratecommon signalling mechanisms to respond to multiple perturbations in their naturalenvironment.New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) doi: 10.1111/j.1469 -8137.2008.02507.xBlackwell Publishing Ltd © The Authors (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist (2008) May 200800??????Tansley reviewTansley review Tansley reviewT ansley reviewShade avoidanceKeara A. FranklinDepartment of Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester LE2 7RH, UKContentsSummary 930
ContentsSummary 930I. Introduction 931II. Shade avoidance responses 932III. Photoreceptor regulation of shade avoidance 932IV. Molecular mechanisms in shade avoidance signalling 934V. Crosstalk in shade avoidance signalling 939VI. Future perspectives 940Acknowledgements 940References 940Author for correspondence:Keara A. FranklinTel: +44 116 2525302Fax: +44 116 2522791Email: kaf5@leicester.ac.ukReceived: 5 March 2008Accepted: 11 April 2008Key words: DELLA, phytochrome, PIF (PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR), red to far-red ratio (R : FR), shade avoidance.
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 931I. IntroductionAs sessile photoautotrophs, plants must continuously adjusttheir growth and development to optimize photosyntheticactivity in fluctuating conditions. This developmental plasti-city is achieved through the perception, transduction andintegration of multiple environmental signals. In addition toproviding a key energy resource for photosynthesis, lightsignals provide plants with important spatial and temporalinformation about their surr ounding environment. Light
signals are perceived by specialized information-transducingphotoreceptors which include the red (R) and far-red (FR)light-absorbing phytochromes and the blue/UV-A light-absorbing cryptochromes and phototropins (see Section III).Phytochromes are reversibly photochromic biliproteins whichexist in two photo-convertible isomers, a biologically inactivered light-absorbing Pr form, and a biologically active far-redlight-absorbing Pfr form. Phytochromes are synthesized inthe Pr form and acquire biological activity following photo-transformation to the Pfr form (reviewed in Schäfer & Nagy,2006). In natural light environments, phytochrome exists ina dynamic equilibrium of Pr and Pfr forms, the relative pro-portions of each being largely determined by ambient lightquality. The parameter commonly used to describe the lightquality of natural environments is the ratio of photon irradi-ance in the red region of the spectrum to that in the FR region(termed R : FR ratio). This relates directly to
R : FR ratio). This relates directly to the propertiesof phytochrome and is often more precisely defined as thefollowing:
Eqn 1The R : FR ratio of daylight has been shown to vary littlewith weather conditions or season (Holmes & Smith, 1977),but undergoes daily fluctuations at dawn and dusk, periodscommonly referred to as twilight. During twilight periods,solar elevation drops below 10 °, increasing the path length ofthe solar beam through the earth’s atmosphere. This results inenhanced absorption and scattering of shorter wavelengthsin the outer atmosphere, enhancing the proportion of longerwavelengths at the earth’s surface. T wilight periods are there-fore often associated with a significant drop in R : FR, parti-cularly at northern latitudes where twilight duration is alsoenhanced. The magnitude and duration of twilight reductionsin R : FR can provide important seasonal information to borealspecies, regulating processes such as bud development in sometrees (Linkosalo & Lechowicz, 2006).The most significant alteration in R : FR occurs when
daylight is reflected from (o r transmitted through) livingvegetation. Preferential absorption of red and blue wavebandsby chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments results in the selectiveenrichment of lesser absorbed regions of the spectrum inreflected/transmitted light. The latter include green and FRwavebands, making plants appear green to the human eye.Although not detectable by human vision, the greatest enrich-ment occurs in FR wavelengths, thereby reducing the R : FRratio. The low R : FR ratio signal of reflected light can provideearly warning of the presence and proximity of neighbouringvegetation, enabling the initiation of adaptive developmentalstrategies to either tolerate or avoid vegetational shade beforecanopy closure. When shaded by neighbouring vegetation,plants additionally experience a reduction in light quantity (in
particular photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), 400–700 nm) and elevated concentrations of the gaseous hormoneethylene (see Section V). The integration of multiple environ-mental stimuli therefore enables plants to distinguish betweenthe threat of vegetational shading (proximity perception) andactual shading (shade perception), ensuring initiation of theappropriate developmental response. The spectral photondistribution of daylight and daylight filtered through Arabi-dopsis leaves is shown in Fig. 1. In this experiment, a singleArabidopsis leaf filter covering the spectroradiometer sensorreduced the PAR of daylight from 1500 to 120 µmol m−2s−1and the R : FR ratio from 1.2 to 0.2. Further reductions ofPAR and R : FR to 40 µmol m−2s−1 and 0.1, respectively,were recorded following the addition of a second leaf. Thesedata highlight the dramatic alteration in light quality andsignificant reduction in PAR experienced by plants developingR:F Rphoton irradiance between 660 and 670 nm
photon irradi=aance between 725 and 735 nmFig. 1 Spectral photon distribution of daylight and daylight filtered through Arabidopsis leaves. Spectra were recorded at noon during October in Leicester, UK. 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 932under a vegetational canopy. The ability of individual plantsto effectively tolerate or avoid shading by neighbouring vege-tation thereby significantly enhances competitiveness, andultimately the probability of reproductive success, in rapidlygrowing populations.II. Shade avoidance responsesConsiderable intra- and interspecies variation occurs in theresponse of plants to vegetative shade and is thought to conferselective advantage in different ecological habitats. In shade-tolerant species such as Alocasia macrorrhiza , leaves display
adaptations in photosynthetic structures to optimize efficiencyat low light intensities. These include thinner leaves, higherchlorophyll content and lens-shaped epidermal cells to focuslight within mesophyll tissue (Boardman, 1977; Middleton,2001). In shade-avoiding species (e.g. Sinapis alba , Chenopodiumalbum ), perception of low R : FR results in a suite of develop-mental responses, collectively referred to as the ‘shade avoidancesyndrome’ (Smith & Whitelam, 1997). The most strikingphenotypes observed in dicotyledonous plants subject to lowR : FR are a rapid elongation of stems and leaves (Morgan &Smith, 1976, 1978, 1981) and an up ward reorientation of leaves(leaf hyponasty) (Whitelam & Johnson, 1982). These adapta-tions serve to elevate leaves within the canopy, a response thatis likely to enhance light-foragi ng capacity in dense stands andenable plants to overtop competing vegetation. Indeed, hori-zontally propagated, reflected FR  within the lower vegetational
strata of canopies has been sh own to be a major regulatorysignal controlling stem elongation in shade-avoiding species(Ballaré et al., 1987, 1990). The rate of stem elongationresponses to targeted supplementary FR was measured inSinapis alba seedlings by Harry Smith and colleagues, usinglinear voltage displacement transducers and a fibreoptic lightsource (Morgan et al., 1980). An increase in stem elongationrate was recorded following a lag phase of just 10–15 min,demonstrating the rapidity of this response.Additional responses to low R : FR include reduced leafchlorophyll content and increased apical dominance (Smith& Whitelam, 1997). If the reduced R : FR ratio signal persistsand the plant is unable to overtop competing vegetation,flowering is accelerated, thereby promoting seed set andenhancing the probability of reproductive success (Hallidayet al., 1994; Dudley & Schmitt, 1995; Donohue et al., 2001).
These adaptations are often accompanied by reductions inleaf area, shoot biomass and the size of harvestable organs, alikely consequence of the reallocation of resources towardsreproductive structures (Keiller & Smith, 1989; Robson et al.,1993; Devlin et al., 1996, 1999). An Arabidopsis thalianaplant grown in high and low R : FR light is shown in Fig. 2.Elongation of petioles, reduced leaf area and decreased leafchlorophyll are clearly visible. In monocotyledonous plants,low R : FR-induced increased apical dominance results in sig-nificantly reduced tiller format ion, reduced harvest yield andincreased risk of lodging, making shade avoidance a majordeterminant in crop planting density (reviewed in Kebrom &Brutnell, 2007).III. Photoreceptor regulation of shade avoidance1. PhytochromesAngiosperms contain three major types of phytochromes,phyA, phyB and phyC, the apoproteins of which are encodedby the genes PHYA , PHYB  and PHYC , respectively. In the
model species A. thaliana , five phytochrome genes ( PHYA -PHYE ) have been sequenced and characterized (Sharrock &Quail, 1989; Clack et al., 1994). These can be divided intotwo subgroups based on sequence homology: PHYA /PHYCand PHYB /PHYD/PHYE (Goosey et al., 1997). Responses to
Quail, 1989; Clack et al., 1994). These can be divided intotwo subgroups based on sequence homology: PHYA /PHYCand PHYB /PHYD/PHYE (Goosey et al., 1997). Responses tolow R : FR ratio are primarily mediated by phyB, which actsto restrain shade avoidance responses under high R : FRconditions. Mutants deficient in phyB mimic growth ofwild-type plants in low R : FR ratios and display phenotypesreferred to as ‘constitutive shade avoidance’ (López-Juezet al., 1990; N agatani et al., 1991; Somers et al., 1991). Theinvolvement of additional phytochromes was suggested,following observations of residual shade avoidance responsesin phyB mutants of multiple species (Whitelam & Smith, 1991;Smith et al., 1992; Robson et al., 1993). The isolation of anaturally occurring phyD mutation in the Wassilewskija (Ws)
accession of Arabidopsis enabled the role of this phytochromein shade avoidance to be examined. Similar elongationresponses to end of day (EOD-FR) treatments were observedin phyD mutants and control plants containing an introgressedfunctional PHYD  allele (Aukerman et al., 1997). In plantsgrown in light : dark cycles, EOD-FR treatment mimics growthin low R : FR by decreasing Pfr amounts before the onset ofdarkness, thereby maintaining a low Pfr throughout the darkperiod. Functional roles for phyD were, however, observedfollowing the creation and analyses of multiple mutantcombinations. Double mutants, deficient in phyB and phyD,displayed longer hypocotyls, longer petioles and earlierflowering than either monogenic parent, suggesting thatFig. 2 Arabidopsis thaliana  grown in 16 h photoperiods of high red to far red (R : FR) (a) and low R : FR light (b).
to far red (R : FR) (a) and low R : FR light (b). 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 933phyD acts redundantly with phyB in mediating thesuppression of shade avoidance (Aukerman et al., 1997;Devlin et al., 1999). An additional regulatory role for phyEwas proposed following the isolation of mutants deficient inthis photoreceptor (Devlin et al., 1998). In an elegantlydevised screen, the authors exploited observations thatphyAphyB  double mutants treated with EOD-FR displayedvisibly elongated internodes between rosette leaves andflowered early when compared with untreated controls.Mutagenized phyAphyB  mutant seed was grown inlight : dark cycles and plants d isplaying phenotypes consistentwith EOD-FR treatment were identified. Sequencing ofresulting mutants revealed a single base-pair deletion at thePHYE  locus, implicating a role for this photoreceptor in the
suppression of these responses (Devlin et al., 1998). Similar tophyD  mutants, monogenic  phyE  mutants displayed noobvious phenotype, suggesting that phyE acts redundantlywith phyB and phyD in the suppression of shade avoidance(Devlin et al., 1998). A role for phyC was dismissed followingobservations that phyBphyDphyE  triple mutants treated withlow R : FR displayed no further elongation or promotion offlowering (Franklin et al., 2003).In contrast to other phytochromes, phyA displays lightlability in the Pfr form and accumulates to relatively highamounts in etiolated seedlings. Accumulated phyA can beenvisaged to function as a highly sensitive antenna, triggeringthe germination and subsequent photomorphogenesis ofburied seeds following a brief exposure to light (Smith &Whitelam, 1990). The unique properties of phyA enablethis photoreceptor to operate as an effective FR sensor in thehigh irradiance response (HIR) mode (Hennig et al., 2000).
Mutants deficient in phyA are unable to de-etiolate in con-tinuous FR, a property which formed the basis of screens formutants null at the PHYA  locus (Nagatani et al., 1993; Parks& Quail, 1993; Whitelam et al., 1993). The ability of phyAto function as a FR sensor has implications for R : FR ratiosignalling. In low R : FR conditions, the photoequilibrium ofphyB, D and E is shifted to the inactive Pfr form, whilst phyAsignalling is enhanced through the FR-HIR response mode.Mutants deficient in phyA have been shown to displayenhanced responses to low R : FR, suggesting that phyA mayperform an important role in natural light environments in‘antagonizing’ shade avoidance ( Johnson et al., 1994; Salteret al., 2003). This suggestion is supported, in part, byobservations showing phyA mutants grown in dense vegeta-tional shade to display excessive elongation, with many seedlingsfailing to become established and dying prematurely (Yanovsky
et al., 1995). Given the extreme nature of the shade treatmentin these experiments, it could be argued that in most naturallight environments, the adaptive significance of this phyA-mediated ‘antagonism’ is limited and may simply represent anunavoidable consequence of the physical properties of phyA,the evolutionary selection of which was driven by the impor-tance of this photoreceptor in seedling de-etiolation.Monocotyledonous plants contai n only three phytochromes,phyA, phyB and phyC (Mathews & Sharrock, 1996, 1997).In maize ( Zea mays ), duplications have arisen in all threefamily members (Sheehan et al., 2004). Mutants deficient inphyB have been isolated in multiple species, including rice(Oryza sativa ), barley ( Hordeum vulgare ), maize and sorghum(Sorghum bicolour ). The roles of different phytochromes in
phyB have been isolated in multiple species, including rice(Oryza sativa ), barley ( Hordeum vulgare ), maize and sorghum(Sorghum bicolour ). The roles of different phytochromes ingrasses are less clear than in Arabidopsis and it is likely that allmay play a role in the suppression of shade avoidance. Inmaize, both phyB alleles (phyB1 and phyB2) display func-tional redundancy in the suppression of leaf elongation andapical dominance. Partial redundancy was, however, observedbetween these alleles in the regulation of mesocotyl elongationand flowering time, where phyB1 and phyB2 were observedto predominate respectively (Sheehan et al., 2007). Sorghummutants deficient in phyB1 ( ) have been reported toconstitutively display some phenotypes consistent with shadeavoidance (Pao & Morgan, 1986; Childs et al., 1997), whilstanalyses of rice mutants, deficient in individual and multiplecombinations of phytochromes, have revealed a role for all
three family members in the repression of flowering (Takanoet al., 2005).2. CryptochromesWhen subject to vegetational shading, plants experience asignificant reduction in light quantity, in particular red andblue wavebands, which are absorbed by the canopy and usedto drive photosynthesis (Fig. 1). In higher plants, sensitivity toblue wavebands is conferred primarily by the flavoproteins,cryptochromes and phototropins (Cashmore et al., 1999;Briggs & Huala, 1999) with suggested blue light-sensing rolesfor the proteins FKF1, ZTL/ADO and LKP2 (Somers et al.,2000; Schultz et al., 2001; Imaizumi et al., 2003). Whengrowing in dense stands, reductions in blue light quantity areperceived by stems well before  leaves are shaded (Ballaré et al.,1987, 1991b). Glasshouse experiments using selectivespectral filters have shown the removal of blue wavelengthsto result in pronounced stem elongation in multiple species(Ballaré et al., 1991a,b). Similar elongation responses were
not observed following the removal of green wavelengths,confirming the blue light specificity of this response. Increasedleaf hyponasty has also been observed in tobacco plants sub-ject to reduced photon irradiances of blue light (Pierik et al.,2004b). Reductions in blue light quantity can therefore elicitsome physiological responses characteristic of low R : FR ratioperception.Cryptochromes show structural similarity to DNA photo-lyases and regulate an array of developmental responsesthroughout plant photomorphogenesis (Briggs & Huala,1999). In Arabidopsis, the blue light-mediated inhibition ofhypocotyl growth is regulated by two cryptochromes (cry1and cry2), which differ in light lability and fluence ratespecificity (Ahmad et al., 1995; Lin et al., 1998). An additionalmaR3
3 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 934cryptochrome (cry3) has been identified in Arabidopsis andshown to function as a single-stranded DNA photolyase(Selby & Sancar, 2006). At higher photon irradiances ofblue light, cry1 function predominates in the inhibition ofhypocotyl growth. Under these conditions, cry2 displaysconsiderable light lability (Lin et al., 1998). At lower photonirradiances ( <1µ m o lm−2s−1), cry2 displays greater stabilityand performs a significant role in the inhibition ofhypocotyl growth, thereby enhancing blue light sensitivity inlight-limiting conditions (Lin et al., 1998). When grown inhigh-photon-irradiance white light, elongated hypocotylswere observed in cry1 but not cry2 mutants (Mazzella et al.,2001). Double mutants deficient in both photoreceptorsdisplayed greater elongation than cry1 monogenic mutants,
suggesting a redundant role for cry2 in suppressing thisresponse (Mazzella et al., 2001). It is therefore likely that cry1and cry2 are the primary photoreceptors mediating elonga-tion responses to reductions in blue light quantity. Reversal ofArabidopsis cry1 function by green light (500–600 nm) wassuggested by Lin et al. (1995) following the identificationof a green light-absorbing, flavin semiquinone state of thisphotoreceptor. More recently, a similar semi-reduced state hasbeen identified for Arabidopsis cry2 (Banjeree et al., 2007).Observations showing increased hypocotyl length followinggreen light supplementation of red and blue light mixturessuggest that, under certain conditions, green light may reversecryptochrome-mediated growth inhibition (Folta, 2004, Boulyet al., 2007). The possibility therefore exists that in light
reflected from/transmitted through living vegetation, the effectsof reduced blue light quantity are further exacerbated by greenlight-mediated inactivation of cryptochrome signalling.3. PhototropinsT wo phototropins (phot1 and phot2) have been identifiedin Arabidopsis (Christie et al., 1998; Jarillo et al., 1998) anddisplay overlapping regulatory roles in plant development.These include the control of directional growth in responseto directional light (phototropism), intracellular chloroplastmovement in response to light quantity and leaf expansion(Jarillo et al., 2001; Sakai et al., 2001; Sakamoto & Briggs,2002). A recent study has additionally shown that phot1(and to a lesser extent, phot2) performs a significant role inpromoting plant growth in lo w intensities of blue light(Takemiya et al., 2005). In these experiments, the additionof low-photon-irradiance blue light (0.1 µmol m−2s−1) to abackground of red light (25 µmol m−2s−1) resulted in a
marked increase in leaf expansion and plant biomass. Thisresponse was severely attenuated in phot1  mutants and abolishedin phot1phot2  double mutants. The authors propose that theblue light-mediated increases in plant biomass may result,in part, from phototropin-mediated increases in chloroplastaccumulation and stomatal opening. Furthermore, growth ofphot1phot2  double mutants in low-photon-irradiance whitelight (25 µmol m−2s−1) resulted in a striking reduction inplant biomass when compared with wild-type controls andmonogenic parents. This phenotype was not observed at ahigher photon irradiance (70 µmol m−2s−1), suggesting amajor role for phototropins in mediating plant growth anddevelopment in conditions of low light quantity (Takemiyaet al., 2005).IV. Molecular mechanisms in shade avoidance signallingThe most significant developments in shade avoidance research
over the past decade have undoubtedly resulted from theidentification of multiple R : FR ratio-regulated genes andelucidation of molecular mechanisms by which phytochromescontrol their expression. Early observations reporting stemelongation to occur within 1 0–15 min of FR supplementation
appeared to preclude the involvement of gene expressionchanges in the initiation of these responses (Morgan et al.,1980). Quantitative kinetic analyses of low R : FR-mediatedgene expression later revealed similar rapidity, presenting anexciting opportunity to investigate the molecular mechanismscontrolling these responses (Salter et al., 2003). The combinedresearch efforts of both the photomorphogenesis and gibberellinsignalling fields have recently converged, providing a moreholistic understanding of how plants regulate elongationgrowth at the molecular level. In this review, I present a(simplified) hypothetical model of how plants may initiateelongation growth following perception of low R : FR (Fig. 3).The mechanisms presented are based on evidence frompublished literature and are described in detail throughoutthis section.1. R : FR ratio-regulated genesResearch efforts to identify R : FR ratio-regulated genes pro-
gressed considerably following the development of microarraytechnology (Devlin et al., 2003; Salter et al., 2003; Sessa et al.,2005). Before this, the only genes reported to be reversiblyregulated by changes in R : FR were the transcription factorsATHB2  (formerly HAT4 ) and ATHB4  (Carabelli et al., 1993,1996). Both are members of the homeodomain leucine zipper(HDZip) family of transcription factors and interact with theDNA binding site CAATNATTG (Henriksson et al., 2005).T ranscript abundance of ATHB2 was shown to increase rapidlyfollowing low R : FR and EOD-FR treatments (Carabelliet al., 1996). This response was partially retained in phyBmutants, suggesting the involvement of additional phyto-chromes (Carabelli et al., 1996). Subsequent analysis ofmultiple phytochrome-deficient mutants revealed phyE toact redundantly with phyB to suppress ATHB2 expression(Franklin  et al., 2003). A role for ATHB2 in the regulation of
shade avoidance was proposed following analyses of transgenicplants, expressing altered abundances of ATHB2  transcript 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 935(Schena et al., 1993; Steindler et al., 1999). Plants expressingelevated abundances of ATHB2  displayed reduced apicaldominance and earlier flowering, phenotypes reminiscent ofthe shade avoidance syndrome (Schena et al., 1993). Areciprocal phenotype was observed in plants expressing anantisense ATHB2  construct, which displayed shorter statureand a reduced developmental rate (Schena et al., 1993). Plantsexpressing elevated abundances of ATHB2  were subsequentlyobserved to display reduced growth of secondary tissues anddecreased lateral root formation, phenotypes associated withaltered auxin transport (Steindler et al., 1999). Such observa-
tions suggested the involvement of auxin in shade avoidancesignalling, a notion which has gained increased credence inrecent years (see Section V).Microarray-based investigations have enabled additional genesdisplaying robust R : FR rever sibility to be identified. Ina study by the Whitelam laboratory, transcripts eroding thebHLH transcription factors PIL1  (PIF3 LIKE1) and a closehomologue, PIL2, were shown to  display rapid up-regulationby low R : FR treatment (Salter et al., 2003). These proteinswere named based on their close sequence similarity to a groupof phytochrome-binding bHLH transcription factors termedPHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTORs (PIFs)(see later). Differences in the responsivity of PIL1  and PIL2  tolow R : FR were recorded at different times of day, suggestingthe possible involvement of the circadian clock in their regu-lation. In a series of free-running experiments, the authorsestablished circadian gating of both gene expression and
Fig. 3 Hypothetical model depicting molecular mechanisms controlling red to far red ratio (R : FR)-mediated elongation growth. (a) In daylight, phyB exists predominantly in the Pfr form (Pfr B). Phytochrome A Pfr (Pfr A)  is degraded in both the cytosol and the nucleus. Following import into the nucleus, Pfr B binds PIF4 (and PIF5 proteins), resulting in their degradation via the 26S proteosome. The binding of DELLA and PIF proteins simultaneously results in PIF inactivation. An enhancement of DELLA activity relative to PIF4 activity results in the suppression of genes involved in elongation growth. (b) In vegetational shade, a reduction in R : FR results in conversion of phyB Pfr to the inactive Pr form, which dissociates from PIFs and exits the nucleus, increasing PIF stability. Antagonism of shade avoidance is provided by phyA operating in the high irradiance response (HIR) mode. In low R : FR, a small pool of cycled phyA is protected from
a small pool of cycled phyA is protected from degradation and binds some PIF4 protein, targeting it for degradation. The overall increase in PIF4 activity results in increased expression of genes involved in elongation growth. These include genes involved in the biosynthesis of gibberellin (GA). (c) In prolonged vegetational shade, GA concentrations may increase, thus enhancing DELLA degradation. Increased DELLA degradation would further enhance PIF stability, resulting in prolonged elongation growth. 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 936hypocotyl elongation responses to low R : FR. Intriguingly,plants expressing altered abundances of PIL1 displayed aphase shift in the timing of maximal hypocotyl elongationresponse. Further connections between PIL1 and the circadianclock are provided by the reported physical interaction ofPIL1 with the central oscillator component TOC1 (Makinoet al., 2002) and observations that pil1 null mutants displayreduced light-regulated expression of the putative clockcomponent PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR 9  (PPR9 )(Khanna et al., 2006). A confusing observation from theSalter et al. study involved the relative timings of different lowR : FR ratio-mediated responses.  Gene expression responses to
low R : FR were observed to occur maximally post-subjectivedawn, whereas hypocotyl elongation displayed maximumresponsivity pre-subjective dusk (Salter et al., 2003). Elongationresponses to R : FR therefore mapped on to the period ofmaximum seedling elongation observed in free-runningexperiments (Dowson-Day & Millar, 1999), yet were at variancewith the timing of gene expression responses. This apparenttemporal paradox has recently been addressed in a seminalstudy by Nozue et al. (2007) and is discussed later in this section.Global analysis of low R : FR ratio-mediated gene expressionhas additionally revealed a number of genes associated withcell wall loosening and auxin signalling to be up-regulated inlow R : FR, including a number of the indole-3-acetic acid(IAA) family of auxin-regulated transcription factors (Devlinet al., 2003). In a later study, the bHLH transcription factorHFR1 , the auxin responsive gene IAA29  and the xyloglucan
endotransglycosylase XTH15  were shown to display significantup-regulation following simulated shade treatment (Sessaet al., 2005). Together, these results present further supportfor the involvement of auxin in low R : FR signalling andprovide potential candidates for the regulation of cell wallmetabolism during elongation responses. The latter studyadditionally reports enhanced shade avoidance responses inhfr1 null mutants. Based on these observations, the authorssuggest the existence of a HFR1-mediated negative feedbackloop controlling the magnitude of shade avoidance responses(Sessa et al., 2005). Given the well documented role of HFR1in phyA signalling (Fairchild et al., 2000; Fankhauser &Chory, 2000; Soh et al., 2000), the possibility exists thatreported phenotypes may represent a defect in the phyA-mediated ‘antagonism’ of sh ade avoidance (see Section III).2. Phytochrome interacting factors (PIFs)Following photoconversion to the active Pfr form,
Following photoconversion to the active Pfr form,phytochromes undergo translocation to the nucleus(Sakamoto & Nagatani, 1996; Kircher et al., 1999, 2002).Nuclear-localized Pfr binds directly to a family of bHLHtranscription factors termed PIFs (reviewed in Duek &Fankhauser, 2005; Monte et al., 2007). The first PIF protein(PIF3) was identified by yeast-two-hybrid screening andshown to display photoreversible binding to phyA and phyBPfr in vivo  (Ni et al., 1998, 1999). A number of closely relatedPIFs have since been identified which, together with PIF3,perform varied and overlapping regulatory roles in seedlingde-etiolation (Halliday et al., 1999; Huq & Quail, 2002; Kimet al., 2003; Huq et al., 2004; Khanna et al., 2004, 2007;Monte et al., 2004; Leivar et al., 2008). Binding of phyB andPIFs has been shown to occur via a conserved APB (ActivePhytochrome Binding) motif pres ent in PIF proteins (Khannaet al., 2004). In a series of de-etiolation studies, binding of
photoactivated phytochromes to PIFs has been shown toresult in rapid PIF phosphorylation and degradation via the26S proteosome (Bauer et al., 2004; Park et al., 2004; Shenet al., 2005, 2007; Al-sady et al., 2006; Lorrain et al., 2008).
et al., 2005, 2007; Al-sady et al., 2006; Lorrain et al., 2008).The importance of PIF stability in shade avoidance hasbeen highlighted in a pivotal recent study by the Fankhauserand Whitelam labs (Lorrain et al., 2008). In this work, theauthors demonstrate rapidly increased stability of PIF4 andPIF5 proteins following transfer of de-etiolated plants to lowR : FR. Immunoprecipitation assays have shown PIF4 todisplay strong binding to phyB with weaker binding to phyA(Huq & Quail, 2002). By contrast, PIF5 has only been demon-strated to bind phyB (Shen et al., 2007). This observation doesnot accord with mutant analyses, showing a clear requirementfor phyA in PIF5 degradation (Shen et al., 2007). The authorsspeculate that either a weak phyA/PIF5 interaction exists inplanta , which is unstable in the assay conditions used, or phyAmay mediate PIF5 turnover through one or more intermediaryfactors (Shen et al., 2007). The analyses of null mutants and
transgenic plants displaying altered abundances of PIF4 andPIF5 have revealed significant roles for these proteins inmediating shade avoidance responses (Lorrain  et al ., 2008).Monogenic pif4 mutants displayed short hypocotyls in bothhigh and low R : FR, conditions in which pif5 monogenicmutants resembled WT plants. Double mutants, deficient inPIF4 and PIF5, however, displayed reduced elongation of bothhypocotyls and petioles in hi gh and low R : FR conditions. Bycontrast, plants overexpressing PIF5 were considerably elongatedand displayed a ‘constitutive shade avoidance’ phenotype inhigh R : FR. Similar phenotypes were observed in plants over-expressing PIF4 , but difficulties in line maintenance led theauthors to focus on lines overexpressing PIF5 (Lorrain et al.,2008). Parallel analyses of gene expression responses revealeda similar pattern. All mutants ( pif4, pif5, pif4pif5 ) displayed
reduced expression of shade avoidance marker genes in lowR : FR, whilst plants overexpressing PIF5  displayed constitu-tively elevated amounts of these genes in high R : FR. T ransgenicplants expressing PIF4 and PIF5  constructs with a deletedAPB motif were additionally investigated in this study. Thedeletion of this motif prevents phy/PIF interaction (Khannaet al., 2004) and resulted in exacerbation of the ‘constitutiveshade avoidance’ phenotype (Lorrain et al., 2008). The authorsconclude that PIF4 and PIF5 promote the expression of genesmediating elongation growth. In high R : FR, PIF proteins aredegraded, following binding of photoactivated phytochrome.
14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 937In low R : FR, the photoconversion and subsequent nuclearexport of phyB Pfr results in enhanced stability of PIF4 andPIF5, thereby increasing the expression of genes mediatingelongation growth (Lorrain et al., 2008). This model suggeststhat R : FR ratio signalling operates, in part, through thetargeted degradation of transcriptional regulators, an emergingregulatory mechanism already established in auxin andgibberellin (GA) signalling (reviewed in Huq, 2006). Furthersupport for this model is provided by observations that pif4and pif5 mutations can partially restore the constitutivelyelongated phenotype of a phyB mutant (Lorrain et al., 2008).T ransfer of etiolated seedlings to red light has recently beenshown to result in some degradation of the phyB photo-receptor (Khanna et al., 2007). This effect is marginally
reduced in pif5 mutants and considerably exacerbated in PIF5overexpressing lines. The authors suggest that PIF5 maydisplay functional duality, acting as both transcriptionalregulator and mediator of photoreceptor abundance.Observations of pronounced el ongation phenotypes in plantsexpressing elevated amounts of PIF4 and PIF5 proteins witha deleted phytochrome-binding APB motif suggests these PIFscan promote shade avoidance independently of phytochromeinteraction (Lorrain et al., 2008). Such observations are atvariance with the suggestion that PIF5 promotes elongationgrowth through reducing phyB abundance, and support thenotion that phyB acts to target PIF5 for degradation. Analternative explanation for the observed results may be thatthe light-regulated turnover of PIF5 results in some unavoid-able loss of phyB photoreceptor, as a result of incompletedisassociation of the complex, before degradation. As bothproteins display light-mediated proteolysis (Khanna et al.,
2007; Lorrain et al., 2008), a circular argument could beinitiated to explain the functional significance of this interactionin the regulation of elongation growth. Comparative analysisof PIF5 and PHYB protein amounts in different R : FR ratioswould therefore be of interest in assessing the functionalsignificance of this interaction in shade avoidance.The importance of PIF4 and PIF5 in elongation growth isadditionally highlighted in recent work from the Maloof andFankhauser labs (Nozue et al., 2007). The authors demonstratethat in light : dark cycles, the hypocotyl growth of Arabidopsisseedlings is regulated through an external coincidence model,integrating both the circadian regulation of PIF4  and PIF5transcript abundance and light-mediated proteolysis of PIF4and PIF5 proteins. Under these conditions, transcript abun-dance of PIF4  and PIF5  is high from the end of the darkperiod and peaks in the middle of the day. In agreement with
other studies (Shen et al., 2007; Lorrain et al., 2008), theauthors show rapid light-mediated degradation of bothproteins. The coincidence of high PIF4  and PIF5 transcriptabundances and enhanced protein stability at the end of thedark period promotes maximum elongation growth duringthis time. This observation is in contrast to studies in con-tinuous light, whereby maximum hypocotyl growth occurredat subjective dusk (Dowson-Day & Millar, 1999). Doublepif4pif5  mutants displayed loss of the dawn growth peak,confirming their importance in the regulation of this response(Nozue et al., 2007). Furthermore, an advancement of thegrowth peak was observed in 16 h photoperiods whencompared with experiments in 8 h photoperiods (Nozue et al.,2007). In these conditions, maximum hypocotyl growth wasobserved at approx. 4 h post-d awn, thereby coinciding withmaximum low R : FR ratio-induced gene expression (Lorrainet al., 2008). It would therefore appear that previous temporal
maximum low R : FR ratio-induced gene expression (Lorrainet al., 2008). It would therefore appear that previous temporalinconsistencies between low R : FR ratio-mediated geneexpression and elongation growth have arisen as a result ofthe analysis of plants in continuous light (Salter et al., 2003).It is likely that in light : dark cycles, maximum elongationgrowth in response to transient low R : FR occurs in the earlymorning, thereby coinciding with maximum gene expressionresponses. Moreover, the circadian regulation of PIF4  andPIF5  transcript abundances may ultimately provide a mole-cular mechanism for the gating of rapid shade avoidance.3. DELLA proteinsThe retention of shade avoidance responses in pif4pif5 doublemutants provides evidence for the existence of multipleregulatory mechanisms (Lorrain et al., 2008). Recent studies
suggest that GA and phytochrome-mediated signallingpathways may converge to regulate elongation growth. TheDELLA family of growth repressing proteins are mediators ofthe GA signalling pathway (Peng et al., 1997; Silverstoneet al., 1998; Dill & Sun, 2001). In Arabidopsis, five DELLAhomologues exist: GAI, RGA, RGL1, RGL2 and RGL3(reviewed in Hussain & Peng, 2003). The relief-of-restraintmodel proposed by Harberd (2003) suggests that DELLAs actto restrain plant growth whilst GAs promote growth throughovercoming DELLA-mediated growth restraint. It is nowknown that GAs regulate turnover of DELLAs via bindingof a receptor, GID1 (Ueguchi-Tanaka et al., 2005; Griffithset al., 2006; Nakajima et al., 2006; Willige et al., 2007).
., 2006; Willige et al., 2007).Interaction of DELLAs with GA-bound GID1 promotesinteraction with the F-box protein SLEEPY1 (SLY1). Thisinteraction results in polyubiquitination and degradation ofDELLAs via the 26S proteosome, thereby relieving inhibitionof growth (McGinnis et al., 2003; Dill et al., 2004).Numerous reports exist of interactions between light andGA signalling (López-Juez et al., 1995; Reed et al., 1996;Pierik et al., 2004a). More recently, Pierik and colleagues haveprovided evidence supporting a central role for DELLAproteins in mediating shade avoidance responses (Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007). Confocal imaging of transgenic Arabi-dopsis plants expressing a pRGA:GFP-RGA  construct revealedincreased DELLA degradation in canopy-grown plants. Asexpected, these plants displayed greater hypocotyl and petioleelongation than isolated control plants. The identity of thecanopy signal regulating DELLA stability was investigated
14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 938through analyses of plants subject to low R : FR and bluelight depletion. Increased DELLA degradation was observedin low R : FR-treated hypocotyls and petioles, confirming theinvolvement of phytochrome in these responses. Similardegradation was also observed in hypocotyls subject to bluelight depletion, suggesting inte rplay between multiple photo-receptors. The requirement for GA in hypocotyl and petiolegrowth responses was confirmed by analyses of GA-deficientmutants. These plants displayed short hypocotyls which lackedresponsivity to both low R : FR and blue light depletion.All phenotypes were rescued by GA application. A similarresult was also observed in pe tioles treated with low R : FR.Quadruple mutants deficient in four DELLAs ( gai/rga/rgl1/rgl2) did not, however, display elongated petioles, when
compared with wild-type controls. Hypocotyls of thesemutants were elongated, but retained responsivity to bothlow R : FR and blue light depletion. These data suggest thatlow R : FR-mediated DELLA degradation is not sufficient toinduce shade avoidance responses in petioles, but, togetherwith other signalling mechanisms, performs a more centralrole in hypocotyl growth (Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007).The importance of light in the regulation of DELLAstability is supported by a parallel study from the Harberd lab(Achard et al., 2007). In this work, the authors show increasedGFP-RGA stability in etiolated hy pocotyls transferred to light.Comparison of hypocotyl length ratios (wild-type/quadrupleDELLA mutant) revealed an increased contribution ofDELLAs to growth restraint with increasing photoperiods.Conversely, GA-deficient plants displayed short hypocotyls inthe dark, but wild-type hypocotyl lengths at longer photo-periods. Interestingly, transcri pt abundance of enzymes involved
in GA metabolism showed rapid up-regulation upon transferto light (Achard et al., 2007). The authors conclude thatlight-mediated growth restraint during photomorphogenesisinvolves the stabilization of DELLA proteins. Further stabi-lization may be achieved through light-regulated increases inGA metabolism. This notion is supported by observations inpea, showing decreased bioactive GA1 concentrations upontransfer of etiolated seedlings to light (Gil & García-Martínez,2000; O’Neill et al., 2000).4. PIF/DELLA interaction – a molecular mechanism for R : FR ratio signalling?A molecular mechanism integrating light and GA signallinghas recently been provided by parallel studies from the Dengand Prát labs (De Lucas et al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008). Both
report the physical interaction of PIF and DELLA proteinsthrough yeast-two hybrid and immunoprecipitation assays.The former study focuses on PIF3 and the latter, PIF4. Dele-tion studies confirmed the PIF4/RGA interaction to requirethe bHLH DNA recognition domain in PIF4 and a conservedleucine repeat motif in the RGA protein (De Lucas et al.,2008). The physiological significance of PIF/DELLA bindingis elegantly demonstrated in both studies through chromatinimmunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments. Here, the physicalinteraction between PIFs and DELLAs was shown to blocktranscriptional activity, thereby inhibiting PIF function.These studies highlight PIFs as an integration node for bothlight and GA signalling. The authors propose that GA actsto target DELLAs for degradation, thereby relieving theinhibition of PIF activity and promoting elongation growth(De Lucas et al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008).A hypothetical model for the R : FR ratio-mediated regu-
A hypothetical model for the R : FR ratio-mediated regu-lation of elongation growth is presented in Fig. 3. In daylight(Fig. 3a), photoactivation of phyB (and likely phyD andphyE) results in nuclear import of Pfr and binding to PIF4. Asimilar role for PIF5 can also be speculated. This physicalinteraction results in targeted PIF4 phosphorylation anddegradation (Lorrain et al., 2008). In high R : FR, DELLAstability would also be enhanced (Djakovic-Petrovic et al.,2007), resulting in PIF4 binding and inactivation (De Lucaset al., 2008). Phytochrome A would be degraded in both thecytosol and the nucleus. Overall, the increased relative enhance-ment of DELLA to PIF4 activity would restrain elongationgrowth.When subject to reduced R : FR (Fig. 3b), phyB is
When subject to reduced R : FR (Fig. 3b), phyB isconverted to the inactive Pr form. This dissociates from PIFproteins and exits the nucleus. The reduction in phyB Pfrwould therefore result in increased abundance of nuclear PIF4.Increased PIF4 activity would result in enhanced expressionof genes involved in elongation growth (Nozue et al., 2007;Lorrain et al., 2008). Under these conditions, phyA activity inthe FR-HIR response mode would provide some antagonismof elongation growth, possibly through the binding andtargeted degradation of PIF4 (Huq & Quail, 2002). Overall,the relative enhancement of PIF4 to DELLA activity wouldpromote rapid elongation growth.In prolonged vegetational shad e (Fig. 3c), an additional rolefor GA can be proposed. Increased expression of transcriptsencoding GA 20-oxidase have been reported following lowR : FR, EOD-FR and simulated shade treatment in Arabi-dopsis (Devlin et al., 2003; Salter et al., 2003; Hisamatsu
et al., 2005; Sessa et al., 2005). Such observations suggest GAconcentrations may increase in vegetational shade. Increasedconcentrations of GA would enhance DELLA degradation,thereby relieving DELLA-mediated inhibition of PIF func-tion (Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007; De Lucas et al., 2008). Itcan therefore be speculated that in prolonged low R : FR,increased GA synthesis would increase DELLA degradation,further enhancing PIF4 function and maintaining elongationgrowth.5. FloweringFlowering time in Arabidopsis is regulated through thecomplex integration of multiple environmental signals whichact together to regulate the expression of floral meristem
14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 939identity genes (for review, see Simpson & Dean, 2002). Thelight-quality pathway mediating acceleration of flowering inlow R : FR has been shown to operate through the floralintegrator FLOWERING TIME  (FT), independently of thetranscriptional regulator CONSTANS  (CO) (Cerdán & Chory,2003; Halliday et al., 2003). Indeed, expression of both FTand the meristem identity gene LEAFY  (LFY ) have beenshown to display constitutively elevated expression in early-flowering phyB mutants (Blázquez & Weigel, 1999; Cerdán& Chory, 2003; Halliday et al., 2003). A potential signallingcomponent linking phyB to FT expression was identified in
a mutagenesis screen by Cerdán & Chory (2003). A plantdisplaying late flowering behaviour in both long and shortdays was isolated. Sequencing of the mutation revealed anuclear-localized protein with similarity to some transcrip-tional activators, termed PHYTOCHROME AND FLOW-ERING TIME 1 (PFT1). Mutants deficient in PFT1 displayedimpaired flowering responses to EOD-FR treatments.Double mutants, deficient in phyB and PFT1, displayed petiolelengths similar to phyB controls, but flowered at the sametime as wild-type plants. Together, these observations suggestseparate signalling mechanisms operate downstream of phyto-chromes to regulate elongation and flowering responses to lowR : FR. This notion is supported by reports of natural Arabi-dopsis accessions displaying low R : FR-mediated elongationgrowth but no acceleration of flowering (Botto & Smith,2002).V. Crosstalk in shade avoidance signallingThe interaction of phytochrome signalling with other environ-
mental cues facilitates the accurate detection of, and responseto, environmental fluctuations. An emerging body of evidencesuggests that plants integrate R : FR information with multiplesignalling pathways to elicit developmental responses. Theseinclude blue light signals, the circadian clock and gibberellinstatus (as discussed earlier). Additional interactions with auxin,ethylene and temperature signalling have been established andwill be discussed briefly.1. AuxinThe phytohormone auxin regulates multiple aspects of plantgrowth and development. These include elongation growthand apical dominance, processes commonly associated withshade avoidance (Chatfield et al., 2000; Sawa et al., 2002).Low R : FR, EOD-FR and simulated shade treatments haveall been demonstrated to enhance expression of genesassociated with auxin signalling (Tanaka et al., 2002; Vanden-bussche et al., 2003; Sessa et al., 2005; Roig-Villanova et al.,
2007). Such observations strongly suggest the involvement ofauxin in shade avoidance. Circumstantial evidence is providedby experiments using auxin transport inhibitors and analysesof mutants deficient in auxin responsivity and signalling(Steindler et al., 1999; Vandenbussche et al., 2003). Suchexperiments are, however, confounded by pleiotropic mor-phological phenotypes, requiring careful interpretation.2. EthyleneThe role of ethylene as a proximity perception signal withincanopies was investigated by Pierik and colleagues, followingobserved similarities between physiological adaptations toflooding stress in the wetland species Rumex palustris andresponses commonly termed shade avoidance (Pierik et al.,2003). Such adaptations include  increased stem elongationand rapid leaf hyponasty, responses induced during floodingby ethylene accumulation in the shoot (reviewed in Pieriket al., 2005). Exposure of tobacco plants to low concentra-
tions of ethylene resulted in similar phenotypes (Pierik et al.,
tions of ethylene resulted in similar phenotypes (Pierik et al.,2003). Furthermore, analysis of transgenic tobacco plantsdisplaying ethylene insensitivity revealed delayed shade avoid-ance responses in crowded canopies. Interestingly, the delayedshade avoidance phenotypes observed were demonstrated toresult from insensitivity of transgenic plants to low quantitiesof blue light, suggesting crosstalk between multiple signallingpathways (Pierik et al., 2004a). Ethylene increases have beenrecorded following treatment of multiple plant species withlow R : FR (Finlayson et al., 1998, 1999; Pierik et al., 2004b)and reduced light quantity (Vandenbussche et al., 2003).Studies in tobacco have additionally reported that the growth-promoting effects of ethylene require GA and suggest thatethylene functions, in part, through altering GA responsive-ness (Pierik et al., 2004b). Intriguingly, ethylene has been
demonstrated to regulate DELLA stability in Arabidopsis(Achard et al., 2003). More recently, seedlings overexpressingPIF5 have been shown to display elevated ethylene concentra-tions (Khanna et al., 2007), suggesting PIF and DELLAproteins may function as integrators of multiple hormonesignalling pathways. Together, these data suggest that elevatedethylene concentrations in crowded canopies may augmentlow R : FR ratio and reduced blue light signalling to maximizeshade avoidance responses.3. TemperatureThe integration of phytochrome and temperature signallingpathways has been reported in the regulation of multipledevelopmental processes, including germination (Penfieldet al., 2005; Heschel  et al., 2007; Donohue et al., 2008) andflowering (Halliday et al., 2003; Halliday & Whitelam, 2003).More recently, low R : FR and temperature signalling have beenshown to interact to regulate freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis
(Franklin & Whitelam, 2007). T ranscriptomic analysis ofplants treated with low R : FR at 16 and 22 °C revealed ambienttemperature-dependent, light-quality regulation of the CBFregulon, a suite of genes involved in cold acclimation and theacquisition of freezing tolerance. During cold acclimation, the 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 940perception of low temperature (usually <4°C) results inincreased expression of the CBF family of transcriptionalactivators. These lead to the up-regulation of downstreamCOLD-REGULATED  (COR ) genes and metabolic changeswhich enhance tolerance to subzero temperatures (Thomashow,1999). Low R : FR treatment of Arabidop sis plants at both 16and 22 °C resulted in increased CBF transcript abundance ina circadian gated manner. Maximum responsivity was observedbetween ZT4 and ZT8, times at which maximum responsi-vityto low-temperature treatment has also been observed (Fowleret al., 2005). Intriguingly, low R : FR treatment at 16 °C but not22°C led to significant up-regulation of COR genes and enhanced
freezing tolerance (Franklin & Whitelam, 2007). The authorsspeculate that the reduced ambient temperature, shorterday-length and longer twilight periods experienced duringautumn months at northern latitudes may provide the idealenvironmental conditions to initiate COR  gene expression.The use of light quality signals to seasonally enhance freezingtolerance would confer some protection to plants subject tosudden decreases in temperat ure. The uncoupling of thisresponse at 22 °C may serve to prevent the unnecessaryaccumulation of COR  gene products at higher temperatures.VI. Future perspectivesThe identification of multiple genes robustly and reversiblyregulated by R : FR has enabled considerable advancement inour understanding of shade avoidance signalling. Observa-tions of PIF/DELLA interactions provide an exciting insightinto how R : FR ratio and GA signalling integrate to regulateelongation growth (Djakovic-Petrovic et al., 2007; De Lucas
et al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008; Lorrain et al., 2008). Theincreased stability of PIF4 and PIF5 in low R : FR implicatesignificant roles for these transcription factors in shadeavoidance signalling and suggest a considerably wider role forPIF proteins beyond de-etiolation and seedling establishment.The existence of residual shade avoidance responses in pif4/pif5 and quadruple DELLA-deficient mutants clearly demon-strates the involvement of ad ditional, as yet unidentified,molecular mechanisms. Observations that plants subject toother environmental perturbations display phenotypes con-sistent with low R : FR treatment suggests that ‘the shadeavoidance syndrome’ may in fact, represent a more genericstress response. Examples in clude the leaf hyponasty andpetiole extension responses observed during flooding (Pieriket al., 2005) and the auxin-mediated extension growth andprecocious flowering observed in response to high-temperature
treatment (Gray et al., 1998; Balasubramanian et al., 2006).Indeed, phenotypes similar to shade avoidance have even beenreported in plants defective in plant pathogen signalling(Faigón-Soverna et al., 2006). These plants also displayedenhanced ATHB2  and HFR1  expression, raising a pertinentquestion: do all stress responses resulting in ‘shade avoidance’-like phenotypes target the same downstream genes? Recentobservations that PIFs act as nodes to integrate light and GAsignalling tempt speculation that similar mechanistic inter-actions may operate in other light signal crosstalk interactions(De Lucas et al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008). The emergingpicture of shade avoidance is of a complex signalling network,regulated by multiple light si gnals, mediated by multiple
photoreceptors and modulated by multiple endogenous andexogenous cues. The molecular dissection of such a complexnetwork presents photobiologists with a daunting futurechallenge but should hopefully result in a more completeunderstanding of this important biological phenomenon.Acknowledgements
AcknowledgementsThanks to Garry Whitelam for critical reading of the manu-script and stimulating debate of the content. KAF is a RoyalSociety University Research Fellow.ReferencesAchard P, Liao L, Jiang C, Desnos T, Bartlett J, Fu X, Harberd NP. 2007. DELLAs contribute to plant photomorphogenesis. Plant Physiology  143: 1163–1172.Achard P, Vriezen WH, Van Der Straaten D, Harberd NP. 2003. Ethylene regulates Arabidopsis development via the modulation of DELLA protein growth repressor function. The Plant Cell  15: 2816–2825.Ahmad M, Lin C, Cashmore AR. 1995. Mutations throughout an Arabidopsis blue-light photoreceptor im pair blue-light-responsive anthocyanin accumulation and inhi bition of hypocotyl elongation. Plant Journal  8: 653–658.Al-Sady B, Ni W, Kircher S, Scháfer E, Quail PH. 2006. Photoactivated phytochrome induces rapid PIF3 phosphorylation as a prelude to proteosome-mediated degradation. Molecular Cell  23: 439–446.
Aukerman MJ, Hirschfeld M, Wester L, Weaver M, Clack T, Amasino RM, Sharrock RA. 1997. A deletion in the PHYD gene of the Arabidopsis Wassilewskija ecotype defines a role fo r phytochrome D in red/far-red light sensing. The Plant Cell  9: 1317–132.Balasubramanian S, Sureshkumar S, Lempe J, Weigel D. 2006. Potent induction of Arabidopsis thaliana flowering by elevated growth temperature. PLoS Genetics  2: 0980–0989.Ballaré CL, Casal JJ, Kendrick RE. 1991a. Responses of light-grown wild-type and long-hypocotyl mutant cucumber seedlings to natural and stimulated shade light. Photochemistry and Photobiology  54: 819–826.Ballaré CL, Sánchez RA, Scopel AL, Casal JJ, Ghersa CM. 1987. Early detection of neighbour plants by ph ytochrome perception of spectral changes in reflected sunlight. Plant, Cell & Environment  10: 551–557.Ballaré CL, Scopel AL, Sánchez RA. 1990. Far-red radiation reflected from adjacent leaves: an early signal of competition in plant canopies. Science
247: 329–332.Ballaré CL, Scopel AL, Sánchez RA. 1991b. Photocontrol of stem elongation in plant neighbourhoods: e ffects of photon fluence rate under natural conditions of radiation. Plant, Cell & Environment  14: 57–65.Banjeree R, Schleicher E, Meier S, Munoz VR, Pokorny R, Ahmad M, Bittl R, Batschauer A. 2007. The signalling state of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 contains flavin semiquinone. Journal of Biological Chemistry  282: 14916–14922.Bauer D, Viczián A, Kircher S, Nobis T, Nitschke R, Kunkel T, Panigrahi KCS, Adam E, Fejes E, Schäfer E  et al. 2004. Constitutive Photomorphogenesis 1 and multiple photoreceptors control degradation of Phytochrome Interacting Factor 3, a transcription factor required for light signalling in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell  16: 1433–1445.
14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 941Blázquez MA, Weigel D. 1999. Independent regulation of flowering by phytochrome B and gibberellins in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  120: 1025–1032.Boardman NK. 1977. Comparative photosynthesis of sun and shade plants. Annual Review of Plant Physiology  28: 355–377.Botto JF, Smith H. 2002. Differential genetic variatio n in adaptive strategies to a common environ mental signal in Arab idopsis accessions: phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance. Plant, Cell & Environment  25: 53–63.Bouly J-P, Schleicher E, Dionisio -Sese M, Vandenbussche F, Van Der Straeten D, Bakrim N, Meier S, Batschauer A, Galland P, Bittl R  et al. 2007. Cryptochrome blue light photorec eptors are activated through interconversions of flavin redox states. Journal of Biological Chemistry  282: 9383–9391.
9383–9391.Briggs WR, Huala E. 1999. Blue-light photoreceptors in higher plants. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology  15: 33–62.Carabelli M, Morelli G, Whit elam GC, Ruberti I. 1996. T wilight-zone and canopy shade induction of the ATHB-2 homeobox gene in green plants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  93: 3530–3535.Carabelli M, Sessa G, Rube rti I, Morelli G. 1993. The Arabidopsis ATHB-2 and -4 genes are strongly indu ced by far-red-rich light. Plant Journal  4: 469–479.Cashmore AR, Jarillo JA, Wu YJ, Liu D. 1999. Cryptochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals. Science  284: 760–765.Cerdán PD, Chory J. 2003. Regulation of flowering time by light quality. Nature  423: 881–885.Chatfield SP, Stirnberg P, Forde BG, Leyser O. 2000. The hormonal regulation of axillary bud growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal  24: 159–169.Childs KL, Miller FR, Cordonnier-Pratt MM, Pratt LH, Morgan PW,
Mullet JE. 1997. The sorghum photoperiod sensitivity gene, Ma3 encodes phytochrome B. Plant Physiology  113: 611–619.Christie JM, Reymond P, Powell GK, Be rnasconi P, Raibekas AA, Liscum E, Briggs WR. 1998. Arabidopsis NPH1: a flavoprotein with the properties of a photoreceptor for phototropis. Science  282: 1698–1701.Clack  T, Mathews S, Sharrock RA. 1994. The phytochrome apoprotein family in Arabidopsis is encoded by five genes: the sequences and expression of PHYD and PHYE. Plant Molecular Biology  25: 413–427.De Lucas M, Davière J-M, Rodríguez-Fa lcón M, Pontin M, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Lorrain S, Fankhauser  C, Blázquez MA, Titare nko E, Prat S. 2008. A molecular framework for light and gibberellin control of cell elongation. Nature  451: 480–486.Devlin PF, Halliday KJ, Harb erd NP, Whitelam GC. 1996. The rosette habit of Arabidopsis thaliana is dependent upon phytochrome action: novel phytochromes control internod e elongation and flowering time.
Plant Journal  10: 1127–1134.Devlin PF, Patel, SR, Whitelam GC. 1998. Phytochrome E influences internode elongation and flowering time in Arabidopsis . The Plant Cell  10: 1479–1487.Devlin PF, Robson PRH, Patel SR, G oosey L, Sharrock RA, Whitelam GC. 1999. Phytochrome D acts in the sh ade-avoidance syndrome in Arabidopsis by controlling elongati on and flowering time. Plant Physiology  119: 909–915.Devlin PF, Yanovsky MJ, Kay SA. 2003. A genomic analysis of the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  133: 1617–1629.Dill A, Sun T-P . 2001. Synergistic de-repression of  gibberellin signaling by removing RGA and GAI function in Arabidopsis thaliana . Genetics  159: 777–785.Dill A, Thomas SG, Hu J, Steber CM, Sun TP. 2004. The Arabidopsis F-box protein SLEEPY1 targets gibbe rellin signaling repressors for gibberellin-induced degradation. The Plant Cell  16: 1392–1405.Djakovic-Petrovic T, de Wit M, Voesenek LACJ, Pierik R. 2007. DELLA
protein function in growth re sponses to canopy signals. Plant Journal  51: 117–126.
Djakovic-Petrovic T, de Wit M, Voesenek LACJ, Pierik R. 2007. DELLA protein function in growth re sponses to canopy signals. Plant Journal  51: 117–126.Donohue K, Heschel MS, Butler CM, Barua D, Sharrock RA, Whitelam GC, Chiang GCK. 2008. Diversification of phytochrome contributions to germination as a function of seed-maturation environment. New Phytologist  177: 367–379.Donohue K, Pyle EH, Messiqua D,  Heschel MS, Schmitt J. 2001. Adaptive divergence in plasticity in natural populations of Impatiens capensis and its consequences for performance in novel habitats. Evolution  55: 692–702.Dowson-Day MJ, Millar AJ. 1999. Circadian dysfunction causes aberrant hypocotyl elongation patterns in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal  17: 63–71.Dudley SA, Schmitt J. 1995. Genetic differentiation in morphological responses to simulated foliage shade between populations of Impatiens capensis from open and woodland sites. Functional Ecology  9: 655–666.
9: 655–666.Duek PD, Fankhauser C. 2005. bHLH class transcriptio n factors take centre stage in phytochrome signaling. Trends in Plant Science  10: 51–54.Faigón-Soverna A, Harmon FG, Storani L, Karayekov E, Staneloni RJ, Gassmann W, Más P, Casal JJ, Kay SA, Yanovsky MJ. 2006. A constitutive shade-avoidance mutant implicates TIR-NBS-LRR proteins in Arabidopsis photomor phogenic development. The Plant Cell  18: 2919–2928.Fairchild CD, Schumaker MA, Quail PH. 2000. HFR1  encodes a typical bHLH protein that acts in phyt ochrome A signal transduction. Genes and Development  14: 2377–2391.Fankhauser C, Chory J. 2000. RSF1 , an Arabidopsis locus implicated in phytochrome A signalling. Plant Physiology  124: 39–45.Feng S, Martinez C, Gusmaroli G, Wa ng Y, Zhou J, Wang F, Chen L, Yu L, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Kircher S  et al. 2008. Coordinated regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana  development by light and gibberellins. Nature  451: 475–480.
Nature  451: 475–480.Finlayson SA, Jung I-J, Mullet JE, Morgan PW. 1999. The mechanism of rhythmic ethylene production in Sorg hum: the role of phytochrome B and simulated shading. Plant Physiology  119: 1083–1089.Finlayson SA, Lee I-J, Morgan PW. 1998. Phytochrome B and the regulation of circadian ethyle ne production in sorghum. Plant Physiology  116: 17–25.Folta KM. 2004. Green light stimulates early st em elongation, antagonizing light-mediated growth inhibition. Plant Physiology  135: 1407–1416.Fowler SJ, Cook D, Thomashow MF. 2005. Low temperature induction of Arabidopsis CBF1,2 and 3 is gated by the circadian clock. Plant Physiology  137: 961–968.Franklin KA, Praekelt U, Stoddart  WM, Billingham OE, Halliday KJ, Whitelam GC. 2003. Phytochromes B, D and E act redundantly to control multiple physiological responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  131: 1340–1346.Franklin KA, Whitelam GC. 2007. Light-quality regulation of freezing
tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana . Nature Genetics  39: 1410–1413.Gil J, García-Martinez JJ. 2000. Light-regulation of gibberellin A1 content and expression of genes coding for GA 20-oxidase and GA 3 β-hydroxylase in etiolated pea seedlings. Physiologia Plantarum  180: 223–229.Goosey L, Palecanda L, Sharrock RA. 1997. Differential patterns of expression of the Arabidopsis PHYB , PHYD  and PHYE  phytochrome genes. Plant Physiology  115: 959–969.Gray WM, Östin A, Sandberg G,  Romano CP, Estelle M. 1998. High temperature promotes auxin-medi ated hypocotyl elongation in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  95: 7197–7202.Griffiths J, Murase K, Ri eu I, Zentella R, Zhang Z-L, Powers SJ, Gong F, Phillips AL, Hedden P, Sun T-P  et al. 2006. Genetic characterization and functional analysis of the GID1 gi bberellin receptors in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell  18: 3399–3414.Halliday KJ, Hudson M, Ni M, Qin M, Quail PH. 1999. poc1: an
Arabidopsis mutant perturbed in ph ytochrome signaling because of a T-DNA insertion in the promoter of PIF3, a gene encoding a
Halliday KJ, Hudson M, Ni M, Qin M, Quail PH. 1999. poc1: an Arabidopsis mutant perturbed in ph ytochrome signaling because of a T-DNA insertion in the promoter of PIF3, a gene encoding a  14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 942phytochrome-interacting bHLH protein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  96: 5832–5837.Halliday KJ, Koornneef M, Whitelam GC. 1994. Phytochrome B and at least one other phytochrome mediate th e accelerated flowering response of Arabidopsis thaliana L. to low red/far-red ratio. Plant Physiology  104: 1311–1315.Halliday KJ, Salter MG, Thin gnaes E, Whitelam GC. 2003. Phytochrome control of flowering is temperature sens itive and correlates with expression of the floral integrator FT. Plant Journal  33: 875–885.Halliday KJ, Whitelam GC. 2003. Changes in photoperiod or temperature reveal roles for phyD and phyE. Plant Physiology  131: 1913–1920.Harberd NP. 2003. Relieving DELLA restraint. Science  299: 1853–1854.Hennig L, Büche C, Schäfer E. 2000. Degradation of phytochrome A and
the high irradiance response in Arabidopsis: a kinetic analysis. Plant, Cell & Environment  23: 727–734.Henriksson E, Olsson ASB, Johannesson H, Hanson J, Engström P, Söderman E. 2005. Homeodomain leucine zipper class I genes in Arabidopsis. Expression patterns and phylogenetic relationships. Plant Physiology  139: 509–518.Heschel MS, Selby J, Butler C, Whit elam GC, Sharrock RA, Donohue K. 2007. A new role for phytochromes in temperature-dependent germination. New Phytologist  174: 735–741.Hisamatsu T, King RW, Helliw ell CA, Koshioka M. 2005. The involvement of gibberellin 20-oxida se genes in phytochrome-regulated petiole elongation of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  138: 1106–1116.Holmes MG, Smith H. 1977. The function of phytochrome in the natural environment. II. The influence of ve getation canopies on the spectral energy distribution of natural daylight. Photochemistry and Photobiology  25: 539–545.
25: 539–545.Huq E. 2006. Degradation of negative regu lators: a common theme in hormone and light signaling networks? Trends in Plant Science  11: 4–7.Huq E, Al-Sady B, Hudson M, K im C, Apel K, Quail PH. 2004. PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 1 is a critical bHLH regulator of chlorophyll biosynthesis. Science  305: 1937–1941.Huq E, Quail, PH. 2002. PIF4, a phytochrome-inte racting bHLH factor functions as a negative regulato r of phytochrome B signaling in Arabidopsis. The EMBO Journal  21: 2441–2450.Hussain A, Peng J. 2003. DELLA proteins and GA si gnalling in Arabidopsis. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation  22: 134–140.Imaizumi T, T ran HG, Swartz TE, Briggs WR, Kay SA. 2003. FKF1 is essential for photoperiodic-specific light signalling in Arabidopsis. Nature  426: 302–306.Jarillo JA, Ahmad M, Cashmore AR. 1998. NPL1 (accession no. AF053941): a second member of the NPH serine/threonine kinase family of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  117: 719.
of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  117: 719.Jarillo JA, Gabrys H, Capel J, Alon so JM, Eker JR, Cashmore AR. 2001. Phototropin-related NPL1 controls chlo roplast relocation induced by blue light. Nature  410: 592–594.Johnson E, Bradley JM, Harberd NP, Whitelam GC. 1994. Photoresponses of light-grown phyA mutants of Arabidopsis : phytochrome A is required for the perception of daylength extensions. Plant Physiology  105: 141–149.Kebrom TH, Brutnell TP. 2007. The molecular analysis of the shade avoidance syndrome in the grasses has begun. Journal of Experimental Botany  58: 3079–3089.Keiller D, Smith H. 1989. Control of carbon partitioning by light quality mediated by phytochrome. Plant Science  63: 25–29.Khanna R, Huq E, Kikis EA, Al-Sady B, Lanzatella C, Quail PH. 2004. A novel molecular recognition otif nece ssary for targeting photoactivated phytochrome signalling to specific basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. The Plant Cell  16: 3033–3044.
factors. The Plant Cell  16: 3033–3044.Khanna R, Shen Y, Mario CM, Tsuchi saka A, Theologis A, Scháfer E,
phytochrome signalling to specific basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. The Plant Cell  16: 3033–3044.Khanna R, Shen Y, Mario CM, Tsuchi saka A, Theologis A, Scháfer E, Quail PH. 2007. The basic helix-loop-helix tran scription factor PIF5 acts on ethylene biosynthesis and ph ytochrome signaling by distinct mechanisms. The Plant Cell  19: 3915–3929.Khanna R, Shen Y, Toledo-Ortiz G, Kikis E, Johannesson H, Hwang Y-S, Quail PH. 2006. Functional profiling reveals th at only a small number of phytochrome-regulated early-response genes in Arabidopsis are necessary for optimal deetiolation. The Plant Cell  18: 2157–2171.Kim J, Yi H, Choi G, Shin B, Song P-S, Choi G. 2003. Functional characterization of phytochrome in teracting factor 3 in phytochrome-mediated light signal transduction. The Plant Cell  15: 2399–2407.Kircher S, Kozma-Bognar L, Fejes E, Speth V, Husselstein-Muller T, Bauer D, Adam E, Scháfer E, Nagy F . 2002. Nucleo-cytoplasmic partitioning of
plant photoreceptors phytochromes  A,B,C,D and E is differentially regulated by light and exhibits a diurnal rhythm. The Plant Cell  14: 1514–1544.Kircher S, Kozma-Bognar L, Kim L, Adam  E, Harter K, Scháfer E, Nagy F . 1999. Light quality-dependent nuclear impo rt of the plant photoreceptors phytochrome A and B. The Plant Cell  11: 1445–1456.Leivar P, Monte E, Al-Sady B, Carle C, Storer A, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Quail PH. 2008. The Arabidopsis Phytochrome- Interacting Factor PIF7, together with PIF3 and PIF4, regulates responses to prolonged red light by modulating phyB levels. The Plant Cell . 20: 337–352.Lin C, Robertson DE, Ahmad M, Ra ibekas AA, Jorns MS, Dutton PL, Cashmore AR. 1995. Association of flavin adenine dinucleotide with the Arabidopsis blue light receptor CRY1, Science  269: 968–970.Lin C, Yang H, Guo H, Mockler T, Chen J, Cashmore AR. 1998. Enhancement of blue light sensitivity of Arabidopsis seedlings by a blue
light receptor cryptochrome 2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  95: 7686–7699.Linkosalo T, Lechowicz MJ. 2006. T wilight far-red treatment advances leaf bud burst of silver birch ( Betula pendula ) Tree Physiology  26: 1249–1256.López-Juez E, Buurmeijer WF, Heerin ga GH, Kendrick RE, Wesselius JC. 1990. Response of light-grown wild-t ype and long hypocotyl mutant cucumber plants to end-of-day far-red light. Photochemistry and Photobiology  52: 143–149.López-Juez E, Kobayashi M, Sakura i A, Kamiya Y, Kendrick RE. 1995. Phytochromes, gibberellins,  and hypocotyl growth. Plant Physiology  107: 131–140.Lorrain S, Allen T, Duek PD, Wh itelam GC, Fankhauser C. 2008. Phytochrome-mediated inhibition of shade avoidance involves degradation of growth-promoting  bHLH transcription factors. Plant Journal  53: 312–323.Makino S, Matsushika A, Kojima M, Yamashino T, Mizuno T. 2002. The APRR1/TOC1 quintet implicat ed in circadian rhythms of Arabidopsis
thaliana : I. Characterization with APRR1-overexpressing plants. Plant and Cell Physiology  43: 58–69.Mathews S, Sharrock RA. 1996. The phytochrome gene family in grasses (Poaceae): a phylogeny and evidence that  grasses have a subset of the loci found in dicot angiosperms. Molecular Biology and Evolution  13: 1141–1150.Mathews S, Sharrock RA. 1997. Phytochrome gene diversity. Plant, Cell & Environment  20: 666–671.Mazzella MA, Cerdán PD, St aneloni RJ, Casal JJ. 2001. Hierarchical coupling of phytochromes and cryptoch romes reconciles st ability and light modulation of Arabidopsis development. Development  128: 2291–2299.McGinnis KM, Thomas SG, Soule JD, Strader LC, Zale JM, Sun T-P, Steber CM. 2003. The Arabidopsis SLEEPY1 gene encodes a putative F-box subunit of an SC F E3 ubiquitin ligase. The Plant Cell  15: 1120–1130.Middleton L. 2001. Shade-tolerant flowering plants: adaptations and horticultural implications. Acta Horticulturae (ISHS)  552: 95–102.
Monte E, Al-Sady B, Leivar P, Quail PH. 2007. Out of the dark: how the
horticultural implications. Acta Horticulturae (ISHS)  552: 95–102.Monte E, Al-Sady B, Leivar P, Quail PH. 2007. Out of the dark: how the PIFs are unmasking a dual temp oral mechanism of phytochrome signalling. Journal of Experimental Botany  58: 3125–3133. 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e w© The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008) www.newphytologist.org New Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944Review 943Monte E, Tepperman JM, Al-Sady B, Kaczorowski KA, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Li X, Zhang Y, Quail PH. 2004. The phytochrome-interacting transcription factor, PIF3, acts early,  selectively and positively in light-induced chloroplast development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  101: 16091–16098.Morgan DC, O’Brien T, Smith H. 1980. Rapid photomodulation of stem extension in light-grown Sinapis alba L. Studies on kinetics, site of perception and photoreceptor. Planta  150: 95–101.Morgan DC, Smith H. 1976. Linear relationship between phytochrome photoequilibrium and growth in plants  under simulated natural radiation. Nature  262: 210–212.Morgan DC, Smith H. 1978. The function of phytoc hrome in the natural environment. VII. The relation ship between phytochrome photo-
equilibrium and development in light-grown Chenopodium album L. Planta  132: 187–193.Morgan DC, Smith H. 1981. Control of development in chenopodium-album l by shadelight – the effect of light quantity (total fluence rate) and light quality (red – far-red ratio). New Phytologist  88: 239–248.Nagatani A, Chory J, Furuya M. 1991. Phytochrome B is not detectable in the hy3 mutant of Arabidopsis, which is  deficient in responding to end-of-day far-red light treatments. Plant and Cell Physiology  32: 1119–112.Nagatani A, Reed JW, Chory J. 1993. Isolation and initial characterisation of Arabidopsis mutants that are deficient in  functional phytochrome A. Plant Physiology  102: 269–277.Nakajima M, Shimada A, Takashi Y,  Kim Y-C, Park S-Y, Tanaka MU, Suzuki H, Katoh E, Iuchi S. 2006. Identification and characterization of Arabidopsis gibberellin receptors. Plant Journal  46: 880–889.Ni M, Tepperman JM, Quail PH. 1998. PIF3, a phytochrome-interacting
factor necessary for normal photoinduc ed signal transduction, is a novel basic helix-loop-helix protein. Cell 95: 657–667.Ni M, Tepperman JM, Quail PH. 1999. Binding of phytochrome B to its nuclear signaling partner PIF3 is  reversibly induced by light. Nature  400: 462–466.Nozue K, Covington MF, Duel P, Lorr ain S, Fankhauser C, Harmer SL, Maloof JN. 2007. Rhythmic growth explained by coincidence between internal and external cues. Nature  448: 358–363.O’Neill DP, Ross JJ, Reid JB. 2000. Changes in gibberellin A1 levels and response during de-etiolation of pea seedlings. Plant Physiology  124: 805–812.Pao CI, Morgan PW. 1986. Genetic regulation of development in Sorghum bicolor . II. Effect of the ma(3)  allele mimicked by GA(3). Plant Physiology  82: 581–584.Park E, Kim J, Lee Y, Shin J, Oh E, Chung WI, Liu JR, Choi G. 2004. Degradation of phytochrome intera cting factor 3 in phytochrome-mediated signaling. Plant Cell Physiology  45: 968–975.
Parks BM, Quail PH. 1993. hy8, a new class of Arabidopsis long hypocotyl mutants deficient in functional phytochrome A. The Plant Cell  3: 39–48.Penfield S, Josse E-M, Kannangara R, Gilday AD, Halliday KJ, Graham IA. 2005. Cold and light control seed germination through the bHLH transcription factor SPATULA. Current Biology  15: 1998–2006.Peng JR, Richards DE, King KE, Co wling RJ, Murphy GP, Harberd NP. 1997. The Arabidopsis GAI gene defines a signaling pathway that negatively regulates gibberellin responses. Genes and Development  11: 3194–3205.Pierik R, Cuppens MLC, Voesenek LACJ, Visser EJW. 2004b. Interactions between ethylene and gibberellin s in phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in tobacco. Plant Physiology  136: 2928–2936.Pierik R, Millenaar FF, Peeter s AJM, Voesenek LACJ. 2005. New perspectives in flooding research : the use of shade avoidance and Arabidopsis thaliana . Annals of Botany  96: 533–540.
Pierik R, Visser EJW, de Kr oon H, Voesenek LACJ. 2003. Ethylene is
perspectives in flooding research : the use of shade avoidance and Arabidopsis thaliana . Annals of Botany  96: 533–540.Pierik R, Visser EJW, de Kr oon H, Voesenek LACJ. 2003. Ethylene is required in tobacco to successfully complete with proximate neighbours. Plant, Cell & Environment  26: 1229–1234.Pierik R, Whitelam GC, Voesenek LA CJ, de Kroon H, Visser EJW. 2004a. Canopy studies on ethylene-insensitive tobacco identify ethylene as a novel element in blue light and plant-plant signalling. Plant Journal  38: 310–319.Reed JW, Foster KR, Morg an PW, Chory J. 1996. Phytochrome B affects responsiveness to gibberellins in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology  112: 337–342.Robson PRH, Whitelam GC, Smith H. 1993. Selected components of the shade-avoidance syndrome are displaye d in a normal manner in mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica rapa deficient in phytochrome B. Plant Physiology  102: 1179–1184.Roig-Villanova I, Bou-Torrent J, Galsty an A, Carretero-Paulet L, Portolés
S, Rodríguez-Conepción M, Martínez-García JF. 2007. Interaction of shade avoidance and auxin responses: a role for two novel atypical bHLH proteins. The EMBO Journal  26: 4756–4767.Sakai T, Kagawa T, Kasahara M, Sw artz TE, Christie JM, Briggs WR, Wada M, Okada K. 2001. Arabidopsis nph1 and npl1: blue light receptors that mediate both phototropism and chloroplast relocation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  98: 6969–6974.Sakamoto K, Briggs WR. 2002. Cellular and subcellular localization of phototropin 1. The Plant Cell  14: 1723–1735.Sakamoto K, Nagatani A. 1996. Nuclear localization activity of phytochrome B. Plant Journal  10: 859–868.Salter MG, Franklin KA, Whitelam GC. 2003. Gating of the rapid shade avoidance response by the circadian clock in plants. Nature  426: 680–683.Sawa S, Ohgishi M, Goda H, Higuch i K, Shimada Y, Yoshida S, Koshiba T. 2002. The HAT2 gene, a member of the HD-Zip gene family, isolated
as an auxin inducible gene by DNA microarray screening, affects auxin response in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal  32: 1011–1022.Schäfer E, Nagy F . 2006. Physiological basis of photomorphogenesis. In: Schäfer E, Nagy F, eds. Photomorphogenesis in plants and bacteria, 3rd edn . Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer, 1–23.Schena M, Lloyd AM, Davis RW. 1993. The HAT4 gene of Arabidopsis encodes a developmental regulator. Genes and Development  7: 367–379.Schultz TF, Kiyosue T, Yanovsky  M, Wada M, Kay SA. 2001. A role for LKP2 in the circadian clock of Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell  13: 2659–2670.Selby CP, Sancar A. 2006. A cryptochrome/photolyase class of enzymes with single-stranded DNA-specific photolyase activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA  93: 8129–8133.Sessa G, Carabelli M, Sassi M, Ciol fi A, Possenti M, Mittempergher F, Becker J, Morelli G, Ruberti I. 2005. A dynamic balance between gene
activation and repression regulate s the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Genes and Development  19: 2811–2815.Sharrock  RA, Quail PH. 1989. Novel phytochrome sequences in Arabidopsis thaliana : structure, evolution, and differential expression of a plant regulatory photoreceptor family. Genes and Development  3: 1745–1757.Sheehan MJ, Farmer PR, Brutnell TP. 2004. Structure and expression of maize phytochrome family homologs. Genetics  167: 1395–1405.Sheehan MJ, Kennedy LM, Costich DE, Brutnell TP. 2007. Subfunctionalization of phyB1 and ph yB2 in the control of seedling and mature plant traits in maize. Plant Journal  49: 338–353.Shen Y, Khanna R, Carle CM, Quail PH. 2007. Phytochrome induces rapid PIF5 phosphorylation and degradation in  response to red-light activation. Plant Physiology  145: 1043–1051.Shen H, Moon J, Huq E. 2005. PIF1 is regulated by light-mediated
degradation through the ubiquitin-26S proteosome pathway to optimize photomorphogenesis of seedlings in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal  44: 1023–1035.
degradation through the ubiquitin-26S proteosome pathway to optimize photomorphogenesis of seedlings in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal  44: 1023–1035.Silverstone AL, Ciampaglio CN, Sun T-P . 1998. The Arabidopsis RGA gene encodes a transcriptional regulator repressing the gibberellin signal transduction pathway. The Plant Cell  10: 155–169.Simpson GG, Dean C. 2002. Arabidopsis , the Rosetta stone of flowering time? Science  296: 285–289. 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ta n s l e y  re v i e wNew Phytologist  (2008) 179: 930–944 www.newphytologist.org © The Author (2008). Journal compilation © New Phytologist  (2008)Review 944Smith H, T urnbull M, Kendrick RE. 1992. Light-grown plants of the cucumber long hypocotyl mutant exhibit both long-term and rapid growth responses to irradiation wi th supplementary far-red light. Photochemistry and Photobiology  56: 607–610.Smith H, Whitelam GC. 1990. Phytochrome, a family of photoreceptors with multiple physiological roles. Plant, Cell & Environment  13: 695–707.Smith H, Whitelam GC. 1997. The shade avoidance syndrome: multiple responses mediated by multiple phytochromes. Plant, Cell & Environment  20: 840–844.Soh M-S, Kim Y-M, Han S-J, Song P-S. 2000. REP1 , a basic helix-loop-helix protein is required for a branch  of phytochrome A signalling in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell  12: 2061–2073.Somers DE, Schultz TF, Milnamow M, Kay SA. 2000. ZEITLUPE encodes
a novel clock-associated PAS protein from Arabidopsis. Cell 101: 319–329.Somers DE, Sharrock RA, Tepperman JM, Quail PH. 1991. The hy3 long hypocotyl mutant of Arabidopsis is deficient in phytochrome B. The Plant Cell 3: 1263–1274.Steindler C, Matteucci A, Sessa G, Weimar T, Ohgishi M, Aoyama T, Morelli G, Ruberti I. 1999. Shade avoidance responses are mediated by the ATHB-2 HD-zip protein, a negati ve regulator of gene expression. Development  126: 4235–4245.Takano M, Inagaki N, Xie X, Yuzurihara  N, Hihara F, Ishizuka T, Yano M, Nishimura M, Miyao A, Hirochika H  et al. 2005. Distinct and cooperative functions of phytochro mes A,B and C in the control of deetiolation and flowering in rice. The Plant Cell  17: 3311–3325.Takemiya A, Inoue S, Doi M, Ki noshita T, Shimazaki K. 2005. Phototropins promote plant growth in response to blue light in low light environments. The Plant Cell  17: 1120–1127.Tanaka S, Mochizuki N, Nagatani A. 2002. Expression of the At GH3a
gene, and Arabidopsis homologue of the soybean GH3 gene, is regulated by phytochrome B. Plant Cell Physiology  43: 281–289.Thomashow MF. 1999. Plant cold acclimation: fr eezing tolerance genes and regulatory mechanisms. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology  50: 571–599.Ueguchi-Tanaka M, Vriezen WH, Smal l J, Laarhoven LJJ, Harren FJM, Van Der Straeten D. 2005. GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF1 encodes a soluble receptor for gibberellin. Nature  437: 693–698.Vandenbussche P, Vriezen WH, Small J,  Laarhoven LJJ, Harren FJM, Van Der Straeten D. 2003. Ethylene and auxin control the Arabidopsis response to decreased light intensity. Plant Physiology  133: 517–527.Whitelam GC, Johnson CB. 1982. Photomorphogenesis in Impatiens parviflora and other plant species under simulated natural canopy radiation. New Phytologist  90: 611–618.Whitelam GC, Johnson E, Peng J,  Carol P, Anderson MC, Cowl JS,
Harberd NP. 1993. Phytochrome A null mutants of Arabidopsis display a wild-type phenotype in white light. The Plant Cell  5: 757–768.Whitelam GC, Smith H. 1991. Retention of phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in phytoc hrome-deficient mutants of Arabidopsis,  cucumber and tomato. Journal of Plant Physiology  39: 119–125.Willige BC, Ghosh S, Nill C, Zour elidou M, Dohmann EMN, Maier A, Schwechheimer C. 2007. The DELLA domain of GA INSENSITIVE mediates the interaction with the GA INSENITIVE DWARF1A gibberellin receptor of Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell  19: 1209–1220.Yanovsky MJ, Casal JJ, Whitelam GC. 1995. Phytochrome A, phytochrome B and HY4 are involved in hypocotyl gr owth responses to natural radiation in Arabidopsis : weak de-etiolation of the phyA mutant under dense canopies. Plant, Cell & Environment  18: 788–794.About New Phytologist
About New Phytologist• New Phytologist  is owned by a non-profit-making charitable trust  dedicated to the promotion of plant science, facilitating projects
About New Phytologist• New Phytologist  is owned by a non-profit-making charitable trust  dedicated to the promotion of plant science, facilitating projectsfrom symposia to open access for our Tansley reviews. Complete information is available at www.newphytologist.org . Regular papers, Letters, Research revi ews, Rapid reports and both Modelling/Theory and Methods papers are encouraged.We are committed to rapid processing, from onlin e submission through to publication ‘as-ready’ via Early View  – our averagesubmission to decision time is ju st 29 days. Online-only colour is free, and essential print colour costs will be met if necessary.We also provide 25 offprints as well as a PDF for each article. For online summaries and ToC alerts , go to the website and click on ‘Journal online’. You can take out a personal subscription  tothe journal for a fraction of the institutional price. Rates st art at £135 in Europe/$251 in the USA & Canada for the online ed ition
(click on ‘Subscribe’ at the website). If you have any questions, do get in touch with Central Office ( newphytol@lancaster.ac.uk ; tel +44 1524 594691) or, for a localcontact in North America, the US Office ( newphytol@ornl.gov ; tel +1 865 576 5261). 14698137, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02507.x by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
