ArticleDe Novo Epigenetic Programs Inhibit PD-1 Blockade-Mediated T Cell RejuvenationGraphical AbstractHighlightsdPost-effector de novo DNA methylation programs promoteterminal T cell exhaustiondExhaustion-associated DNA methylation programs arepreserved during PD-1 blockadedBlocking de novo methylation enhances PD-1 blockade-mediated T cell rejuvenationdPD-1hi TILs acquire exhaustion-associated DNA-methylation programsAuthorsHazem E. Ghoneim, Yiping Fan,Ardiana Moustaki, ..., Geoff Neale,Paul G. Thomas, Ben YoungbloodCorrespondencebenjamin.youngblood@stjude.orgIn BriefDe novo DNA methylation programspromote T cell exhaustion, and inhibitingthese programs can enhance immune-checkpoint-blockade-mediated T cellrejuventation and ultimately facilitate thecontrol of chronic viral infections andtumor growth.Ghoneim et al., 2017, Cell 170, 142–157June 29, 2017 ª2017 Elsevier Inc.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.007
ArticleDe Novo Epigenetic Programs InhibitPD-1 Blockade-Mediated T Cell RejuvenationHazem E. Ghoneim,1Yiping Fan,2Ardiana Moustaki,1Hossam A. Abdelsamed,1Pradyot Dash,1Pranay Dogra,1Robert Carter,2Walid Awad,1Geoff Neale,3Paul G. Thomas,1and Ben Youngblood1,4,*1Department of Immunology2Department of Computational Biology3Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics & BiotechnologySt. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA4Lead Contact*Correspondence: benjamin.youngblood@stjude.orghttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.007SUMMARYImmune-checkpoint-blockade (ICB)-mediated reju-venation of exhausted T cells has emerged as apromising approach for treating various cancersand chronic infections. However, T cells that becomefully exhausted during prolonged antigen exposureremain refractory to ICB-mediated rejuvenation. We
report that blocking de novo DNA methylation inactivated CD8 T cells allows them to retain theireffector functions despite chronic stimulation duringa persistent viral infection. Whole-genome bisulﬁtesequencing of antigen-speciﬁc murine CD8 T cellsat the effector and exhaustion stages of an immuneresponse identiﬁed progressively acquired heritablede novo methylation programs that restrict T cellexpansion and clonal diversity during PD-1 blockadetreatment. Moreover, these exhaustion-associatedDNA-methylation programs were acquired in tumor-inﬁltrating PD-1hi CD8 T cells, and approaches toreverse these programs improved T cell responsesand tumor control during ICB. These data establishde novo DNA-methylation programming as a regu-lator of T cell exhaustion and barrier of ICB-mediatedT cell rejuvenation.INTRODUCTIONAntigen-driven clonal expansion and differentiation of naive CD8
T cells initially instills the cells with an effector program that facil-itates their ability to directly and indirectly kill antigen-presentingcells ( Kaech and Cui, 2012 ). However, prolonged stimulation ofthe cells, as occurs during chronic infection and cancer, resultsin a progressive suppression of the cell’s effector function,commonly referred to as ‘‘exhaustion’’ ( Wherry, 2011 ). Duringacquisition of the exhausted state, T cell functional impairmentfollows a hierarchical loss in expression of the effector cytokinesinterleukin-2 (IL-2), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF a), andinterferon g(IFNg). Accompanying the impairment in cytokineexpression is a decline in the cells’ cytolytic ability, proliferativecapacity, and sustained upregulated expression of surfaceinhibitory receptors (IRs), including programmed cell death 1(PD-1) ( Wherry, 2011 ). The discovery that IRs serve as an im-mune checkpoint regulating T cell effector function was rapidly
translated into therapeutic approaches that block these check-points for the treatment of various cancers ( Sharma and Allison,2015a ).While immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy has yieldedstriking clinical responses, its success is unfortunately limited toa minority of patients with cancer ( Sharma and Allison, 2015a ).The mechanism(s) underlying ICB therapy non-responsivenessremains a major challenge for a broader success of this therapy.Recent efforts to identify antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells that retainthe potential to respond to ICB therapy have established that thecumulative expression of multiple inhibitory receptors progres-sively restricts the cells’ ability to be rejuvenated ( Jin et al.,2010 ). Commensurate with the progressive upregulation of IRsand reduced responsiveness to ICB therapy, it has becomeevident that aspects of the T cell exhaustion gene-expressionprogram are reinforced, resulting in stable maintenance of
exhaustion-associated features even if the antigen levels arereduced or cleared ( Angelosanto et al., 2012; Utzschneideret al., 2013; Youngblood et al., 2011 ).Given that exhaustion-associated gene expression programs
et al., 2013; Youngblood et al., 2011 ).Given that exhaustion-associated gene expression programscan be maintained in the absence of antigen, we sought to betterunderstand the heritable nature of T cell-intrinsic transcriptionalprogramming and how it impacts ICB therapy. During cellular dif-ferentiation, recruitment and/or eviction of speciﬁc transcriptionfactors to regions of accessible chromatin facilitate cell-type-speciﬁc gene expression programming ( Vaquerizas et al.,2009 ). Long-term maintenance of transcription factor accessi-bility to gene regulatory elements is controlled in part by covalentmodiﬁcations to histones and DNA that affect chromatin struc-ture, resulting in an ‘‘epigenetic memory’’ of gene expressionprograms in a dividing population of cells ( Bintu et al., 2016;Bird, 2002 ). Consistent with prior reports showing that exhaus-tion-associated gene expression programs become reinforced,
a recent study reported that T cell exhaustion is associatedwith a general increase in chromatin accessibility and thatmany of these accessible regions are retained after PD-1blockade therapy ( Pauken et al., 2016 ). While a variety of142 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 ª2017 Elsevier Inc.
Figure 1. Whole-Genome Methylation Proﬁling of LCMV-Speciﬁc WT and Dnmt3a-Deﬁcient CD8 T Cells(A) Experimental setup. CD4 T cells were depleted in WT and Dnmt3a -cKO mice prior to infection with LCMV clone 13.(B) Longitudinal summary graph of WT and Dnmt3a cKO mice serum viral titers during chronic LCMV infection.(C) Summary graph of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell quantity in the peripheral blood of WT and cKO mice during chronic LCMV infection.(legend continued on next page)Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 143
transcription factors and epigenetic modiﬁcations are associ-ated with changes in chromatin accessibility, recent evidencesupports the notion that DNA methylation is a critical epigeneticmechanism for establishing stable gene-silencing programs(Bintu et al., 2016; Cedar and Bergman, 2009 ). We report herethat de novo DNA methylation acquired during and after thepeak of an effector CD8 T cell response to a chronic viralinfection or tumor challenge is critical for establishing T cellexhaustion. Our study identiﬁes genome-wide de novo DNA-methylation programs that promote terminal differentiation ofexhausted T cells and reveals that these programs persist afterPD-1 blockade therapy. In contrast, CD8 T cells lacking theacquisition of such methylation programs resist functionalexhaustion and retain a greater potential for expansion afterICB. These data establish Dnmt3a-mediated de novo DNAmethylation as a mechanism restricting the efﬁcacy of ICB ther-
apy and have broad implications for novel approaches toenhance T cell-based immunotherapies.RESULTSPost-effector De Novo DNA-Methylation ProgrammingAccompanies T cell ExhaustionRecent studies demonstrated that the phenotypic and functionalchanges that occur during the naive-to-effector stage of CD8T cell differentiation are accompanied by genome-wide changesin DNA-methylation programming ( Scharer et al., 2013 ); how-ever, the role of these changes in regulating the functional stateof the cell is largely unknown. To determine if T cell post-effector adaptation is also accompanied by additional epige-netic modiﬁcations and to assess the consequence of theseepigenetic programs on the development of T cell exhaustion,we measured the quantity and function of antigen-speciﬁcwild-type (WT) or mutant CD8 T cells that lack the ability to ac-quire de novo DNA-methylation programs during persistentLCMV (lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus) infection in mice.
Inhibition of de novo methylation programming was achievedby conditionally deleting the de novo DNA methyltransferaseDnmt3a ( Dnmt3a -cKO; hereafter referred to as cKO mice) usinga Cre recombinase under the control of the granzyme b promoter(Figures S1 A and S1B). WT and cKO mice were initially depletedof CD4 T cells and then infected with the chronic strain of LCMV(Figures 1 A and 1B). Longitudinal tracking of virus-speciﬁc CD8T cells in the blood of chronically infected WT mice revealeda progressive decline in gp33-speciﬁc (a dominant LCMVepitope) CD8 T cells ( Figure 1 C) as well as a reduction in the totalquantity of polyclonal LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells ( Figure S1 C). Incontrast, the contraction of virus-speciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells afterthe peak of the effector response was modest, and the quantityof cKO virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells that survived the contraction
stage of the immune response was maintained at a much greaterlevel relative to the WT CD8 T cells ( Figures 1 C and S1C). Wenext assessed whether the retained cKO CD8 T cells also main-tained their effector function despite persistent antigen exposureand maintenance of elevated expression of PD-1 ( Figures S1 Eand S1G). As expected, WT antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells isolatedfrom mice after 2 months of chronic infection were severelyimpaired in their ability to produce IFN gand IL-2 in responseto peptide stimulation ( Figure 1 D). In contrast, cKO CD8 T cellsretained a substantial capacity to co-produce both cytokines(Figures 1 D and S1F). Thus, CD8 T cells lacking the ability toacquire new DNA-methylation programs retain a heightened ca-pacity to recall effector cytokines despite prolonged TCR (T cellreceptor) stimulation and sustained PD-1 expression.To identify de novo DNA-methylation programs associatedwith progressive commitment to T cell exhaustion, we next
measured genome-wide DNA-methylation changes in WT andcKO virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells at the effector (8 days post-infec-tion [dpi]; Figure S1 H) and exhaustion (35 dpi) stages of the im-
measured genome-wide DNA-methylation changes in WT andcKO virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells at the effector (8 days post-infec-tion [dpi]; Figure S1 H) and exhaustion (35 dpi) stages of the im-mune response ( Figure 1 E). Initial assessment of 5’ Cytosine—phosphate—Guanine 3’ (CpG) methylation levels across theentire genome of all samples demonstrated that differentiationof both WT and cKO day 8 antigen-speciﬁc effector CD8T cells was coupled to /C2410,000 demethylated regions relativeto naive CD8 T cells ( Figures S1 I and S1J). In addition to DNA de-methylation, WT CD8 T cells acquired /C24980 de novo programs,the majority of which were not acquired in the cKO effector CD8T cells ( Figures 1 F and S1K). We next examined both DNA deme-thylation and de novo methylation events in WT CD8 T cells dur-
ing the effector-to-exhaustion stage of T cell development. Incontrast to the striking level of DNA demethylation that occurredduring the effector stage of the immune response, only 280 addi-tionally demethylated regions were detected ( Figure S1 J). More-over, we found that WT CD8 T cells acquired an additional 1,200Dnmt3a-dependent DNA methylation events during the effector-to-exhaustion transition ( Figure 1 F). These data indicate that,during the effector-to-exhaustion transition, WT CD8 T cellscontinue to undergo epigenetic changes that are predominantlyde novo events. To further characterize when WT and Dnmt3acKO CD8 T cells acquire divergent DNA-methylation programs,we performed an unsupervised principle-component analysis(PCA) and generated a dendrogram of the whole-genome bisul-ﬁte sequencing (WGBS) datasets based on the methylation sta-tus of the top 3,000 most variable CpG sites in all WT and cKO
(D) Representative FACS analysis of PD-1 expression on gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the spleens of WT and cKO mice after 2 months of chronic infection,gated on CD8+ T cells. Representative intracellular FACS analysis of IFN gand IL-2 expression from gp33 peptide-stimulated CD44hiCD8 T cell splenocytes ofchronically infected WT and cKO mice.(E) Experimental setup for performing whole-genome bisulﬁte sequencing (WGBS) methylation analysis of virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells.(F) The number of newly methylated regions in gp33-speciﬁc effector or exhausted WT CD8 T cells.(G) Heatmap showing cluster analysis of the top 3,000 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) among naive and LCMV-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells at t he
effector and chronic stages of the immune response. Color intensity scales from red (methylated region) to blue (non-methylated region).(H) Summary table of ingenuity pathway analysis showing putative upstream regulators for Dnmt3a-targeted genes.(I) Nucleotide-resolution methylation proﬁling of the IFNgandMyc loci in naive and LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells. Vertical blue and red lines indicate CpG positionsin the loci. The ratio of blue to red indicates the percentage of unmethylated versus methylated reads, respectively, in the WGBS.N = 3–5 mice per group of two or more independent experiments. Error bars indicate SEM.144 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
(legend on next page)Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 145
antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells. Our analysis revealed that the DNA-methylation status of WT CD8 T cells segregated from themethylation status of cKO CD8 T cells during the effector-to-exhaustion transition ( Figure S1 L). Importantly, we found thatseveral of the chronic-associated de novo epigenetic eventswere acquired at sites that were initially methylated in naiveCD8 T cells ( Figure 1 G).We next performed a gene ontology (GO) biological processanalysis of the exhaustion-associated Dnmt3a-targeted loci todetermine if Dnmt3a-targeted genes were involved in biologicalprocesses known to be impacted during T cell exhaustion.Importantly, the analysis of Dnmt3a-targets in exhausted WTCD8 T cells identiﬁed several immune-related functions amongthe top-ranked GO biological processes ( Figure S1 M). In addi-tion, Biocarta pathway enrichment analysis of all Dnmt3a-targetsshowed statistical enrichment of immune-related signaling path-
ways, such as TCR-signaling and IL-7/IL-2-signaling pathways(Figure S1 N). We further characterized these de novo programsusing ingenuity-pathway analysis and observed that severaltranscription factors and signaling molecules, known to regulateimmune-related pathways, were identiﬁed as putative regulatorsof the Dnmt3a-targeted loci ( Figure 1 H). Speciﬁcally among thelist of Dnmt3a-targeted loci were IFNg,Myc (Figure 1 I),Tcf7,Ccr7 ,Tbx21 , and Eomesodermin ( Eomes )(Figure S2 A). Thesedata document the DNA-methylation programs acquired duringand after the peak of the effector response that are coupled tothe progressive decline in CD8 T cell effector functions.Chronic T Cell Stimulation Induces Post-effectorDe Novo DNA-Methylation ProgrammingOur data demonstrate that de novo DNA-methylation programsare progressively acquired during the development of T cellexhaustion and that speciﬁc differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) serve as an epigenetic signature for exhausted T cells.However, it is unclear whether these post-effector DNA-methyl-ation programs are acquired due to persistent stimulation orwhether they are acquired due to a hard-wired differentiation pro-gram that continues regardless of additional TCR stimulation.Therefore, we next sought to examine whether exhaustion-asso-ciated de novo DNA-methylation programs were also acquiredin highly functional WT memory CD8 T cells generated duringan acute viral infection. We designed loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁtesequencing primers to assess the methylation status of anexhaustion-associated DMR in the IFNglocus in naive andvirus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells isolated from chronically infected andinfection-matched immune WT and cKO mice ( Figure 2 A). Bothmemory T cells from immune mice and cKO CD8 T cells fromchronically infected mice retain high expression of IFN g(Fig-ure 2 B), and accordingly remained demethylated at the IFNg
DMR, while only WT exhausted T cells from chronically infectedanimals remethylated this region ( Figures 2 C and S2B). Thus,acquisition of the post-effector de novo DNA-methylation pro-gram at the IFNglocus is not simply due to slow accumulationof DNA-methylation marks over time in the aged cells, rather it re-sults from chronic stimulation. We next asked if naive and mem-ory-associated genes that are downregulated during the effectorstage of the immune response acquire and maintain de novo DNAmethylation under conditions of persistent antigen stimulation. Todo this, we measured the methylation level of the DMR in the Ccr7locus in naive and virus-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells isolated8 dpi (effector cells) and 60 dpi from chronic LCMV-infected miceand compared it to that of functional memory WT CD8 T cells iso-lated 60 dpi from acute-infected mice. Indeed, downregulation of
CCR7 in effector (at 8 dpi) CD8 T cells accompanied de novomethylation of the locus ( Figure S2 B). Functional-memory cellshad a reduction in this de novo program consistent with a subset
CCR7 in effector (at 8 dpi) CD8 T cells accompanied de novomethylation of the locus ( Figure S2 B). Functional-memory cellshad a reduction in this de novo program consistent with a subsetof functional-memory CD8 T cells expressing CCR7. However,theCcr7effector-associated DMR underwent further methylationin the exhausted WT cells ( Figures 2 D and S2B). These data sug-gest that the transcriptional repression of genes during theeffector stage of the immune response may become epigeneti-cally reinforced during or shortly after the effector stage.To more broadly deﬁne the de novo DNA methylation programsthat are unique to T cell exhaustion, we performed WGBS methyl-ation proﬁling of WT memory CD8 T cells isolated 35 days afteracute LCMV infection and compared the methylation proﬁlewith the proﬁle of exhausted WT CD8 T cells to identify DMRs.Importantly, more than 71% of the unmethylated DMRs in func-tional memory WT CD8 T cells relative to exhausted WT CD8
T cells were also identiﬁed as Dnmt3a-targets in exhausted cells(e.g., IFNgandCcr7 loci) ( Figures 2 E, 2F, S3A, and S3B). We nextasked whether these programs are only acquired in the absenceof CD4 T cell help. Interestingly, we found that even in the pres-ence of CD4 T cell help, WT exhausted CD8 T cells still acquiresimilarly high levels of DNA methylation at several of these re-gions ( Figure S3 C). Taken together, the lack of exhaustion-asso-ciated de novo methylation programs at a genome-wide level infunctional memory CD8 T cells further suggests that these pro-grams result from the chronic stimulation of exhausted T cells.De Novo DNA-Methylation Programming RegulatesDevelopment of Fully Exhausted T CellsProgressive adaptation of antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells tochronic stimulation occurs asynchronously among the totalFigure 2. Exhaustion-Associated De Novo DNA-Methylation Programs Are Not Acquired during a Primary Acute Viral Infection
(A) Experimental setup for loci-speciﬁc methylation analysis of exhaustion-associated DMRs in functional versus exhausted virus-speciﬁc CD8 T ce lls.(B) Representative intracellular FACS analysis and summary graph of mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) for IFN gand IL-2 expression among ex vivo stimulated(gp33-peptide) WT and cKO CD44hiCD8 T cells isolated 2 months post-acute (Armstrong strain) or chronic (clone 13 strain) LCMV infection.(C and D) Schematic of CpG sites in the (C) IFNgand (D) Ccr7 loci. Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of the IFNgandCcr7 DMRs in naive and tetramer+CD8 T cells isolated from acutely and chronically infected WT and cKO mice. Horizontal lines represent individual sequenced clones from the pool of FA CS-puriﬁed tetramer+CD8 T cells. Filled circles, methylated cytosine; open circles, nonmethylated cytosine.
(E) Nucleotide-resolution view of DNA methylation programs at IFNgand Ccr7 loci from WGBS analyses of exhausted and functional-memory WT CD8 T cells.(F) Venn diagram of WGBS data showing overlap between exhaustion-speciﬁc Dnmt3a-targeted loci and functional-memory-speciﬁc demethylated loci a mongWT CD8 T cells.Error bars indicate SEM.146 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
Figure 3. CD8 T Cell-Intrinsic De Novo Programming Regulates Exhaustion(A) Experimental setup for tracking congenically distinct WT and cKO P14 CD8 T cells in LCMV infected Rag1 KO mice.(B) Longitudinal measurement of WT and cKO P14 cell frequencies in the peripheral blood of chimeric Rag1 KO mice during chronic LCMV infection.(C) Representative FACS analysis and summary graphs of cKO (red) and WT (blue) P14 cell frequency in tissues of chronically infected chimeric Rag1 KO m iceat 35 dpi.(legend continued on next page)Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 147
pool of antigen-experienced cells and results in heterogeneouspopulations of CD8 T cells with varying degrees of T cell exhaus-tion. Coupled to this adaptation is the differential expression ofthe T-box transcription factors T-bet and Eomes ( Speiseret al., 2014; Wherry, 2011 ). In line with these prior ﬁndings, weidentiﬁed exhaustion-associated de novo programs in theT-bet and Eomes loci among our WGBS data ( Figures S4 A andS2A). Correspondingly, Dnmt3a-deﬁcient CD8 T cells had signif-icantly higher T-bet and lower Eomes expression compared tothe levels observed in exhausted WT cells ( Figures S4 C andS4D). Furthermore, the Eomeslocells were predominantlyTim-3–and T-bet+(Figures S4 C, S4E, and S4F). Recent studieshave also linked Tcf7 expression to retention of T cell functionduring chronic infection ( Im et al., 2016; Utzschneider et al.,2016 ). Consistent with these reports, we identiﬁed an effector-associated de novo DNA-methylation program in the Tcf7 locus
(Figure S2 A). Loci-speciﬁc methylation analysis of the Tcf7 DMRin virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells isolated from chronically infectedWT and cKO mice demonstrated that exhausted WT cells re-tained the repressive program acquired during the effector stageof the immune response ( Figure S4 B), whereas cKO cells re-tained an unmethylated Tcf7-DMR and expressed signiﬁcantlyhigher levels of Tcf1 ( Figures S4 G and S4H). Together, thesedata further support a model whereby de novo DNA methylationserves as a mechanism for stable epigenetic gene silencing andreinforces commitment to terminal differentiation of exhaustedT cells.Exhaustion-Associated De Novo MethylationProgramming Is Coupled to the Limited ProliferativeCapacity of Exhausted CD8 T CellsPreservation of cKO CD8 T cell quantity during prolonged expo-sure to high levels of antigen prompted us to assess the epige-
netic status of genes associated with the cell’s proliferativepotential. c-Myc has been shown to be essential for activation-induced metabolic reprogramming and antigen-driven prolifera-tion of naive CD8 T cells ( Wang et al., 2011 ), and our datarevealed that the Myc locus acquires an exhaustion-associatedde novo DMR ( Figure 1 I). Loci-speciﬁc methylation analysis oftheMyc DMR among naive, functional-memory, and exhaustedWT virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells conﬁrmed that the Myc locus un-dergoes striking demethylation during the effector stage of theimmune response, followed by remethylation during chronic an-tigen exposure ( Figure S5 A). In contrast, memory CD8 T cells re-tained their demethylated state ( Figure S5 A). To determine if thisepigenetic program was coupled to changes in Myc-regulatedexpression programs, we measured the surface expression ofCD98, a downstream metabolic target of c-Myc, in antigen-spe-
ciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells during chronic or acute LCMVinfection. Demethylation of the Myc DMR in WT effector anti-gen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells was coupled to upregulated CD98expression ( Figure S5 B). Additionally, both WT and cKO memoryCD8 T cells maintained elevated levels of CD98 expression(Figure S5 B). In contrast, CD98 expression was downregulatedon the exhausted WT cells but was retained at higher levelson cKO CD8 T cells during chronic infection ( Figure S5 B), indi-cating that the de novo methylation acquired during the develop-ment of T cell exhaustion is coupled to Myc-regulated proteinexpression.To examine whether these programs were coupled to T cellproliferation, we stained virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells for Ki67 atthe effector and chronic stages of the immune response. At8 dpi, the majority of both WT and cKO effector CD8 T cells ex-pressed high levels of Ki67 ( Figure S5 C), but by 60 dpi, the pro-liferation of virus-speciﬁc WT CD8 T cells was substantially
reduced. In contrast, antigen-speciﬁc and polyclonal virus-spe-ciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells have signiﬁcantly higher levels of Ki67 inboth Tim-3+and Tim-3/C0subsets of PD-1+cells ( Figures S5 D–
reduced. In contrast, antigen-speciﬁc and polyclonal virus-spe-ciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells have signiﬁcantly higher levels of Ki67 inboth Tim-3+and Tim-3/C0subsets of PD-1+cells ( Figures S5 D–S5F). These data suggest that the elevated quantity of cKO cellsduring persistent infection is in part coupled to their retained pro-liferative capacity.CD8 T Cell-Intrinsic De Novo Programming RegulatesExhaustionTo determine whether the retained effector function and prolifer-ative capacity of Dnmt3a-cKO CD8 T cells exposed to chronicstimulation are due to cell-intrinsic changes in DNA-methylationprogramming rather than extrinsic factors, we generated cKOtransgenic P14 cells (transgenic CD8 T cells with a TCR speciﬁcto the gp33 epitope) and co-adoptively transferred congenicallydistinct WT and cKO P14 CD8 T cells into Rag1 KO mice. Use ofthe chimeric Rag1 KO mouse model enabled us to control for the
inﬂuence of extrinsic factors such as other activated Gzmb-expressing immune cells—NK and CD4 T cells, undetecteddifferences in viral titers, inﬂammatory microenvironment, anddifferences in the depletion of peripheral CD4 T cells amongWT versus cKO mice. Chimeric Rag1 KO mice were infectedwith the chronic strain of LCMV, and the P14 cells were trackedlongitudinally ( Figure 3 A). Both WT and cKO P14 cells underwenta similarly robust expansion during the effector stage of the im-mune response, but following this proliferative burst, WT P14cells experienced a much greater degree of contraction relativeto host-matched cKO P14 cells, resulting in an elevated fre-quency of cKO P14 cells that was maintained into the chronicstage of the immune response ( Figure 3 B). The selective preser-vation of cKO P14 cells during chronic infection was not onlyobserved in the blood and spleen but also in peripheral non-lymphoid tissues, including the liver and lungs ( Figure 3 C). We
(D) Representative FACS analysis and summary graph of IFN gexpression frequency among cKO and WT P14 cells from spleens of chronically infected chimericRag1 KO mice.(E) Representative FACS analysis and summary graphs of intracellular TCF1 and Ki67 levels among cKO and WT P14 cells in spleens from chronically infec tedchimeric Rag1 KO mice.(F) Representative post-sort purity FACS analysis of cKO and WT P14 cells from spleens of chronically infected chimeric Rag1 KO mice.(G) Locus-speciﬁc DNA-methylation analysis of the IFN gand Tcf7 DMRs in naive P14 cells from uninfected mice and WT and cKO P14 splenocytes fromchronically infected chimeric Rag1 KO mice.N = 3 mice per group of two independent experiments. Error bars indicate SEM.148 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
(legend on next page)Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 149
found that the cKO P14 cells retained an enhanced capacity toproliferate, higher Tcf1 expression, and heightened effectorcytokine production ( Figures 3 D and 3E). Locus-speciﬁc DNA-methylation analysis of a post-effector-associated DMR (e.g.,in the IFNglocus) and an effector-associated DMR (e.g., in theTcf7 locus) further conﬁrmed selective inhibition of de novoDNA-methylation programming in cKO P14 cells ( Figures 3 Fand 3G). These data conﬁrm that the retained effector propertiesof cKO CD8 T cells are cell intrinsic and collectively suggest thatDnmt3a-mediated DNA-methylation programming is critical forestablishing the major hallmarks of T cell exhaustion.PD-1 Blockade Therapy Does Not Erase Exhaustion-Associated DNA-Methylation Programs in RejuvenatedT cellsOur ﬁnding that exhaustion-associated DNA-methylation pro-grams play a critical role in establishing a terminal-exhaustionfate prompted us to next ask whether PD-1 blockade-mediated
rejuvenation of T cells results in erasure of these programs ( Fig-ure 4 A). To address this question, we treated chronically infectedWT mice with anti-PD-L1, isolated the rejuvenated antigen-spe-ciﬁc CD8 T cells, and assessed the methylation status of theexhaustion-associated DMRs ( Figure 4 A). As expected, PD-1blockade treatment increased the quantity of gp33-speciﬁcand total polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+CD8 T cells in WT mice ( Fig-ure 4 B). Quite strikingly, we observed no change in the effectorand post-effector de novo DNA-methylation programs despiteT cell expansion ( Figures 4 C and S2C). Preservation of thede novo DNA-methylation programs at the IFNg,Myc,Tcf7,Ccr7 , and Tbx21 loci in the rejuvenated WT CD8 T cells promp-ted us to more broadly assess the stability of DNA-methylationprogramming in all Dnmt3a-targeted genes. WGBS was per-formed on FACS-puriﬁed antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the
spleens of the PD-1 blockade–treated and untreated WT mice(Figure 4 A). Only 5,964 DMRs between the treated versus un-treated WT CD8 T cells were detected among the WT exhaustedand WT rejuvenated WGBS datasets. Among the 5,964 DMRs,only 84 were Dnmt3a-mediated programs, which accounts forless than 2% reprogramming of the total Dnmt3a-mediatedexhaustion programs ( Figure 4 D). Notably, when we comparedPD-1 blockade-associated DNA-methylation DMRs with themethylation proﬁles of functional-memory WT CD8 T cells, wefound that <1% of these DMRs were present in the functionalT cells ( Figure 4 D). Importantly, exhaustion-associated DNA-methylation programming across the IFNg,Myc,Tcf7, andTbx21 loci were unchanged in rejuvenated WT CD8 T cells ( Fig-ures 4 E and S2C). These data illustrate how remarkably stablethe exhaustion-associated DNA-methylation programs are.Given that PD-1 blockade does not erase exhaustion-associated
methylation programs and that they play a causal role in restrict-ing effector function, it raises the question of whether these spe-ciﬁc epigenetic programs restrict the therapeutic response ofPD-1 blockade treatment.Inhibition of De Novo DNA-Methylation ProgrammingSynergizes with PD-1 Blockade to EnhanceRejuvenation of CD8 T CellsMaintenance of PD-1hi Dnmt3a cKO virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells inan environment with viral loads comparable to chronically in-fected WT mice provided a unique opportunity to test whetherDnmt3a-mediated de novo DNA methylation restricts the abilityof cells to respond to PD-1 blockade therapy. Chronically in-fected WT and Dnmt3a cKO mice were treated with anti-PD-L1for 2 weeks, and the antigen-speciﬁc T cell response wasmeasured ( Figure 5 A). Quite strikingly, the cKO virus-speciﬁcCD8 T cells increased in frequency and quantity during PD-1blockade to a signiﬁcantly greater degree compared to WTvirus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells. The expanded population of cKO
T cells was observed not only in the spleen ( Figures 5 B, S6A,and S6B) but also in non-lymphoid tissues ( Figures 5 C, 5D,
T cells was observed not only in the spleen ( Figures 5 B, S6A,and S6B) but also in non-lymphoid tissues ( Figures 5 C, 5D,S6C, and S6D). Notably, gp33-speciﬁc and np396-speciﬁcCD8 T cells, which are known to be less responsive to PD-1blockade relative to gp276-speciﬁc CD8 T cells, underwent asynergistic expansion after PD-1 blockade treatment in cKOmice ( Figures 5 B,S6C, and S6E). Consistent with our observa-tion that Dnmt3a-deﬁcient CD8 T cells resist terminal differenti-ation, the expanded virus-speciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells retainedlower levels of Tim-3 and Eomes and a higher level of T-bet afterPD-1 blockade treatment ( Figures S6 A and S6B). These datademonstrate that de novo DNA-methylation programs restrictthe ability of exhausted T cells to respond to PD-1 blockadetherapy.Because we observed a striking response across multipleLCMV epitope-speciﬁc CD8 T cell populations in cKO mice, wenext proceeded to determine whether the expanded pool of
cKO cells maintained their T cell clonal diversity. GP33-speciﬁcFigure 4. Exhaustion-Associated De Novo DNA-Methylation Programs Are Preserved during PD-L1 Blockade Therapy(A) Experimental setup for loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of exhaustion-associated DMRs in virus-speciﬁc effector (isolated at 8 dpi w ith the chronicstrain of LCMV), exhausted, and rejuvenated CD8 T cells.(B) Representative FACS analysis of CD44 expression and gp33 tetramer staining in CD8 T cells from the spleens of chronically infected WT after mock tr eatmentor PD-1 blockade treatment. Summary graph of polyclonal (CD44hiPD-1+) virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cell fold expansion in the spleens of chronically infected WT miceafter mock treatment (gray bar) or PD-1 blockade (red bar) treatment. Fold expansion was calculated relative to change in mock-treated WT mice. Error bars
indicate SD.(C) Longitudinal loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of de novo DNA-methylation programs in antigen-speciﬁc WT CD8 T cells. Red bars represe nt theaverage percentage of DNA methylation of all CpG sites in the speciﬁed DMR at different time points during chronic virus infection. Representative me thylationproﬁles are adjacent to the corresponding bar graphs. Error bars indicate SEM.(D) Venn diagrams of WGBS data showing overlap between Dnmt3a-mediated exhaustion-speciﬁc DMRs and PD-1 blockade–generated DMRs among WT CD8T cells (top) and overlap between functional-memory-related DMRs and PD-1 blockade–generated DMRs among WT CD8 T cells (bottom).(E) Nucleotide-resolution view of DNA-methylation programs at IFNg,Myc,Tcf7, and Tbx21 loci from WGBS analyses of exhausted WT CD8 T cells before andafter PD-1 blockade.N = 3–5 mice per group of two independent experiments.150 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
(legend on next page)Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 151
CD8 T cells were single-cell sorted from the blood of chronicallyinfected WT and cKO mice before and after PD-L1 blockade, andthe TCR bchain of the individual cells was sequenced. Interest-ingly, rejuvenated WT CD8 T cells displayed a reduced TCRrepertoire diversity among the expanded gp33-speciﬁc T cells,whereas the TCR repertoire diversity of gp33-speciﬁc cKO CD8T cells was maintained after PD-1 blockade treatment ( Figures5E and S6G). These data suggest that exhaustion-associatedDNA-methylation programming restricts the clonal breadth ofcells that can proliferate in response to PD-1 blockade therapy.We next assessed the function of the PD-L1 blockade-expanded population of antigen-speciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells bymeasuring their ability to recall effector cytokines after peptidestimulation. Indeed, the expanded population of LCMV-speciﬁccKO CD8 T cells retained a heightened capacity to produce IFN gand IL-2 ( Figures 5 F,S6H, and S6I). Given that PD-1 blockade in
the cKO mice resulted in expansion of an extensive repertoire ofLCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells that retained effector properties, wenext proceeded to determine whether the enhanced therapeuticresponse impacted the viral load. Strikingly, anti-PD-L1 treat-ment resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in the viral burden in mul-tiple tissues in cKO mice compared to that in anti-PD-L1-treatedWT mice ( Figure 5 G). These data collectively serve as a proof ofprinciple that therapeutic approaches designed to erase or blockexhaustion-associated DNA-methylation programs may syner-gize with ICB therapy and enhance the therapeutic response.DNA-Demethylating-Agent Treatment Prior to PD-1Blockade Enhances the Reinvigoration Potential ofExhausted CD8 T CellsOur ﬁnding that de novo DNA-methylation programming iscausal in reinforcing the development of T cell exhaustion andestablishes a stable cell-intrinsic barrier to PD-1 blockade-medi-
ated rejuvenation of T cells prompted us to ask whether thera-peutic use of DNA-demethylating agents prior to PD-1 blockadetreatment could enhance rejuvenation of WT exhausted CD8T cells. WT mice chronically infected with LCMV were treatedwith a low dose of the standard DNA-demethylating agent5-aza-20-deoxycytidine (decitabine ‘‘DAC’’) for 2 weeks followedby PD-1 blockade ( Figure 6 A). Longitudinal analysis of virus-spe-ciﬁc CD8 T cell quantity in the peripheral blood of chronically in-fected mice revealed a synergistic expansion of gp33-speciﬁcT cells in treated mice that received DAC prior to PD-1 blockadetherapy compared to those receiving monotherapy ( Figures 6 Band 6C). Importantly, this increase in antigen-speciﬁc and thetotal polyclonal virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cell frequencies was alsoobserved in the spleen, lungs, and liver of chronically infectedWT mice receiving sequential combination therapy ( Figures 6 D,6F, 6G, S7A, and S7B). Notably, concurrent treatment of DAC
with PD-1 blockade did not enhance rejuvenation of WT ex-hausted T cells (data not shown). The striking expansion ofvirus-speciﬁc T cells observed in both lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues of sequentially treated mice suggests thatDNA-demethylating-agent treatment may synergize with PD-1blockade to enhance the rejuvenation.To determine whether the elevated frequencies of rejuvenatedWT CD8 T cells that result from sequential DAC and PD-1blockade treatment are coupled to enhanced proliferation, wemeasured Ki67 expression in antigen-speciﬁc and polyclonalvirus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in chronically infected mice. Interest-ingly, DAC treatment signiﬁcantly increased the proliferativecapacity of virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells ( Figures 6 E, 6H, S7C,and S7D). Furthermore, combination treatment results in agreater number of cells that could recall the expression of theeffector cytokine ( Figures S7 E–S7G), albeit not quite as effective
as genetic deletion of the DNA methyltransferase. While the anti-
greater number of cells that could recall the expression of theeffector cytokine ( Figures S7 E–S7G), albeit not quite as effectiveas genetic deletion of the DNA methyltransferase. While the anti-tumor effect of DNA-demethylating agents is commonly attrib-uted to its direct cytotoxicity or immunoregulating inﬂuence ontumor cells or microenvironment ( Chiappinelli et al., 2016; Liet al., 2014 ), our data suggest that therapeutic DNA demethyla-tion may also function by reversing exhaustion-associatedde novo methylation programs in CD8 T cells, consequentlyenhancing the T cell’s ability to expand during ICB therapy.Tumor-Inﬁltrating CD8 T Cells Acquire Exhaustion-Associated De Novo DNA-Methylation ProgramsRecent advances in ICB therapies have provided a major break-through in the treatment of various cancers. Therefore, wesought to determine whether our ﬁndings, made using a model
of chronic viral infection, extended to a tumor setting. To assessthe DNA-methylation status of tumor-associated CD8 T cells, wegenerated tumor-bearing mice utilizing the well-established mu-rine Tramp-C2 tumor model. This model is characterized by arelatively slow tumor growth that results in prolonged stimulationof T cells ( Curran and Allison, 2009 ). After >45 days post Tramp-C2 cell inoculation, tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells (TILs) wereFigure 5. Inhibiting De Novo DNA Methylation Synergizes with PD-L1 Blockade(A) Experimental setup of anti-PD-L1 treatment in chronically infected WT and Dnmt3a cKO mice.(B) Representative FACS analysis and summary graphs of gp33-, gp276-, and np396-speciﬁc CD8 T cell frequencies in the spleens of treated and untreate d
chronically infected WT and cKO mice. WT mock treated, gray bars; WT anti-PD-L1 treated, red bars; cKO mock treated, black bars; and cKO PD-1 blockadetreated, green bars.(C and D) Representative FACS analysis showing the frequencies of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the (C) lungs and (D) liver of chronically infected WT and cKOmice after mock or PD-1 blockade treatment.(E) Longitudinal analysis of the gp33-speciﬁc TCR repertoire Simpson’s diversity index among WT and cKO CD8 T cells isolated from the peripheral bloo d beforeand after PD-1 blockade treatment.(F) Representative intracellular FACS analysis of IFN gand IL-2 expression from gp33-stimulated CD44hiCD8 T cell splenocytes of mock or PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT and cKO mice. Summary graphs of fold change in quantity of total IFN g-expressing or IFN gand IL-2 co-expressing CD8 T cells
from spleens of mock or PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT and cKO mice.(G) Longitudinal measurement of viral titers in the serum and summary graphs of the viral titers in the spleen or liver of chronically infected WT and cK O mice aftermock or PD-1 blockade treatment.Fold change was calculated relative to mock-treated WT mice. N = 3–5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Error bars indicate SEM.152 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
characterized ( Figure 7 A). Phenotypic analysis of tumor-speciﬁc(Spas1 tetramer+) CD8 T cells demonstrated that they exhibitedcharacteristics of persistent antigen exposure, including co-expression of PD-1 and Tim-3 ( Figure 7 B). To determine whetherexhaustion-associated DNA-methylation programs are acquiredin phenotypically activated CD8+ TILs, we FACS puriﬁed thePD-1hi Tim3+ CD8+ TILs and measured the DNA-methylationstatus of Tcf7,Ccr7 ,Myc, and IFNgDMRs ( Figure 7 C). Addition-ally, we FACS puriﬁed tumor-matched PD-1lo CD8+ TILs todetermine whether the exhaustion-associated DMRs wereFigure 6. DNA-Demethylating-Agent Treatment Prior to PD-L1 Blockade Enhances WT CD8 T Cell Rejuvenation(A) Experimental setup for sequential decitabine and anti-PD-L1 treatment during chronic LCMV infection.(B) Summary graph showing longitudinal tracking of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell quantity in the peripheral blood of chronically LCMV-infected WT mice dur ing mono-
or sequentially combined decitabine and anti-PD-L1 treatments.(C) Summary graph of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell fold expansion in the PBMC after mono PD-1 blockade therapy (red bar) or sequential decitabine and PD-1blockade therapy (blue bar). Fold change was calculated relative to corresponding cell numbers before anti-PD-L1 treatment.(D) Representative FACS analysis showing the frequencies of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleen, lung, and liver tissues of chronically infected W T mice afterindicated treatments.(E) Representative FACS analysis showing Ki67 levels in gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleens of chronically infected WT mice after indicated treat ments.(F) Summary graph of the quantity of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in spleens of chronically LCMV-infected WT mice after indicated treatments.(G) Summary graphs of the frequencies of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the lung and liver tissues of chronically infected WT mice after indicated treatme nts.
(H) Summary graph of the frequencies of Ki67-expressing gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleens of chronically infected WT mice after indicated treat ments.N = 3–5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Error bars indicate SEM.Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 153
Figure 7. Tumor-Inﬁltrating CD8 T Cells Acquire Exhaustion-Associated DNA-Methylation Programs(A) Experimental setup for generating TRAMP-C2 tumor-bearing mice and loci-speciﬁc DNA-methylation analysis of tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells (TI Ls).(B) Representative FACS analysis of CD44, PD-1, CD62L, and Tim-3 expression on tumor-speciﬁc Spas1+ TILs harvested after R45 days post-tumor inoculation.(C) Representative FACS analysis of PD-1 and Tim-3 expression on total TILs and post-sort purity check of FACS-puriﬁed PD-1hi and PD-1low TILs popula tions.(D and E) Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing methylation analysis and summary graphs of individual CpG sites in the (D) Tcf7,Ccr7 , (E)Myc, and IFNgloci amongPD-1low and PD-1hi populations of TILs. Horizontal lines represent individual sequenced clones from the pool of FACS-puriﬁed TILs. Filled circles, methylatedcytosine; open circles, nonmethylated cytosine.(legend continued on next page)154 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
speciﬁcally acquired in activated TILs. Similar to exhaustedLCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells, the de novo DMRs at the Tcf7,Ccr7 ,Myc, and IFNgloci in PD-1hi TILs were heavily methylated,whereas PD-1lo TILs retained demethylated Ccr7 and Tcf7 loci(Figures 7 D, 7E, and S7H). Select methylation of the Tcf7 andCcr7 loci among the PD-1hi TILs demonstrates that the cells un-derwent de novo programming at these loci and further indicatesthat the extensive methylation of the Myc and IFNgDMRs in thePD-1hi TILs are also de novo programs. These results demon-strate that tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells acquire de novo DNA-methylation programming associated with reinforcement ofT cell exhaustion.Given the critical role exhaustion-associated DNA methylationplays in regulating ICB-responsiveness during chronic virusinfection, we sought to further assess the impact these programshave on TIL-rejuvenation during PD-1 blockade. The Tramp-C2
tumor model has been previously shown to be refractory to sin-gle PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy ( Yu et al., 2012 ); therefore, wetested whether primary DAC treatment could enhance rejuvena-tion of CD8 TILs after PD-L1 blockade. Sequential DAC andPD-L1 blockade treatments were initiated more than 4 weeksand 6 weeks, respectively, after tumor inoculation ( Figure 7 F).Interestingly, we found that DAC treatment was able to induceproliferation of both polyclonal (PD-1hi) and antigen-speciﬁc(Spas-1 tetramer+) tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells after PD-L1blockade treatment ( Figure 7 G). Importantly, the enhanced pro-liferation of tumor-speciﬁc CD8 T cells was coupled to signiﬁcantcontrol of tumor growth ( Figures 7 H and S7I). These data sug-gest that administration of DNA-demethylating agents prior toICB therapy may enhance reinvigoration of antitumor CD8T cells, providing a rationale for therapeutic strategies thatcombine epigenetic reprogramming and ICB.
DISCUSSIONReinvigoration of exhausted CD8 T cells by PD-1 blockade ther-apy has emerged as one of the most promising frontiers to treatindividuals with chronic infections or cancer. However, the sta-bility of exhaustion-speciﬁc gene-expression programs sug-gests that a cell-intrinsic mechanism(s) may restrict the capacityand durability of PD-1 blockade-mediated T cell rejuvenation.We and others have demonstrated that changes in epigeneticprogramming are coupled to transcriptional reprogramming dur-ing CD8 T cell effector and memory differentiation ( Cromptonet al., 2016; Russ et al., 2014; Scharer et al., 2013; Youngbloodet al., 2011 ). Yet, whether these reprogramming events play adirect role in regulating the effector properties in functional andexhausted CD8 T cells has remained unclear. Here, we showthat progressive de novo DNA-methylation programming is crit-
ical for establishing T cell exhaustion. Such DNA-methylationprogramming reinforces the repression of key genes involvedin effector function, proliferation, metabolic activity, and tissuehoming in exhausted T cells. We also demonstrate that theselong-lived, exhaustion-associated epigenetic programs serveas a major cell-intrinsic barrier limiting the rejuvenation ofantigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells during PD-1 blockade therapy.Our ﬁndings highlight epigenetic programs among exhaustedT cells as a potential mechanism to explain PD-1 blockade ther-apeutic failures.Recent efforts to better understand the mechanism of actionfor ICB therapy found that the Cxcr5+ subset of PD-1+ T cellsremain responsive to PD-1 blockade therapy, while T cells thatexpress both PD-1 and Tim-3 and that lack Cxcr5 expressionare less responsive to PD-1 blockade therapy ( Im et al., 2016;Wherry, 2011 ). Importantly, when we compared our cKO andWT exhausted CD8 T cell gene expression datasets ( Figures
S3D–S3F) with the recently published gene expression data ofCxcr5+ Tim-3/C0ve(PD-1 blockade-responsive) versus Cxcr5/C0veTim-3+ (PD-1 blockade-nonresponsive) subsets of exhausted
S3D–S3F) with the recently published gene expression data ofCxcr5+ Tim-3/C0ve(PD-1 blockade-responsive) versus Cxcr5/C0veTim-3+ (PD-1 blockade-nonresponsive) subsets of exhaustedWT CD8 T cells ( Im et al., 2016 ), we found a signiﬁcant correlationamong gene expression patterns of cKO CD8 T cells and thePD-1 blockade-responsive subset of WT cells ( Figure S3 G),further highlighting the role de novo DNA methylation plays inregulating PD-1 blockade-responsiveness. These data indicatethat progressive development of less-differentiated CD8 T cellsinto terminally differentiated exhausted CD8 T cells is coupledto the acquisition of transcriptionally repressive DNA-methyl-ation programs. Moreover, once established, such epigeneticprograms restrict the cell’s reinvigoration potential during PD-1blockade therapy.While a durable clinical response has been generated in some
patients that experience ICB-mediated reinvigoration of T cells,new evidence suggests that T cell rejuvenation may be transient.In a recent clinical trial utilizing ICB for melanoma treatment,about one-third of patients who initially responded to PD-1blockade experienced tumor relapse ( Ribas et al., 2016 ).Through efforts to better understand the stable nature of exhaus-tion-associated transcriptional states, it was recently discoveredthat the short-lived reinvigoration of T cells during PD-1 blockadetherapy was associated with preservation of the chromatin land-scape ( Pauken et al., 2016 ). The results presented in our currentstudy provide mechanistic insight into the heritable maintenanceof exhaustion gene expression program during ICB and how thismay leave patients vulnerable to tumor relapse ( Ghoneim et al.,2016; Sharma and Allison, 2015b ).DNA-methylation programming in fully differentiated cells isoften thought to be irreversible owing to the fact that DNA
methylation can be propagated during DNA replication througha mechanism of maintenance methylation. Yet the recentdiscovery that cytosine methylation can be erased through amechanism of TET-mediated hydroxylation has generated greatinterest in determining whether this mechanism can be exploited(F) Experimental setup of sequential decitabine and anti-PD-L1 treatment of TRAMP-C2 tumor-bearing mice starting at R1 month post-inoculation.(G) Representative FACS analysis and summary graphs of Ki67 levels among PD-1hi CD8+ TILs and tumor antigen-speciﬁc (Spas1+) TILs after mono PD-1blockade or sequentially combined decitabine and anti-PD-L1 treatments.(H) Longitudinal measurement of tumor growth in WT mice receiving mono anti-PD-L1 (red) or sequentially combined decitabine and anti-PD-L1 (blue) t reat-
ments. Summary graph of normalized tumor volume after mono anti-PD-L1 (red) or combined decitabine and anti-PD-L1 (blue) treatments.N = 3–5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Error bars indicate SEM.Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 155
to de-differentiate fate-committed cells ( Pastor et al., 2013 ), spe-ciﬁcally exhausted T cells during ICB therapy. In addition to ex-ploiting natural mechanisms of epigenetic reversal, it may bepossible to directly reverse epigenetic modiﬁcations with exist-ing chemotherapeutics ( Chiappinelli et al., 2016; Roulois et al.,2015; Wang et al., 2015 ). FDA-approved DNA demethylatingagents, such as decitabine, may provide a means to modifyexhaustion-associated DNA methylation programs that restrictICB-responsiveness. Consistent with our results, two recent re-ports have highlighted the ability of DNA-demethylating agentsto enhance CTLA-4 blockade-mediated T cell responses ( Chiap-pinelli et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2015 ). In these studies, the effectof DNA demethylation was largely assigned to changes inexpression of endogenous retrovirus dsRNA in the tumor, whichin turn triggered a type I IFN immune response ( Chiappinelli et al.,
2016 ). Our data suggest that decitabine not only modiﬁes the tu-mor cells but may also have a direct effect on antigen-speciﬁcCD8 T cells. In conclusion, our study highlights the critical rolede novo DNA methylation plays in establishing the ICB-nonre-sponsive state of T cell exhaustion and reveals the potentialbeneﬁt of therapeutic strategies that combine ICB with ap-proaches that reverse or inhibit T cell-intrinsic exhaustion-asso-ciated epigenetic programs.STAR+METHODSDetailed methods are provided in the online version of this paperand include the following:dKEY RESOURCES TABLEdCONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARINGdEXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSBMice and Viral InfectionsBTRAMP-C2 Tumor Mouse ModeldMETHOD DETAILSBIn Vivo Decitabine and PD-1 Blockade TreatmentBAnalysis of Antigen-Speciﬁc T Cell Function andPhenotypeBGenome-Wide and Loci-Speciﬁc Methylation AnalysisBMicroarray gene expression analysisBTCR Repertoire Analysis
BTCR Repertoire AnalysisdQUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISBStatistical AnalysisBWhole-Genome Bisulﬁte DNA Sequencing AnalysisBSimpson’s Diversity Index AnalysisdDATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITYSUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATIONSupplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures and one table and can befound with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.007 .AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSH.E.G. and B.Y. designed the experiments and supervised the study. H.E.G.,Y.F., R.C., G.N., and B.Y. collected WGBS and microarray data and analyzedand interpreted results. H.A.A., P.Dogra, and A.M. collected data. H.E.G.,P.Dash, W.A., and P.G.T. contributed to the design of TCR repertoire experi-ments, collected and analyzed data, and interpreted results. H.E.G. and B.Y.wrote the manuscript.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank Drs. Richard Cross and Greig Lennon in the St. Jude Flow Cytome-
try & Cell Sorting Shared Resource for cell sorting and the staff in the St. JudeHartwell Center for all sequencing services. We also thank Dr. AngelaMcArthur at St. Jude for scientiﬁc editing and Dr. Raﬁck Sekaly for his criticalcomments. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant1R01AI114442 and ALSAC (to B.A.Y.) and the SJCRH Garwood PostdoctoralFellowship (to A.M.).Received: September 15, 2016Revised: January 10, 2017Accepted: June 6, 2017Published: June 22, 2017REFERENCESAngelosanto, J.M., Blackburn, S.D., Crawford, A., and Wherry, E.J. (2012).Progressive loss of memory T cell potential and commitment to exhaustionduring chronic viral infection. J. Virol. 86, 8161–8170 .Bintu, L., Yong, J., Antebi, Y.E., McCue, K., Kazuki, Y., Uno, N., Oshimura, M.,and Elowitz, M.B. (2016). Dynamics of epigenetic regulation at the single-celllevel. Science 351, 720–724 .Bird, A. (2002). DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes Dev.16, 6–21 .
16, 6–21 .Cedar, H., and Bergman, Y. (2009). Linking DNA methylation and histonemodiﬁcation: patterns and paradigms. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 295–304 .Chiappinelli, K.B., Strissel, P.L., Desrichard, A., Li, H., Henke, C., Akman, B.,
modiﬁcation: patterns and paradigms. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 295–304 .Chiappinelli, K.B., Strissel, P.L., Desrichard, A., Li, H., Henke, C., Akman, B.,Hein, A., Rote, N.S., Cope, L.M., Snyder, A., et al. (2016). Inhibiting DNAmethylation causes an interferon response in cancer via dsRNA includingendogenous retroviruses. Cell 164, 1073 .Crompton, J.G., Narayanan, M., Cuddapah, S., Roychoudhuri, R., Ji, Y., Yang,W., Patel, S.J., Sukumar, M., Palmer, D.C., Peng, W., et al. (2016). Lineagerelationship of CD8 T cell subsets is revealed by progressive changes in theepigenetic landscape. Cell Mol Immunol 13, 502–513 .Curran, M.A., and Allison, J.P. (2009). Tumor vaccines expressing ﬂt3 ligandsynergize with ctla-4 blockade to reject preimplanted tumors. Cancer Res.69, 7747–7755 .Dash, P., McClaren, J.L., Oguin, T.H., 3rd, Rothwell, W., Todd, B., Morris,
M.Y., Becksfort, J., Reynolds, C., Brown, S.A., Doherty, P.C., and Thomas,P.G. (2011). Paired analysis of TCR aand TCR bchains at the single-cell levelin mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 288–295 .Dash, P., Wang, G.C., and Thomas, P.G. (2015). Single-cell analysis of T-cellreceptor abrepertoire. Methods Mol. Biol. 1343 , 181–197 .Foster, B.A., Gingrich, J.R., Kwon, E.D., Madias, C., and Greenberg, N.M.(1997). Characterization of prostatic epithelial cell lines derived from trans-genic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Cancer Res.57, 3325–3330 .Ghoneim, H.E., Zamora, A.E., Thomas, P.G., and Youngblood, B.A. (2016).Cell-intrinsic barriers of T cell-based immunotherapy. Trends Mol. Med. 22,1000–1011 .Ha, S.J., Mueller, S.N., Wherry, E.J., Barber, D.L., Aubert, R.D., Sharpe, A.H.,Freeman, G.J., and Ahmed, R. (2008). Enhancing therapeutic vaccination byblocking PD-1-mediated inhibitory signals during chronic infection. J. Exp.Med. 205, 543–555 .
Im, S.J., Hashimoto, M., Gerner, M.Y., Lee, J., Kissick, H.T., Burger, M.C.,Shan, Q., Hale, J.S., Lee, J., Nasti, T.H., et al. (2016). Deﬁning CD8+ T cellsthat provide the proliferative burst after PD-1 therapy. Nature 537, 417–421 .Jin, H.T., Anderson, A.C., Tan, W.G., West, E.E., Ha, S.J., Araki, K., Freeman,G.J., Kuchroo, V.K., and Ahmed, R. (2010). Cooperation of Tim-3 and PD-1 inCD8 T-cell exhaustion during chronic viral infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA107, 14733–14738 .Kaech, S.M., and Cui, W. (2012). Transcriptional control of effector and mem-ory CD8+ T cell differentiation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 749–761 .156 Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017
Lefranc, M.P., Giudicelli, V., Ginestoux, C., Jabado-Michaloud, J., Folch, G.,Bellahcene, F., Wu, Y., Gemrot, E., Brochet, X., Lane, J., et al. (2009). IMGT,the international ImMunoGeneTics information system. Nucleic Acids Res.37, D1006–D1012 .Li, H., Chiappinelli, K.B., Guzzetta, A.A., Easwaran, H., Yen, R.W., Vatapalli, R.,Topper, M.J., Luo, J., Connolly, R.M., Azad, N.S., et al. (2014). Immune regu-lation by low doses of the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacitidine incommon human epithelial cancers. Oncotarget 5, 587–598 .Matloubian, M., Somasundaram, T., Kolhekar, S.R., Selvakumar, R., andAhmed, R. (1990). Genetic basis of viral persistence: single amino acid changein the viral glycoprotein affects ability of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus topersist in adult mice. J. Exp. Med. 172, 1043–1048 .Pastor, W.A., Aravind, L., and Rao, A. (2013). TETonic shift: biological roles ofTET proteins in DNA demethylation and transcription. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.14, 341–356 .
Pauken, K.E., Sammons, M.A., Odorizzi, P.M., Manne, S., Godec, J., Khan, O.,Drake, A.M., Chen, Z., Sen, D.R., Kurachi, M., et al. (2016). Epigenetic stabilityof exhausted T cells limits durability of reinvigoration by PD-1 blockade. Sci-ence 354, 1160–1165 .Ribas, A., Hamid, O., Daud, A., Hodi, F.S., Wolchok, J.D., Kefford, R., Joshua,A.M., Patnaik, A., Hwu, W.J., Weber, J.S., et al. (2016). Association of pembro-lizumab with tumor response and survival among patients with advanced mel-anoma. JAMA 315, 1600–1609 .Roulois, D., Loo Yau, H., Singhania, R., Wang, Y., Danesh, A., Shen, S.Y., Han,H., Liang, G., Jones, P.A., Pugh, T.J., et al. (2015). DNA-demethylating agentstarget colorectal cancer cells by inducing viral mimicry by endogenous tran-scripts. Cell 162, 961–973 .Russ, B.E., Olshanksy, M., Smallwood, H.S., Li, J., Denton, A.E., Prier, J.E.,Stock, A.T., Croom, H.A., Cullen, J.G., Nguyen, M.L., et al. (2014). Distinct
epigenetic signatures delineate transcriptional programs during virus-speciﬁcCD8(+) T cell differentiation. Immunity 41, 853–865 .Scharer, C.D., Barwick, B.G., Youngblood, B.A., Ahmed, R., and Boss, J.M.(2013). Global DNA methylation remodeling accompanies CD8 T cell effectorfunction. J Immunol. 191, 3419–3429 .Sharma, P., and Allison, J.P. (2015a). The future of immune checkpoint ther-apy. Science 348, 56–61 .Sharma, P., and Allison, J.P. (2015b). Immune checkpoint targeting in cancertherapy: toward combination strategies with curative potential. Cell 161,205–214 .Speiser, D.E., Utzschneider, D.T., Oberle, S.G., Mu ¨nz, C., Romero, P., andZehn, D. (2014). T cell differentiation in chronic infection and cancer: functionaladaptation or exhaustion? Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 768–774 .Thomas, P.G., Handel, A., Doherty, P.C., and La Gruta, N.L. (2013). Ecological
analysis of antigen-speciﬁc CTL repertoires deﬁnes the relationship betweennaive and immune T-cell populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,1839–1844 .Trinh, B.N., Long, T.I., and Laird, P.W. (2001). DNA methylation analysis byMethyLight technology. Methods 25, 456–462 .Utzschneider, D.T., Charmoy, M., Chennupati, V., Pousse, L., Ferreira, D.P.,Calderon-Copete, S., Danilo, M., Alfei, F., Hofmann, M., Wieland, D., et al.(2016). T cell factor 1-expressing memory-like CD8(+) T cells sustain the im-mune response to chronic viral infections. Immunity 45, 415–427 .Utzschneider, D.T., Legat, A., Fuertes Marraco, S.A., Carrie ´, L., Luescher, I.,Speiser, D.E., and Zehn, D. (2013). T cells maintain an exhausted phenotypeafter antigen withdrawal and population reexpansion. Nat. Immunol. 14,603–610 .Vaquerizas, J.M., Kummerfeld, S.K., Teichmann, S.A., and Luscombe, N.M.(2009). A census of human transcription factors: function, expression and evo-
lution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 252–263 .Wang, L., Amoozgar, Z., Huang, J., Saleh, M.H., Xing, D., Orsulic, S., and Gold-
(2009). A census of human transcription factors: function, expression and evo-lution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 252–263 .Wang, L., Amoozgar, Z., Huang, J., Saleh, M.H., Xing, D., Orsulic, S., and Gold-berg, M.S. (2015). Decitabine enhances lymphocyte migration and functionand synergizes with CTLA-4 blockade in a murine ovarian cancer model. Can-cer Immunol. Res. 3, 1030–1041 .Wang, R., Dillon, C.P., Shi, L.Z., Milasta, S., Carter, R., Finkelstein, D.,McCormick, L.L., Fitzgerald, P., Chi, H., Munger, J., and Green, D.R. (2011).The transcription factor Myc controls metabolic reprogramming upon Tlymphocyte activation. Immunity 35, 871–882 .Wherry, E.J. (2011). T cell exhaustion. Nat. Immunol. 12, 492–499 .Wherry, E.J., Blattman, J.N., Murali-Krishna, K., van der Most, R., and Ahmed,R. (2003). Viral persistence alters CD8 T-cell immunodominance and tissuedistribution and results in distinct stages of functional impairment. J. Virol.77, 4911–4927 .
Wu, H., Xu, T., Feng, H., Chen, L., Li, B., Yao, B., Qin, Z., Jin, P., and Conneely,K.N. (2015). Detection of differentially methylated regions from whole-genomebisulﬁte sequencing data without replicates. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, e141 .Youngblood, B., Oestreich, K.J., Ha, S.J., Duraiswamy, J., Akondy, R.S., West,E.E., Wei, Z., Lu, P., Austin, J.W., Riley, J.L., et al. (2011). Chronic virus infec-tion enforces demethylation of the locus that encodes PD-1 in antigen-speciﬁcCD8(+) T cells. Immunity 35, 400–412 .Yu, P., Steel, J.C., Zhang, M., Morris, J.C., Waitz, R., Fasso, M., Allison, J.P.,and Waldmann, T.A. (2012). Simultaneous inhibition of two regulatory T-cellsubsets enhanced Interleukin-15 efﬁcacy in a prostate tumor model. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 6187–6192 .Cell 170, 142–157, June 29, 2017 157
STAR+METHODSKEY RESOURCES TABLEREAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIERAntibodiesAnti-mouse CD8a (clone 53-6.7) BioLegend Cat#100732Anti-mouse/human CD44 (clone IM7) BioLegend Cat#103039Anti-mouse CD62L (clone MEL-14) BioLegend Cat#104405Anti-mouse PD-1 (clone 29F.1A12) BioLegend Cat#135216Anti-mouse Tim-3 (clone RMT3-23) BioLegend Cat#119704Anti-mouse CD98 (clone RL388) BioLegend Cat#128207Anti-mouse T-bet (clone 4B10) BioLegend Cat#644806Anti-mouse Eomes (clone Dan11mag) eBioscience Cat#25-4875-82Anti-mouse/human Tcf1 (clone C63D9) Cell Signaling Cat#14456SAnti-mouse/human Ki67 (clone SolA15) eBioscience Cat#11-5698-82Anti-mouse IFN g(clone XMG1.2) BioLegend Cat#505810Anti-mouse IL-2 (clone JES6-5h4) BioLegend Cat#503808Anti-mouse/human Granzyme b (clone GB11) BioLegend Cat#515408InVivoMAb anti-mouse PD-L1 (B7-H1) BioXcell Cat# BE0101GK1.5 antibody Harlan Bioproducts N/ABacterial and Virus StrainsLymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,Armstrong strainMatloubian et al., 1990 NALymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,Clone 13 strainMatloubian et al., 1990 N/AXL10-Gold ultracompetent E. coli Stratagene Cat#200314Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant ProteinsGhost Dye Violet 510 viability dye Tonbo Biosciences Cat#13-0870Foxp3/Transcription Factor Buffer Set eBioscience Cat#00-5523BD Cytoﬁx/Cytoperm BD Biosciences Cat#5547145-Aza-20-deoxycytidine (decitabine) Sigma-Aldrich Cat#A3656LCMV gp33, gp276, and np396 monomers Yerkes NIH tetramer corefacilityNASpas-1 monomer Peptide synthesis facilityat SJCRHNALCMV gp33, gp276, and np396 peptides Peptide synthesis facilityat SJCRHNARNAsin Promega Cat#N2111Critical Commercial AssaysQIAGEN DNeasy kit QIAGEN Cat#69506EZ DNA methylation kit Zymo Research Cat#D5002TruSeq DNA Methylation Kit Illumina Cat# EGMK81312pGEM-T Vector cloning kit Promega Cat#A3600JumpStart Taq ReadyMix Sigma-Aldrich Cat#P2893
JumpStart Taq ReadyMix Sigma-Aldrich Cat#P2893Directprep 96 Miniprep kit QIAGEN Cat#27361(Continued on next page )e1Cell 170, 142–157.e1–e5, June 29, 2017
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARINGFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, BenYoungblood ( benjamin.youngblood@stjude.org ).EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSMice and Viral InfectionsWT C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. Dnmt3a cKO mice were generated by crossing ﬂoxed Dnmt3a micewith mice expressing a Granzyme b–driven recombinase transgene. Equal numbers of male and female 6-8 week old WT and cKOmice were used and littermates of the same sex were randomly assigned to experimental groups. For chronic infection, WT and cKOmice were treated with 0.75 mg GK1.5 antibody (Harlan Bioproducts) 2 days prior to and on the day of infection to deplete CD4 T cellsContinuedREAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIERiScript cDNA Synthesis Kit Biorad Cat#1708891Taq polymerase–based PCR kit QIAGEN Cat#201225Deposited Data
Deposited DataWGBS data This paper GEO: GSE99450Microarray data This paper GEO: GSE99449Experimental Models: Cell LinesTRAMP-C2 prostate adenocarcinoma cells ATCC CRL-2731Experimental Models: Organisms/StrainsMouse: C57BL/6 The Jackson Laboratory JAX: 000664Mouse: B6.Cg- Tcratm1MomTg(TcrLCMV)327Sdz Taconic Model#:4138Mouse: B6;129S4-Dnmt3a < tm3.1Enl > MTA from Riken Institute RBRC037313Mouse: B6, Granzyme b-Cre SJCRH animal house NAOligonucleotidesPrimers for IFNg, Myc, Tbx21, Ccr7, andTcf7: See Table S1This paper N/ApUC/M13 reverse primer Promega Cat#Q5421Software and AlgorithmsPrism 6 GraphPad https://www.graphpad.com/scientiﬁc-software/prism/FlowJo 9.9.5 FlowJo NAModel-based analysis of bisulﬁte sequencing Wu et al., 2015 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26184873LIMMA Bioconductor https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.htmlDAVID 6.8 David Pathway enrichmentanalysis toolhttps://david.ncifcrf.gov/
analysis toolhttps://david.ncifcrf.gov/Ingenuity network analysis QIAGEN https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis/Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis Enrichr http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/enrichNon-redundant GO biological processes analysis Revigo http://revigo.irb.hr/OtherFortessa ﬂow cytometer Flow Cytometry core facilityat SJCRHNAABI Big Dye sequencer (Applied Biosystem) Hartwell Center at SJCRH NACell 170, 142–157.e1–e5, June 29, 2017 e2
(Ha et al., 2008 ). CD4-deﬁcient mice were then infected with the LCMV clone 13 (2 3106pfu, i.v.). Serum and tissue virus titers weredetermined by plaque assay as previously described ( Matloubian et al., 1990 ). For acute infection, equal numbers of male and female6-8 week old WT and cKO mice were infected with the Armstrong strain of LCMV (2 3105pfu, i.p.) without CD4 T cell depletion. Allmice were housed in speciﬁc pathogen free conditions prior to use. Prior to the described studies, mice were drug naive and deter-mined to be healthy by the veterinary staff. All protocols were approved by the St Jude Children’s Research Hospital InstitutionalAnimal Care and use Committee, and all mice were handled per their guidelines.TRAMP-C2 Tumor Mouse ModelTRAMP-C2 prostate adenocarcinoma cell line was purchased as ATCC CRL-2731 /C212and grown as previously described ( Foster et al.,1997 ). 1310
1997 ). 13106tumor cells were injected s.c in the right ﬂank of syngeneic 6-8 week old male WT C57BL/6 mice and tumor growth wasmonitored. Male recipients for tumor growth experiments were used due to the origin of the TRAMP C2 tumor line. All mice werehoused in speciﬁc pathogen free conditions prior to use. All protocols were approved by the St Jude Children’s Research HospitalInstitutional Animal Care and use Committee, and all mice were handled per their guidelines.METHOD DETAILSIn Vivo Decitabine and PD-1 Blockade TreatmentUnder chronic LCMV infection settingEqual numbers of male and female 6-8 week old WT C57BL/6 mice were chronically infected with LCMV clone 13 after CD4 T celldepletion as described above. Mice were randomly assigned to experimental groups. At R33 dpi mice were i.p. injected with vehicle
or decitabine (Sigma-Aldrich; 1.2 mg/kg) dissolved in sterile PBS every 3 days for 2 weeks, followed by PBS or anti-PD-L1 treatment(BioXcell; 200 mg) every 3 days for 2 weeks.Under tumor settingTRAMP-C2 tumor-bearing male C57BL/6 mice (as described above) were randomly assigned to experimental groups. After R30post-inoculation, tumor-bearing mice were i.p injected with vehicle or decitabine treatment for 2 weeks as described in the chronicLCMV infection model, followed by anti-PD-L1 treatment (BioXcell; 200 mg) every 3 days for 2 weeks. At indicated time points, tumorswere harvested and tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells were characterized.Analysis of Antigen-Speciﬁc T Cell Function and PhenotypeAntigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells were identiﬁed or puriﬁed by FACS using ﬂuorescently labeled H-2Dbtetramers bound to LCMV pep-
btetramers bound to LCMV pep-tides. LCMV and tumor-speciﬁc Spas-1 monomers were obtained from the Yerkes NIH tetramer core facility. Phenotypic analysisof the cells was performed using the following ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies: CD8, CD44, CD62L, PD-1, Tim-3, and CD98(BioLegend), as previously described ( Wang et al., 2011; Wherry et al., 2003 ). The total pool of virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells was deﬁnedas CD44hiPD-1+CD8 T cells. Ki67, Tcf1, T-bet, and Eomes intracellular staining was performed using the eBioscience ICS-stainingprotocol and ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies against T-bet (clone 4B10; BioLegend), Eomes (clone Dan11mag; eBioscience), Tcf1(clone C63D9; Cell Signaling), and Ki67 (clone SolA15; eBioscience). Ex vivo stimulation of antigen-speciﬁc splenocytes was per-formed using gp33 peptide, as previously described ( Youngblood et al., 2011 ). Intracellular staining for IFN g, IL-2, and Granzyme
b was performed with ﬂuorescently labeled antibody clones XMG1.2, JES6-5h4, and GB11, respectively (all from BioLegend) andby using BD Cytoﬁx/Cytoperm (BD Biosciences) per the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell death frequency was calculated usingGhost Dye Violet 510 viability dye (Tonbo Biosciences) to determine the frequency of live cells in the total lymphocyte-singlet gate.Genome-Wide and Loci-Speciﬁc Methylation Analysis
Ghost Dye Violet 510 viability dye (Tonbo Biosciences) to determine the frequency of live cells in the total lymphocyte-singlet gate.Genome-Wide and Loci-Speciﬁc Methylation AnalysisWe sorted viable naive (CD44lowCD62L+) and tetramer+(gp33+CD44hi) CD8 T cells from the splenocytes of acutely or chronicallyinfected WT and cKO mice. For loci-speciﬁc methylation analysis of TILs, viable PD-1hi and PD-1low subsets of TILs were sortedfrom TRAMP-C2 tumors at > 45 days post-inoculation. DNA was isolated from the FACS-puriﬁed naive, antigen-speciﬁc CD8T cells, and TILs by using the QIAGEN DNeasy kit. Genomic DNA was bisulﬁte treated using the EZ DNA methylation kit (ZymoResearch). Bisulﬁte-induced deamination of cytosine allows for sequencing-based discrimination of methylated versus non-meth-ylated cytosine ( Trinh et al., 2001 ).To perform genome-wide methylation analysis, a bisulﬁte-modiﬁed DNA-sequencing library was generated according to Illumina’s
instructions accompanying the TruSeq DNA Methylation Kit (Part# EGMK81312). Brieﬂy, Bisulﬁte converted DNA was annealed withrandom hexamer with tagging sequence. DNA copy was synthesized using TruSeq DNA Methyl Polymerase. Then Exonuclease I wasused to digest excess random primer. The 30ends of the strands are then selectively tagged with a second speciﬁc sequence tag togenerate di-tagged DNA using DNA polymerase. The di-tagged DNA with known sequence tags at both ends was cleaned up by theAMPureXP Beads. The dsDNA library was generated by PCR ampliﬁcation with Illumina primers for 10 cycles and library fragments of/C24350 bp (insert plus adaptor and PCR primer sequences). The library was puriﬁed by the AMPureXP Beads. The puriﬁed DNA wase3Cell 170, 142–157.e1–e5, June 29, 2017
captured on an Illumina ﬂow cell for cluster generation. Libraries were sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 following the manufacturer’sprotocols.To perform loci-speciﬁc methylation analysis, the bisulﬁte-modiﬁed DNA was PCR ampliﬁed with locus-speciﬁc primers ( Table S1 ).The PCR amplicon was cloned into the pGEM-T TA cloning vector (Promega) and then transformed into XL10-Gold ultracompetentE. coli bacteria (Stratagene). Individual bacterial colonies were grown overnight over Luria-Bertani (LB) agar containing ampicillin(100 mg/L), X-gal (80 mg/L), and IPTG (20 mM). White colonies were selected and subcultured into LB broth with ampicillin(100 mg/L) overnight; the cloning vector was puriﬁed; and the genomic insert was sequenced.Microarray gene expression analysisMicroarray gene expression analysis was performed in FACS-puriﬁed naive and LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from chronically infected
WT and cKO mice at 35 dpi. The microarray data were measured by Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST arrays and were processed withPartek Genomics Suite 6.6 by the RMA method. To compare gene expression patterns of WT and cKO CD8 T cells to those ofCXCR5+ Tim-3- and CXCR5- Tim-3+ subsets of exhausted WT CD8 T cells published in ( Im et al., 2016 ), we downloaded theirnormalized microarray data from GSE84105 and compared Tim-3+ with CXCR5+. Genes that were in GSE84105 but were notmeasured in our array were removed. We identiﬁed 524 upregulated genes in Tim-3+ and 667 downregulated genes in Tim-3+using fdr %0.05 and log2 fold at least 1 as the cutoff. The enrichment of the 2 gene sets in our KO versus WT comparison wasdone using CAMERA. The differential gene expression analysis and CAMERA analysis were done using LIMMA package 3.24.5 inBioconductor.TCR Repertoire Analysis
TCR Repertoire AnalysisLCMV gp33-speciﬁc T cells were stained with speciﬁc tetramer, resuspended in freshly made sort buffer (PBS containing 0.1% BSA(GIBCO) and 200 U RNAsin/ml (Promega)) and ﬁltered prior to sorting. Several hundreds of tetramer-positive T cells were single cellsorted into the wells of a 96-well PCR plates (Eppendorf) that had been preloaded with 2.5 ul of reverse transcription mixture (0.5 mL5X iScript reaction mix, 0.5 mL iScript reverse transcriptase (Biorad), and 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich)) using a iCyt Synergy cellsorter (Sony). The parameters used for sorting are: Multi-drop sort OFF, Multi-drop exclude OFF, Division 10, Center sort%: 90. Thelast two columns of the plate were left unsorted to serve as negative controls for the PCR. Following sorting, the plates were sealedimmediately using plate sealer ﬁlm (MicroAmp, Applied Biosystems) and centrifuged at 500 g for 3 min prior to storing at /C080/C14C untilreverse transcription and PCR.
/C14C untilreverse transcription and PCR.The CDR3 bregion of individual cells were ampliﬁed and sequenced using a nested, single-cell, multiplex PCR approach ( Dashet al., 2011 ). Brieﬂy, cDNA was synthesized directly from single cells as per the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modiﬁcations.The cDNA synthesis was followed by two rounds of PCR with a Taq polymerase–based PCR kit (QIAGEN) and a cocktail of TCR bspeciﬁc primers to amplify the CDR3 btranscripts from each cell in a 25 mL reaction volume. The PCR products were visualized on a2% agarose gel, then puriﬁed using exonuclease/Shrimp alkaline phosphatase enzymes ( Dash et al., 2015 ) and sequenced usingTRBC reverse primer, using an ABI Big Dye sequencer (Applied Biosystem) at the Hartwell Center of St. Jude Children’s ResearchHospital.QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISStatistical Analysis
N = 3-5 per group of at least two independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 6 (GraphPad) softwareand Statistical signiﬁcance was determined if P value is less than 0.05. Comparisons were made using Mann-Whitney U test (for pair-wise comparisons in Figures 1 –4,5B, 5F, 6, and 7); ANOVA test (for multiple comparisons in Figure 5 G); unpaired t test with Welch’s
correction (for CpG methylation comparisons); or parametric two-tailed paired t test for paired analysis of Simpson’s diversity indexof TCR repertoire data.Whole-Genome Bisulﬁte DNA Sequencing AnalysisWGBS data were aligned to the mm10 mouse genome using BSMAP2.74. CpG methylation was performed using model-basedanalysis of bisulﬁte sequencing ( Wu et al., 2015 ). Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identiﬁed using Bioconductor pack-age DSS and custom R scripts with a threshold of 20% change in methylation ratio and p value %0.01 as a cutoff. The minimumlength for DMR is 50 bps and the minimum number of CpG sites for DMR is 3. DMRs were annotated using mm10 RefSeq in thefollowing order: promoter from /C01kb to 1kb of TSS (transcription start site), 50distal from /C050kb to /C01 kb of TSS, downstreamof/C01 kb to 1kb of TTS (transcription termination site), 30distal from 1kb to 50 kb of TTS, exon, intron, and any other genomic regions
were deﬁned as intergenic. The M-value, the measurement of CpG methylation status, was used for principle component analysis(PCA) and dendrogram. For the dendrogram, complete linkage method with Euclidean distance measurement based on M-valuewas used. The M-value is calculated as the log2 ratio of the number of methylated reads versus unmethylated reads. To avoidzero read count, 0.5 is added to the read count. The top 3000 most variable CpG sites with > 5X coverage were selected to dothe PCA and clustering analysis.Cell 170, 142–157.e1–e5, June 29, 2017 e4
Simpson’s Diversity Index AnalysisTCR repertoire sequencing data were analyzed using a custom-built macro-enabled excel sheet in conjunction with an IMGT webinterface to derive CDR3 bnucleotide and amino acid sequences with corresponding TRBV-TRBJ family usage ( Dash et al., 2015;Lefranc et al., 2009 ). Simpson’s Diversity Index (D) was calculated on the population from each mouse as previously described(Thomas et al., 2013 ), with D = Si[(ni(ni/C01))/(N(N /C01))], where n iis the number of sequences in the ith clonotype and N is the totalnumber of sequences in the whole population.DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITYThe accession number for the WGBS datasets and microarray data reported in this paper are GEO: GSE99450 and GEO: GSE99449,respectively.e5Cell 170, 142–157.e1–e5, June 29, 2017
Supplemental FiguresFigure S1. Whole-Genome Methylation Analysis of WT and Dnmt3a-Deﬁcient LCMV-Speciﬁc CD8 T Cells, Related to Figure 1(A) Representative histogram analysis of granzyme B expression in naive and gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from chronically infected WT (top panel) and cKO (bottompanel) mice at 8 dpi.(B) Representative PCR gel showing intact and recombined Dnmt3a ﬂoxed regions in genomic DNA from naive (CD44low CD62L+) and tetramer+ cKO CD8T cells respectively. Both cell types were sorted from the same infected mice 8 days after chronic LCMV infection. PCR ampliﬁcation using the same prim ers wasperformed in sorted naive (CD44low CD62L+) and tetramer+ WT CD8 T cells as a control at 8 dpi showing the wild-type allele with no recombination.(C) Longitudinal tracking of polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+ LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the peripheral blood of WT and Dnmt3a cKO mice during chronic LCMV
infection.(D) Summary graph of CD44 MFI on gp33-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells at 2 months post LCMV infection.(legend continued on next page)
(E) Summary graph of the frequency of PD-1+ gp33-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cell splenocytes after 2 months of chronic LCMV infection.(F) Summary graph of the frequency of IL-2-producing cells among total IFN g+WT and cKO CD8 T cell splenocytes after 5 hr of ex vivo stimulation with the gp33peptide after 2 months of chronic LCMV infection.(G) Summary graph of TCR MFI on gp33-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells after 2 months of chronic LCMV infection.(H) Representative intracellular FACS analysis of IFN gand IL-2 expression in CD44hiCD8 T cells from the spleens of WT and cKO CD8 T cells after 5 hr of ex vivostimulation with the gp33 peptide at 8 dpi.(I) Violin plot showing the methylation distribution (number of methylated CpGs per total number of CpGs) across the genomes of naive and LCMV-speciﬁ cW T
and cKO CD8 T cells at the effector and chronic stages of chronic LCMV infection.(J) Bar graph shows the number of demethylated regions in WT and cKO antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from chronically infected mice during naive-to-effec tor(naive-to-day 8 p.i; WT: black bar, cKO: black dashed bar) and effector-to-exhausted (day 8-to-day 35 p.i; WT: gray bar, cKO: gray dashed bar) stages o f theimmune response.(K) Bar graph shows the number of newly methylated regions in antigen-speciﬁc cKO CD8 T cells from chronically infected mice at the effector (black das hed bar)and chronic (gray dashed bar) stages of the immune response.(L) Principle component analysis (PCA) of DNA methylation proﬁles in naive and LCMV-speciﬁc WT and cKO CD8 T cells at the effector and chronic stages ofchronic LCMV infection.(M) Graph-based visualization of statistically enriched (p < 0.001 ) non-redundant gene ontology (GO) biological processes regulated by Dnmt3a-targeted genes in
exhausted WT CD8 T cells. Bubble size indicates the frequency of the GO term in the GO annotation database, and color intensity indicates -log P-value. Highlysimilar GO terms are linked by edges in the graph, where the line width indicates the degree of similarity. The network was generated using Cytoscape.(N) Table showing statistically enriched (p < 0.05) Biocarta pathways regulated by Dnmt3a-targeted genes in exhausted WT CD8 T cells. Statistical enrichmentwas calculated using the David Pathway enrichment analysis tool.N = 3-5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test. *p%0.05, **p %0.01, ***p %0.001 . Error barsare the mean ±SEM.
Figure S2. Loci-Speciﬁc Bisulﬁte Sequencing Analysis of Exhaustion-Associated DMRs in CD8 T Cells during the Course of ChronicInfection and after PD-L1 Blockade, Related to Figures 2 ,3, and 4andTable S1(A) WGBS nucleotide-resolution view of Dnmt3a-mediated de novo DNA-methylation programs at the Tcf7,Tbx21 ,Ccr7 , and Eomes loci in WT and cKOtetramer+ CD8 T cells from chronically infected mice at 8 dpi or 35 dpi. Vertical blue and red lines indicate CpG positions in the loci. The ratio of blue t o redindicates the percentage of unmethylated versus methylated reads, respectively, in the WGBS.(legend continued on next page)
(B) Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis summary graphs of methylation status at individual CpG sites in the DMRs of the Ccr7 ,Tcf7,IFNg, and Tbx21 loci innaive, and tetramer+ CD8 T cells isolated during the effector (at 8 dpi of mice infected with the chronic strain of LCMV) or post-effector stages from ch ronicallyinfected WT and cKO mice and the memory stage of acutely infected WT mice.(C) Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing summary graphs of methylation status at individual CpG sites in the DMRs of the Ccr7 ,Tcf7,IFNg, and Tbx21 loci in naive,and tetramer+ CD8 T cells isolated after PD-1 blockade treatment of chronically infected WT mice.N = 3-5 pooled samples from independent experiments. Error bars are the mean ±SEM.
Figure S3. DNA Methylation and Gene Expression Proﬁling of LCMV-Speciﬁc cKO and WT CD8 T Cells during Acute and Chronic Infection,Related to Figures 1 and2(A) Scatterplot demonstrates correlation between Dnmt3a-mediated DMRs in exhausted WT cells versus functional memory-related DMRs.(B) Cluster dendrogram analysis of naive and LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from acutely infected WT mice at 35 dpi and chronically infected WT and cKO mice at 8and 35 dpi.(C) Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of exhaustion-associated DMRs in the Myc,IFNg,Tbx21 ,Tcf7 and Ccr7 loci among LCMV-speciﬁc WT CD8 T cellsisolated from chronically LCMV-infected WT mice at R35 dpi, with or without CD4 T cell help. Horizontal lines represent individual sequenced clones from thepool of FACS-puriﬁed TILs. Filled circles, methylated cytosine; open circles, nonmethylated cytosine.(D and E) Heatmaps show representative differences in gene expression between WT and cKO CD8 T cells.(legend continued on next page)
(F) Scatterplot showing statistically signiﬁcant inverse relationship between gene expression changes and DNA methylation changes in WT exhauste d cells. y axisshows log2 fold change between WT versus cKO antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from chronically infected mice at R35 dpi, and x axis shows differential DNAmethylation changes in WT versus cKO antigen-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from chronically infected mice at 35 dpi with 20% cutoff ( R0.2).(G) Graph-based visualization of statistical enrichment between differentially expressed genes in CXCR5+ subset versus Tim-3+ subset of exhauste d LCMV-speciﬁc WT CD8 T cells (using microarray data deposited in GSE84105, with FDR %0.05 and log2 fold change R1 as the cutoff) and gene expression patterns inour microarray data of cKO versus WT LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in chronically infected mice. The enrichment of the 2 gene sets in our KO versus WT comparis onwas done using CAMERA.
Figure S4. Dnmt3a-Mediated Programming Promotes Development of Fully Exhausted T Cells, Related to Figure 2(A and B) Schematic of CpG sites at exhaustion-associated DMRs in the (A) Tbx21 and (B) Tcf7 loci. Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis of the DMRs in theTbx21 and Tcf7 loci in naive and tetramer+CD8 T cells isolated from chronically infected WT and Dnmt3a cKO mice. Horizontal lines represent individualsequenced clones from the pool of FACS-puriﬁed tetramer+CD8 T cells. Filled circles, methylated cytosine; open circles, nonmethylated cytosine.(C) Representative FACS analysis of T-bet and Eomes co-expression among gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the spleens of chronically WT and cKO mice2 months post-infection.(D) Summary graph of T-bet and Eomes co-expression among gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the spleens of chronically WT and cKO mice 2 months post-infection.(legend continued on next page)
(E) Representative FACS analysis of Tim-3 and Eomes co-expression among gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the spleens of chronically WT and cKO mice2 months post-infection.(F) Summary graph of Tim-3 and Eomes co-expression among gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from the spleens of chronically WT and cKO mice 2 months post-infection.(G) Representative FACS analysis of intracellular levels of TCF1 and Ki67 in gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from spleens of chronically infected WT and cKO m ice2 months p.i.(H) Summary graph of the frequency of TCF1 expression among gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells from spleens of chronically infected WT and cKO mice 2 months p.i.N = 3-5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test. *p%0.05, ***p %0.001 . Error bars are themean ±SD.
Figure S5. Dnmt3a-Mediated Exhaustion-Associated Programming Is Coupled to Limited Proliferative Capacity of Exhausted T Cells,Related to Figure 2(A) Schematic of CpG sites in the Myc locus exhaustion-associated DMR. Loci-speciﬁc bisulﬁte sequencing analysis and summary graphs of the methylationpercentage of individual CpG sites in the DMR of the Myc locus in naive, effector, and virus-speciﬁc CD8 T cells isolated from acutely or chronically infected WTand cKO mice.(B) Representative histogram analysis and summary graphs of CD98 expression on naive and tetramer+ CD8 T cells in spleens from WT and cKO mice duringacute (2 months post-infection) or chronic (8 days or 2 months post-infection) LCMV infection.(C) Representative FACS analysis and summary graph of the number of Ki67+ cells among Tim-3 ±PD-1+ gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell subsets from WT and cKOmice after 8 days of chronic infection.(legend continued on next page)
(D) Representative FACS analysis and summary graph of the number of Ki67+ cells among Tim-3 ±PD-1+ gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell subsets from WT and cKOmice after 2 months of chronic infection.(E) Representative FAC analysis of Ki67 levels among the total PD-1+ Tim-3+ and PD-1+ Tim-3- polyclonal CD8 T cells after 2 months of chronic infection .(F) Summary graphs of the frequency and number of Ki67+ cells among the total PD-1+ Tim-3+ and PD-1+ Tim-3- polyclonal CD8 T cells after 2 months of chron icinfection.N = 3-5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test. *p%0.05, **p %0.01. Error bars are themean ±SEM (panel B) or the mean ±SD (panels C, D, and F).
Figure S6. Inhibiting De Novo DNA-Methylation Programming Synergistically Enhances PD-L1 Blockade-Mediated Rejuvenation of CD8T Cells, Related to Figure 5(A) Representative FACS analysis of PD-1 and Tim-3 expression on gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells and summary graphs of the fold change in the quantities and th efrequencies of Tim-3 -/+ PD-1+ gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cell subsets in the spleens of mock-treated (gray bars) or anti–PD-L1–treated (red bars) chronical ly infectedWT and cKO mock-treated (black bars) or PD-1 blockade–treated (green bars) mice. Fold change was calculated relative to change in mock-treated WT mic e.(B) Representative intracellular FACS analysis of T-bet and Eomes expression in gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells and summary graphs of the frequencies of T-b ethiEomeslowand T-betintEomeshiT cell subsets in the spleens of chronically infected WT and cKO mice after mock or PD-1 blockade treatment.
(C) Summary graphs of gp33-, gp276-, and np396-speciﬁc CD8 T cell frequencies in the spleens of chronically infected WT and cKO mice after mock or PD-1blockade treatment.(legend continued on next page)
(D) Summary graphs of the frequencies of gp33-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the lung or liver of chronically infected WT and cKO mice after mock or PD-1 blockadetreatment.(E) Summary graphs of the fold change in gp33-, gp276-, np396-speciﬁc, and total IFN g+ (after ex vivo stimulation with the gp33 peptide) CD8 T cell quantities inthe spleens of chronically infected WT (red) and cKO (green) mice after PD-1 blockade treatment compared to corresponding mock-treated mice.(F) Summary graph of the frequency of dead cells among total np396-speciﬁc CD8 T cells and representative histogram analysis of dead np396-speciﬁc CD 8T cells in the spleens of chronically infected WT and cKO mice after mock or PD-1 blockade treatment.(G) Summary graph of longitudinal Simpson’s diversity index analysis of gp33-speciﬁc TCR repertoire among WT and cKO CD8 T cells isolated from periph eral
blood by single-cell sorting before and after mock treatment.(H) Representative intracellular FACS analysis of IFN gexpression in CD44hiCD8 T cells from the spleens of mock or PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infectedWT and cKO mice after 5 hr of ex vivo stimulation with the gp33 peptide.(I) Summary graphs of the frequency of total IFN g-expressing CD44hiCD8 T cells and the ratio of IFN g+, IL-2+co-producing to total IFN g-producing CD8 T cellsafter 5 hr of ex vivo stimulation with the gp33 peptide in splenocytes of mock or PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT and cKO mice. Summary gr aphsof the MFI of IL-2 or IFN gin the IFN g+, IL-2+coexpressing or the total IFN g-producing CD8 T cells respectively.N = 3-5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test. *p%0.05, **p %0.01, ***p %0.001. Error barsare the mean ±SEM.
Figure S7. Decitabine Treatment Synergizes with PD-L1 Blockade-Mediated Rejuvenation of Exhausted WT CD8 T Cells, Related to Figures 6and7(A) Representative FACS analysis showing the frequencies of polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+ LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleen, lung, and liver tissues of mockplus mock-treated, mock plus anti–PD-L1–treated, decitabine plus mock-treated, or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected W T mice.(B) Summary graphs show the frequencies of polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+ LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleen, lung, and liver tissues of mock plus mock-treated(gray bars), mock plus anti–PD-L1–treated (red bars), decitabine plus mock-treated (black bars), or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated (blue b ars) chronicallyinfected WT mice.(C) Representative FACS analysis showing Ki67 levels in polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+ LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleens of mock plus mock-treated, mock
plus anti–PD-L1–treated, decitabine plus mock-treated, or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT mice.(legend continued on next page)
(D) Summary graph showing the frequencies of Ki67 levels in polyclonal CD44hiPD-1+ LCMV-speciﬁc CD8 T cells in the spleens of mock plus mock-treated (graybars), mock plus anti–PD-L1–treated (red bars), decitabine plus mock-treated (black bars), or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated (blue bars) c hronicallyinfected WT mice.(E) Representative intracellular FACS analysis of IFN gexpression among CD44hiCD8 T cells in the spleens of mock plus mock-treated, mock plus anti–PD-L1–treated, decitabine plus mock-treated, or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT mice.(F) Summary graphs of the frequency and number of IFN g-producing cells among CD44hiCD8 T cells in the spleens of mock plus mock-treated, mock plus anti–
PD-L1–treated, decitabine plus mock-treated, or decitabine plus PD-1 blockade–treated chronically infected WT mice.(G) Graph shows longitudinal measurement of serum LCMV titers in chronically infected WT mice during mono- or sequentially combined decitabine and a nti-PD-L1 treatments.(H) Representative FACS analysis of PD-1 and Tim-3 expression among TILs, and representative histogram analysis and summary bar graphs of intracell ularTCF1 levels among PD-1hi (red) or PD-1low (black) tumor-inﬁltrating CD8 T cells after mono PD-1 blockade (top panel) or sequentially combined decita bine andanti-PD-L1 (bottom panel) treatments.(I) Longitudinal measurement of Tramp C2 tumor growth in WT mice receiving mock (gray) or single decitabine (black) treatment.N = 3-5 mice per group of two independent experiments. Comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test. *p%0.05,**p%0.01, ***p %0.001 ,****p%0.0001 . Error bars are the mean ±SEM (panels B-F, H-I) or the mean ±SD (panel G).
