ReviewThe shade-avoidance syndrome: multiple signals andecological consequencesCarlos L. Ballaré1,2&R o n a l dP i e r i k31IFEVA, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ave. San Martín 4453C1417DSEBuenos Aires, Argentina,2IIB-INTECH, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Universidad Nacional de SanMartín, B1650HMP Buenos Aires, Argentina and3Plant Ecophysiology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Utrecht University,Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The NetherlandsABSTRACTPlants use photoreceptor proteins to detect the proximity ofother plants and to activate adaptive responses. Of thesephotoreceptors, phytochrome B (phyB), which is sensitive tochanges in the red (R) to far-red (FR) ratio of sunlight, is theone that has been studied in greatest detail. The molecularconnections between the proximity signal (low R:FR) and a
model physiological response (increased elongation growth)have now been mapped in considerable detail in Arabidopsisseedlings. We brie ﬂy review our current understanding of theseconnections and discuss recent progress in establishing theroles of other photoreceptors in regulating growth-relatedpathways in response to competition cues. We also considerprocesses other than elongation that are controlled byphotoreceptors and contribute to plant ﬁtness under variablelight conditions, including photoresponses that optimize theutilization of soil resources. In examining recent advances inthe ﬁeld, we highlight emerging roles of phyB as a majormodulator of hormones related to plant immunity, in particularsalicylic acid and jasmonic acid (JA). Recent attempts tomanipulate connections between light signals and defence inArabidopsis suggest that it might be possible to improve crophealth at high planting densities by targeting links betweenphyB and JA signalling.
Key-words : light quality; shade; hormones; signalling; phyto-chrome; herbivory; pathogens; Jasmonate.INTRODUCTIONDuring the last four decades there has been an enormousincrease in our understanding of how plants sense shadingand the proximity of neighbours and how they activateadaptive morphological and physiological responses. Researchin the ﬁeld has moved from working on simple morphologicalresponses (e.g. internode elongation) to a single light cue [lowred to far-red (R:FR) ratio] to the discovery of multipleresponses elicited by a broad spectrum of neighbour proximitysignals. Important elements of the signal transductionpathways that connect informational photoreceptors withfunctional responses have been elucidated, and shade avoid-ance has become a textbook example of adaptive plasticity. In
this review, we describe the progress in understanding shade-avoidance mechanisms, summarize our current view of theroles of different photoreceptors in the perception of competi-tion and highlight the diversity of plant processes and functionsthat are controlled by canopy light signals. We also considerfuture challenges and opportunities in this multidisciplinaryresearch ﬁeld. Other reviews on this topic have been publishedrecently and provide additional perspectives on the mecha-nisms and functional implications of shade-avoidanceresponses (Casal 2013; Ballaré 2014; Pierik & de Wit 2014;Pierik & Testerink 2014; de Wit et al. 2016a; Fraser et al.2016; Viczian et al. 2016).PHYTOCHROME PERCEPTION OF CHANGES INTHE R:FR RATIOConnecting shade with phytochromeAs early as 1971, studies on cultivated tobacco revealed thatthe ratio between R ( λ~ 650 nm) and FR ( λ~ 730 nm) radiationwas lower under the canopies than in direct sunlight and that
plant treatment with FR radiation could promote stem elonga-
the ratio between R ( λ~ 650 nm) and FR ( λ~ 730 nm) radiationwas lower under the canopies than in direct sunlight and thatplant treatment with FR radiation could promote stem elonga-tion (Kasperbauer 1971). These studies inspired the pioneeringwork of H. Smith in the 1970s, describing the basics ofshadelight perception and responses. Using a FR supplementa-tion approach, it was found that the R:FR ratio was a key deter-minant of elongation growth in shade-intolerant species such asChenopodium album andSinapis alba . R light is absorbed byplants for photosynthesis, whereas FR radiation is mostlyreﬂected or transmitted. Elegant studies revealed that inter-node elongation was strongly accelerated at low R:FR ratios(e.g. Morgan & Smith 1978), a response that could be consid-ered adaptive because it would allow the plant to position itsleaves in higher, better-lit strata of the canopy (Fig. 1a). Theseeffects of light quality on elongation were attributed to
phytochrome, a R:FR-reversible protein discovered in the1950s by scientists working at the U.S. Department ofAgriculture in Beltsville, MD (Hendricks & Borthwick 1959)(for historigraphical accounts, see Sage 1992 and Lindblom2015). Typically, phytochrome occurs in a photoequilibriumCorrespondence: C. L. Ballaré and R. Pierik. e-mail: ballare@ifeva.edu.ar; r.pierik@uu.nl© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd 2530doi: 10.1111/pce.12914 Plant, Cell and Environment (2017) 40,2 5 3 0 –2543
between the active (Pfr) and inactive (Pr) states. Absorptionof R light converts Pr to Pfr, whereas FR absorption by theactive Pfr form reverts it to the inactive Pr state. In additionto this R:FR photoreversibility, Pfr can spontaneously revertto the inactive Pr state by a slow non-photoinduced reaction(Liet al. 2011). Internode elongation rates of light-grownChenopodium album andSinapis alba seedlings were foundto correlate very tightly with the phytochromephotoquilibrium, de ﬁned as Pfr/Ptotal (Morgan & Smith1978; Child and Smith, 1987). The early work of Smithand co-workers provided three key pieces of evidence tosupport the concept that the main function of phytochromewas to promote stem elongation under shade: (i) the R:FR
ratio was an excellent signal of canopy cover; (ii) withinthe natural range of variation [between 1.2 (full sunlight)and 0.1 (deep shade)], changes in R:FR ratio are linearly re-lated with changes in the estimated phytochromephotoequilibrium; and (iii) under experimental conditions,the rate of internode elongation is inversely related to thecalculated Pfr/Ptotal ratio established by the light sources(Smith 1982). This work was followed by outdoor experi-ments in several systems that began to address the role ofphytochrome in the perception of leaf shading and the eco-logical implications of plant responses to light quality underﬁeld conditions (Deregibus et al. 1985; Ballaré et al. 1987;Schmitt et al. 1995; Schmitt et al. 1999).A particularly important aspect of R:FR dynamics during
the growth of a plant stand is that the R:FR ratio of horizontallypropagated light decreases before true shading amongneighbouring plants occurs, owing to the backscattering ofFR radiation by green leaves (Ballaré et al. 1987). Thisreﬂection signal allows plants to remotely detect theirneighbours and activate elongation responses before the onsetof competition for resources (Ballaré et al. 1987; Ballaré et al.1990). Laboratory experiments with linear variable displace-ment transducers indicated that internode elongationresponses to FR-enrichment can occur very rapidly, withinminutes upon FR exposure (Child & Smith 1987), and canopystudies demonstrated that the internodes themselves areimportant sites of perception for re ﬂected FR (Ballaré et al.1989; Ballaré et al. 1990).Subsequent research on shade avoidance demonstrated thatnot just internode or hypocotyl elongation are controlled by R:
FR ratio but in fact a suite of responses, including petioleelongation, upward leaf movement (hyponasty), inhibition ofbranching and acceleration of ﬂowering, are commonly co-expressed when phytochrome is inactivated. This suite ofresponses is collectively known as the shade-avoidance syn-drome (SAS) (Smith 1995).Multiple phytochromes sense changes in R:FR ratio(discussed in Smith & Whitelam 1997), and although phyto-chrome B (phyB) is the predominant phytochrome controllingSAS in response to low R:FR ratio (Franklin & Quail 2010)and neighbour proximity (Ballaré 1999), phyD and phyE seemto have partially redundant functions in Arabidopsis (Franklin& Quail 2010). In young seedlings phyA partially antagonizeslow R:FR-induced hypocotyl elongation, due to its activationby FR radiation. As phyA is light-labile, its involvement in fullyde-etiolated, more mature plants is rather modest (Franklin &Quail 2010).
Figure 1. Photoreceptors regulate shade-avoidance responses. (a) Brassica nigra grown for 2 weeks in a growth chamber under white light (red tofar-red (R:FR) = 2.1) or white light supplemented with FR (R:FR = 0.2). Low R:FR stimulates elongation of the hypocotyl, internodes and petioles,whereas the expansion of the leaf lamina is inhibited. Growth conditions: 9 h light (PAR = 150 μmol m/C02s/C01, 15 h light), RH = 70 %, 21 °C). (b)Schematic representation of the signal transduction network that regulates elongation responses under the control of phyB in Arabidopsis thaliana .
Schematic representation of the signal transduction network that regulates elongation responses under the control of phyB in Arabidopsis thaliana .UV-B signalling through UVR8 and blue light signalling through CRYs also feed into the core PIF signalling hub that orchestrates the majority of thedownstream events. Different colours indicate study systems in which certain signal transduction components were shown to function in low R:FR-induced elongation. Rounded boxes, transcription (co)factors; square boxes, hormone biosynthetic enzymes; ellipses: hormones; hexagons:photoreceptors. The dashed lines indicate hypothesized mode of action. The arrows indicate positive interaction; the blocked arrows indicate nega tiveinteraction.Neighbour detection and shade avoidance 2531©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The signalling network downstream ofphytochromesA number of transcriptome surveys have been conducted onshade-avoidance responses in Arabidopsis. The ﬁrst ones werepublished more than a decade ago, using the aerial parts ofyoung Arabidopsis seedlings (Devlin et al. 2003; Salter et al.2003), and were followed by studies that focused on more ma-ture, rosette-stage plants and sampled speci ﬁc organs (Kozukaet al. 2010; de Wit et al. 2013; de Wit et al. 2016b). Very recently,transcriptome surveys have been published that include de-tailed time series and between-organ comparisons of gene ex-pression pro ﬁles (Das et al. 2016; Kohnen et al. 2016) andexperiments that compare multiple light quality treatments(de Wit et al. 2016b). These transcriptome surveys have beenuseful to generate models of regulatory networks. Neverthe-less, functional proof for causal involvement of speci ﬁc regula-
tors has come from dedicated physiological and genefunctional studies, which in some cases were combined withtranscriptome pro ﬁling of genotypes with perturbed expressionor activity of the proposed signalling components (e.g. Taoet al. 2008; Hornitschek et al. 2012; Leivar et al. 2012; Li et al.2012; Ciol ﬁet al. 2013; Pedmale et al. 2016; Procko et al. 2016).An impressive variety of regulators downstream of phyphotoconversion has been elucidated, mostly by studying theelongation response of Arabidopsis hypocotyls to supplemen-tal FR irradiation under white light conditions (Fig. 1b). Wewill classify these regulators according to function and discussthem brie ﬂy.Phytochrome-interacting factorsPhytochrome, upon activation by R light, migrates from the cy-tosol to the nucleus where it interacts with phytochrome-interacting factors (PIFs), a group of subfamily 15 of bHLHtranscription factors (Leivar & Quail 2011; Leivar & Monte
2014). Although this family contains 7 members that can phys-ically interact with phytochrome, only three of these phy-interacting proteins are unambiguously involved in SAS con-trol: PIF4, PIF5 and PIF7. PIFs contain an activephytochrome-binding (APB) domain with which they interactspeci ﬁcally with the biologically active Pfr form of phyB, al-though PIF1 and PIF3 have been shown to also interact withPfr from phyA through a motif called active phytochrome A-binding (APA) (Li et al. 2011). Upon interaction with phyBPfr, PIFs typically are phosphorylated, and in the case ofPIF4 and PIF5, they are subsequently ubiquitinated and de-graded (Lorrain et al. 2008). In the case of PIF7, phosphoryla-tion occurs but no subsequent degradation was observed, eventhough PIF7 ability to regulate transcription of target geneswas inhibited (Li et al. 2012).Other transcriptional regulatorsSeveral other transcriptional regulators are controlled at the
transcriptional level by phytochrome inactivation in low R:FR ratios (Fig. 1). Among these are other members of thebHLH family, such as HFR1, PAR1 and PAR2 (Sessa et al.2005; Roig-Villanova et al. 2007). These three proteins are neg-ative regulators that lack a typical basic domain to interact withpromoters of target genes. Instead, they interact with the DNAbinding domain of PIF proteins, preventing PIFs frominteracting with the promoters of their target genes(Hornitschek et al. 2009; Galstyan et al. 2011). These regulatorsare thought to keep the strength of elongation responses incheck. Indeed, hfr1knockout mutants have exaggerated lowR:FR-induced hypocotyl elongation, whereas an over-expressor of a stable HFR1 protein has suppressed elongation(Galstyan et al.2011). These studies have been limited to youngseedlings, and the functionality of these negative regulators inmature plants remains to be veri ﬁed. Other bHLH proteins
whose gene expression is induced upon low R:FR ratio, butthat are positive regulators of SAS, include BEE1 and BIM,which are PAR1-interacting factors (Cifuentes-Esquivel et al.2013).
whose gene expression is induced upon low R:FR ratio, butthat are positive regulators of SAS, include BEE1 and BIM,which are PAR1-interacting factors (Cifuentes-Esquivel et al.2013).Transcription factors from families other than bHLHs thatare induced upon exposure to low R:FR ratios includehomeodomain-leucine zipper (HD-ZIP) proteins encoded byATHB2 ,ATHB4 ,HAT1 ,HAT2 andHAT3 (Steindler et al.1999; Sorin et al. 2009). ATHB2 diurnal expression undershort-day conditions has been shown to be PIF4-dependentand PIF5-dependent (Kunihiro et al. 2011). ELONGATEDHYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5) encodes a bZIP transcription factorthat is up-regulated in response to low R:FR ratio (Ciol ﬁet al. 2013; de Wit et al. 2016b) (although HY5 protein stabilityis reduced by end-of-day FR; Toledo-Ortiz et al. 2014) and thatcan interact with PIFs (Chen et al. 2013), thereby inhibitingtheir function in a way that is similar to HFR1.Hormones
HormonesThe previously described transcription factor network is highlyinterconnected, and novel components and interactions are stillbeing elucidated. This network, largely centred around PIFs(Fig. 1), is now known to target some major physiological reg-ulatory components, particularly hormones. Upon exposure tolow R:FR ratios, the biosynthesis of at least three growth-associated hormones is stimulated: gibberellins (GA), auxinand ethylene. In addition, low R:FR desensitizes plants todefence-associated plant hormones, such as jasmonic acid(JA) and salicylic acid (SA), which leads to a crosstalk betweenshade avoidance and plant immunity that will be discussed inthe sections ‘Effects on biotic interactions ’and‘Growth-de-fence balance ’.Auxin is now known as the dominant physiological regulator
activated by PIF proteins when they accumulate in low R:FRlight. Low R:FR-induced auxin is derived from tryptophanthrough the TAA1 pathway (Tao et al. 2008) and involvesPIF-mediated transcription of YUCCA genes that encoderate-limiting enzymes in auxin biosynthesis (Hornitscheket al. 2012; Li et al. 2012). This low R:FR-induced de novo syn-thesis of auxin in seedlings occurs mostly in the cotyledons(Procko et al. 2014) and drives expression and localization ofthe auxin ef ﬂux-associated protein PIN3 to transport auxin to-wards the hypocotyl epidermis (Keuskamp et al. 2010). In theepidermis auxin induces both brassinosteroid (BR)-dependent2532 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and BR-independent responses (Procko et al. 2016). Auxin sig-nalling through the receptor TIR1 and related Auxin SignallingF-Box Proteins (AFBs) leads to degradation of AUX/IAAproteins, which in turn relieves repression of auxin responsefactors (ARFs) that control transcription of auxin responsegenes, ultimately leading to cell growth (reviewed in Dünser&K l e i n e - V e h n2 0 1 5 ) .Low R:FR conditions also stimulate the biosynthesis of an-other group of growth-promoting hormones: GA. This occursat least in part through transcriptional up-regulation of genesencoding the GA biosynthetic enzymes GA20ox1 andGA20ox2 (Hisamatsu et al. 2005). Bioactive GA, uponinteracting with its receptor GID1, leads to ubiquitinationand subsequent proteasomal degradation of DELLA proteins,GRAS domain proteins that lack direct DNA binding proper-ties (Harberd et al. 2009). Interestingly, DELLAs are directinteractors of PIFs (de Lucas et al. 2008; Feng et al. 2008) and
their binding to PIFs prevents PIF proteins from bindingDNA and thus controlling the expression of growth-promotinggenes. Low R:FR ratios promote DELLA degradation(Djakovic-Petrovic et al. 2007; Leone et al. 2014), and proteinsthat physically interact with DELLAs, such as BBX24, wereshown to modulate DELLA-mediated repression of PIF activ-ity and shade-avoidance responses (Crocco et al. 2015).Finally, biosynthesis of the volatile hormone ethylene is ac-celerated upon phytochrome inactivation in low R:FR light(reviewed in Kegge & Pierik 2010). Cultivated tobacco plantsexpressing the dominant negative mutant receptor etr1-1 fromArabidopsis are ethylene-insensitive and show delayed shade-avoidance responses to plant neighbours at high density (Pieriket al.2004a). Although there is an interaction with R:FR signal-ling (Pierik et al. 2004a), the delayed leaf movement and stem
elongation responses to neighbours seem to be particularly as-sociated with other canopy signals (Pierik et al. 2004b), whichwill be discussed in the succeeding texts.A c t u a t o r si ng r o w t hc o n t r o lThe previously described plethora of transcription factors,transcriptional co-regulators, hormone biosynthesis enzymesand hormone signalling components ultimately target the cellgrowth machinery. Shade-avoidance research has mostly fo-cused on cell expansion as the driving force of organ elonga-tion. For plant cells to expand, they need to loosen their cellwalls so they can yield to the existing turgor pressure fromthe vacuoles. Indeed, an established shade-avoidance markergene that is under R:FR control is XTH15/XTR7 (Hornitscheket al. 2009; de Wit et al. 2012). XYLOGLUCAN
et al. 2009; de Wit et al. 2012). XYLOGLUCANENDOTRANSGLUCOSYLASE/HYDROLASE (XTH)proteins are cell wall modifying enzymes that can modify theload-bearing xyloglucan-cellulose cross links in the cell wall.Cleavage through hydrolase activity results in wall loosening,whereas transglucosylation can strengthen the cell wall, thusgiving these proteins the potential to control cell growth (Roseet al. 2002; Sasidharan et al. 2011). It has been shown that PIFscan directly target the expression of, for example, XTH15 inArabidopsis seedlings under low R:FR ratios (Hornitscheket al. 2009). Furthermore, coordinated auxin production andpolar auxin transport has also been shown to be importantfor enhanced expression of different XTHs (e.g. XTH17 andXTH19 ) in Arabidopsis petioles under shade (Sasidharanet al. 2014). Interestingly, auxin involvement in shade-inducedXTH expression intersects with another component of cellgrowth: cortical microtubules (CMTs) (Yu et al. 2015). CMTs
rearrange their subcellular localization in shade, facilitatingunidirectional cell growth in Arabidopsis petioles anddisrupting CMT polymers with the drug oryzalin inhibitsshade-induced petiole elongation. CMT disruption also mini-mizes shade-induced expression of some XTHs, and this canbe rescued by exogenous application of auxin (Sasidharan
be rescued by exogenous application of auxin (Sasidharanet al.2014). Finally, the classic mode of action for auxin-inducedcell growth is the acid growth theory: auxin regulates activity ofproton pumps in the plasma membrane, leading to acidi ﬁcationof the apoplast, thereby increasing, among others, the activityof cell wall modifying proteins (reviewed in Dünser & Kleine-Vehn 2015).MULTIPLE SIGNALS FOR SHADE ANDNEIGHBOUR DETECTIONThe R:FR ratio is an incredibly reliable indicator of plant prox-imity as very few objects other than green plants absorb R lightso efﬁciently and FR barely at all. Perhaps because the signalappeared to be so good, shade-avoidance research has focusedfor many years almost exclusively on phytochrome signalling ofchanges in R:FR ratio (Ballaré 1999). Nevertheless, there isnow strong evidence that other signals play an important roleactivating shade-avoidance responses in plant canopies. Mostof these signals are generated from the spectral properties of
leaves, which include strong absorption of R, blue and ultravi-olet (UV) radiation and re ﬂection and transmission of greenand especially FR radiation. The emerging picture is thatdifferent light signals interactively control shade avoidance,thus adjusting the magnitude of the response to the severityof the competitive threat.Light intensityAlthough dismissed as ‘essentially irrelevant ’in an in ﬂuentialCommentary in this journal (Smith & Whitelam 1997), atten-uation of overall light intensity is now known to indeed in-duce shade-avoidance responses. One reason for the initialdismissal of light intensity (irradiance) as a shade signalcould be that, under conditions in which light is limiting
for photosynthesis (as was the case in many growth-chamberstudies), the trophic effects and the photomorphogenic ef-fects of light attenuation could have been confounded. Con-sistent with this hypothesis, in studies where shading wasapplied from the side, simulating the proximity of otherplants but without affecting the light received by the leaves,attenuation of the light received by the internodes causedstrong elongation responses (Ballaré et al. 1991). Anotherreason for not considering total irradiance as a shade signalwas that shade-avoidance research at that time was rather‘elongation-centred ’, whereas especially leaf angles arehighly responsive to changes in light intensity (Pierik et al.Neighbour detection and shade avoidance 2533©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2004b; Mullen et al. 2006; Millenaar et al. 2009). The effectsof attenuated light intensity promoting shoot elongation arepartially mediated by cryptochromes (as discussed in thefollowing section). However, early studies have shown thatattenuation of R and FR radiation (without affecting bluelight or the R:FR ratio) is suf ﬁcient to promote stem elonga-tion in some species (Ballaré et al. 1991). The availableevidence suggests that this irradiance response is mediatedby phyB in Arabidopsis (Trupkin et al. 2014).Interestingly, leaf responses that may contribute to shade tol-erance, rather than avoidance, including the increase in speci ﬁcleaf area (SLA), are strongly sensitive to changes in the inten-sity of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) (Björkman1981) but poorly responsive to changes in R:FR ratio (Poorteret al., 2012). Essentially, a higher SLA indicates a larger area to
intercept solar radiation per unit carbon invested in the con-struction of leaf tissue, often coinciding with a thinner leafthrough formation of fewer mesophyll cell layers.Blue lightBlue light depletion can trigger shade-avoidance responses inmany plant species. Perhaps, the best studied shade-avoidanceresponse controlled by blue light is phototropism, which is me-diated by phototropins (phot1 and phot2 in Arabidopsis)(Briggs & Christie 2002). Positive phototropism to blue light,along with negative phototropic responses to re ﬂected FR radi-ation (Ballaré et al. 1992), can help plants to direct their growthtoward canopy gaps in patchy canopies (Ballaré et al. 1995b;Ballaré 1999). Interestingly, in Arabidopsis seedlings, phot-mediated phototropism is enhanced by low R:FR ratios (Goyalet al. 2016).Internode and petiole elongation in species such astobacco, jimsonweed, mustard and Arabidopsis are alsostimulated by the attenuation of blue light (Ballaré et al.
1991; Pierik et al. 2004b; Sellaro et al. 2010; Keller et al.2011; Keuskamp et al. 2011). Exposure of light-grownArabidopsis seedlings to light deprived of the blue compo-nent leads to a very strong elongation response of the hypo-cotyl, even larger than that induced by low R:FR (Pieriket al. 2009). This and other elongation responses to bluelight depletion are triggered through the photoreceptorscrytochrome 1 and 2 (cry1 and cry2) in Arabidopsis (Pieriket al. 2009; Keller et al. 2011; Pedmale et al. 2016). Low blueand low R:FR signalling recruit partially similar physiologicalregulators to control hypocotyls elongation, including auxin,BRs and XTHs (Keuskamp et al. 2011) (Fig. 1). Interest-ingly, also upstream of the hormones, low blue and low R:FR signalling were recently shown to converge in their re-quirement of transcriptions factors PIF4 and PIF5 (Kelleret al. 2011). Pedmale et al. (2016) showed that cry1 andcry2 interact physically with PIF4 and PIF5, thereby modu-
lating their transcriptional output and hence growth, involv-ing XTHs. The main difference between low R:FR ratioand low blue light seems to be that low R:FR-mediated hy-pocotyl elongation involves a dominant role for PIF7, withthepif7 knockout being essentially irresponsive to low R:FR (Li et al. 2012), whereas the pif7 mutant still showspronounced low blue-mediated elongation (Pedmale et al.2016). Although blue light depletion induces shade-avoidance responses, depletion of blue light will not occuralone in dense vegetation (Ballaré et al. 1991). The func-tional relevance of blue light signalling in the control ofshade avoidance seems to be that low blue levels enhancethe elongation responses induced by low R:FR ratios, thusallowing plants to attune their shade-avoidance phenotypeto the severity of competitive threat. This enhancement ap-pears to occur through suppression by blue light depletionof negative SAS regulators, such as HFR1, which are in-
duced by low R:FR conditions (de Wit et al. 2016b).UV-B radiationPlant canopies effectively ﬁlter out UV radiation, including the
duced by low R:FR conditions (de Wit et al. 2016b).UV-B radiationPlant canopies effectively ﬁlter out UV radiation, including theUV-B (290 –315 nm) component (Flint & Caldwell 1998), andchanges in UV-B levels can affect plant growth. Inhibition ofhypocotyl elongation by UV-B radiation involves the UV-B re-ceptor UVR8 in Arabidopsis (reviewed in Jenkins 2009 andUlm & Jenkins 2015). UVR8 binds to CONSTITUTIVELYPHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1), thereby promoting ac-cumulation of HY5 and HY5 HOMOLOGUE (HYH) (Brown& Jenkins 2008; Favory et al. 2009). HY5/HYH promote GAdegradation, leading to stabilization of growth-repressingDELLA proteins and inhibiting PIF function. UV-B also en-hances the degradation of PIF4 and PIF5 (Hayes et al. 2014).Consequently, PIF and auxin-dependent elongation responsesto low R:FR ratio can be antagonized by the UVR8-dependentsignalling of UV-B radiation (Hayes et al. 2014; Mazza &Ballaré 2015).Non-light cues
Ballaré 2015).Non-light cuesAlthough canopy-generated light cues probably dominateneighbour detection and shade avoidance, some complemen-tary signalling mechanisms have been described. It was foundin Arabidopsis canopies that the ﬂat lying rosette leaves donot generate a strong FR-re ﬂection signal, due to the absenceof a vertical structure. As a consequence, these plants detectneighbours through touching of neighbouring leaf tips. In re-sponse to this biomechanical detection, Arabidopsis leavesmove upward, thereby creating a vertical structure that gener-ates horizontal FR re ﬂection, thus triggering low R:FR re-sponses in the stand, such as petiole elongation (de Wit et al.2012). The regulatory (sensing) mechanisms underpinningthese responses are currently unknown, but seem to differ fromother established thigmomorphogenic responses (Chehab et al.2009; Chehab et al. 2012).Plants in high-density stands can be close enough to
communicate via volatile compounds. Much has been writtenabout volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and their potentialfor carrying information about neighbour identity and physio-logical status. As mentioned earlier, ethylene emissions arelargely increased under low R:FR light. and it has been shownthat ethylene can accumulate to physiologically meaningfulconcentrations in dense stands of cultivated tobacco (Pieriket al. 2004b). Although the emission of several other volatiles2534 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
from Arabidopsis (Kegge et al. 2013), barley (Kegge et al.2015) and tomato (Cortés et al. 2016) are affected by lowR:FR ratios, it remains to be studied if these changes inVOC pro ﬁles are involved in neighbour detection andshade-avoidance responses. Nevertheless, it has been shownthat the changes in VOC emissions induced by low R:FRin barley can alter carbon allocation in neighbouring plants(Kegge et al. 2015).FROM MORPHOLOGY TO MULTIPLE RESPONSESThe initial focus on stem elongation responses led to adetailed mechanistic understanding of the molecular connec-tions between photoreceptors, particularly phyB and growth-related signalling pathways (Fig. 1). Photoreceptors provideinformation on neighbour proximity and spatial distribution,thereby allowing the plant to ‘forage ’for light in complexcanopies. It is now becoming clear that proximity perceptionleads to a complete recon ﬁguration of plant function. Thisrecon ﬁguration allows the plant to optimize the deployment
of leaves into light gaps, balance resource allocation betweenshoots and roots, optimize leaf gas exchange and nutrientuptake as a function of the degree of shading and adaptivelyregulate interactions with herbivores, pathogens and bene ﬁ-cial microorganisms (Fig. 2).Optimizing resource capture and economyThe roles of phyB and other photoreceptors, includingphototropins and cryptochromes, as modulators of morpho-logical responses that are important for the optimization ofleaf placement in patchy canopies are now well documentedand have been summarized in previous sections of this re-view. Field studies have shown that mutants impaired in R:FR perception are less ef ﬁcient than the corresponding wildtypes at foraging for light in heterogeneous light environ-ments, providing direct evidence for the adaptive value ofphytochrome-mediated shade avoidance (Ballaré et al.1995b; Schmitt et al. 1995; Schmitt et al. 1999). More recent
work has suggested that in addition to the main functions ofphytochromes, cryptochromes and phototropins in control-ling shoot architecture and foraging for light in patchy cano-pies, the UV-B photoreceptor UVR8 may contribute toattenuate shade-avoidance responses when the plant meetswell-illuminated areas in canopy gaps (Hayes et al. 2014;Mazza & Ballaré 2015).Figure 2. Photoreceptors optimize plant structure and function in patchy canopies. As discussed in the text, proximity cues perceived by phyB andother photoreceptors are used by the plant to optimize foraging for light, as these signals regulate stem elongation (1); phototropism (2); branchin g( 3 ) ;resource partitioning between shoot and roots (4); and leaf senescence (5). In addition to these structural changes that allow the plant to optimize t hespatial distribution of its branches and leaves in the canopy light matrix, photoreceptors regulate the mechanical strength and hydraulic resistan ce of
the stem (6) and contribute to adjust the physiology of resource-harvesting organs to the prevailing light conditions. Under high light, such in a can opygap, photoreceptors activate leaf photoprotection (7), increase stomatal conductance and sensitivity to water stress signals (8) and activate mob ilesignals that increase the expression of a NO 3/C0transporter in the roots (9), which presumably contributes to maintain the C:N homeostasis underchanging light conditions. Proximity signals perceived by phyB also have profound effects on plant interactions with other organisms. Low R:FR rati oslocally repress jasmonic acid signalling and down-regulate salicylic acid responses, which reduces plant resistance to herbivores (10) and pathog ens(11). Light effects on jasmonate signalling also affect plant interactions with root simbionts, including rizhobia (12) and mycorrhyzae (13). Low R :FR
ratios also promote the emission of ethylene, which may contribute to shade avoidance (14) and alter the blend of terpene compounds emitted by
ratios also promote the emission of ethylene, which may contribute to shade avoidance (14) and alter the blend of terpene compounds emitted byinduced plants, which may contribute to increase indirect defence against herbivores in shaded plants (15).Neighbour detection and shade avoidance 2535©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Besides optimizing light interception, evidence is emergingthat photoreceptors play a key role adjusting plant structure,hydraulics and nutrient uptake. In this section, we provideexamples of the role of informational photoreceptors incontrolling plant functional acclimation to open or shadedconditions. Transition between sun and shade are often associ-ated with sharp variations in exposure to mechanical stressfrom exposure to wind, evaporative demand, nutrient require-ments and need of photoprotection.Structural acclimationE a r l yw o r ki nc u c u m b e rd e m o n s t r a t e dt h a ti nc a n o p yo p e n -ings, activation of phyB promotes morphological and anatom-ical changes that increase plant ﬁtness (Casal et al. 1994).Thus, when phyB is activated under sunlight conditions, Pfr
promotes the formation of thicker and mechanically moreresistant stems, with increased cross section of xylem vesselsand higher water conductivity compared with plants undershade. These responses were shown to be essential for plantsurvival in canopy gaps (Casal et al. 1994). Effects of phyB onstructural properties of the stems likely complement thespeci ﬁc effects of mechanical stress on internode architectureand mechanical resistance (Anten et al. 2005).Root function, uptake of soil resources and nutrientmetabolismRoot growth (Casal et al. 1994), gravitropism (Galen et al.2007; Boccalandro et al. 2008) and development (Salisburyet al. 2007; Tong et al. 2008) are known to be affected by
photoreceptors. Some of the effects of photoreceptors onroot growth, particularly during de-etiolation, are thoughtto be mediated by changes in photoassimilate supply fromt h ec o t y l e d o n s ,w h i c hi sa f f e c t e db yp h o t o r e c e p t o rs i g n a l sthat trigger cotyledon expansion and the establishment ofphotosynthetic competence in the shoot as it emerges fromsoil (Kircher & Schopfer 2012). The adaptive value of rootresponses to photoreceptor signals has seldom been testedin the ﬁeld (Gundel et al. 2014). However, there is someevidence that root foraging for soil resources can be in ﬂu-enced by photoreceptors. For example, Galen et al. (2007)demonstrated that the ability of Arabidopsis roots to foragefor water in the ﬁeld was impaired in a phot-1 mutant. Rootcells have photoreceptors, but aside from the case of veryyoung seedlings, where physiologically signi ﬁcant amountsof light can be piped from shoot to roots (Lee et al. 2016),
or under certain types of substrates, such as very sandy soils(Tester & Morris 1987), the vast majority of root cells willgrow in the dark under ﬁeld conditions. Therefore, mosteffects of light on root function are likely to depend on lightperception by shoot cells and mobile signals traveling fromshoot to roots. Recent research (Chen et al. 2016) demon-strated that HY5, a transcription factor involved in the signaltransduction pathways of nearly all photoreceptors, is a sig-nal that moves from shoot to root and mediates lightpromotion of root growth and nitrate uptake in Arabidopsisseedlings. Thus, shoot-derived HY5 activates HY5 expres-sion in the root and promotes nitrate uptake by activatingNRT2.1 , a gene that encodes a high-af ﬁnity nitrate trans-porter. In the shoot, HY5 promotes the expression of genesinvolved in carbon assimilation and translocation to roots(Toledo-Ortiz et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2016), whereas in the
root, HY5 activation of NRT2.1 expression and nitrate up-take is potentiated by increased sucrose levels (Chen et al.2016). HY5 function is irradiance-dependent, and thisregulation appears to play an important role, along withshoot-derived sugar signals (e.g. Kircher & Schopfer 2012),in coupling nitrogen and carbon assimilation under variablelight conditions (Chen et al. 2016). Photoreceptors also mod-
shoot-derived sugar signals (e.g. Kircher & Schopfer 2012),in coupling nitrogen and carbon assimilation under variablelight conditions (Chen et al. 2016). Photoreceptors also mod-ulate nutrient metabolism and redistribution, for exampleduring shade-induced leaf senescence. The activity of nitratereductase, a key enzyme in nitrogen assimilation, isregulated by phytochrome (Whitelam & Johnson 1980),and this regulation, among other metabolic changes, suchas chlorophyll degradation, may contribute to optimize theredistribution of nutrient utilisation and photosyntheticcapacity throughout the plant, so as to match the verticallight gradient in high-density crops (Rousseaux et al. 1996;Rousseaux et al. 1997).Regulation of stomatal conductanceGas exchange per unit leaf area is also regulated by photore-ceptors, presumably contributing to optimize CO 2ﬁxationunder ﬂuctuating light conditions. phyB controls stomataldifferentiation (Casson et al. 2009; Kang et al. 2009), increasing
stomatal density under open conditions (Boccalandro et al.2009). This developmental response helps to minimize epider-mal resistance to CO2diffusion between the atmosphere andthe mesophyll in leaves exposed to high irradiance (where lightis not limiting for photosynthesis). However, the increasednumber of stomata could also make the plant more vulnerableto desiccation. This is, however, prevented by a positive effectof phyB on stomatal sensitivity to abscisic acid (Gonzálezet al. 2012). Blue light photoreceptors, including phot1 andphot2 and cry1 and cry2, may also be important to optimizephotosynthesis under high irradiance, acting through mecha-nisms that are dependent or independent of stomatal responses(Boccalandro et al. 2012).Optimizing leaf photoprotectionAdjusting photoprotection as a function of light exposure is
also an important function of photoreceptors. Positioning ofleaves in well-illuminated areas of the canopy during shadeavoidance increases the availability of energy for photosynthe-sis, but at the same time increases the potential for harmfuleffects of UV radiation. Accumulation of protective phenolicsunscreens in the ﬁeld is sensitive to small variations in theUV-B region of the solar spectrum (Barnes et al. 2000; Mazzaet al. 2000), and the UV-B photoreceptor UVR8 has beenshown to regulate the expression of numerous genes involved2536 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
in the biosynthesis of these protective compounds (reviewed inJenkins 2009 and Ulm & Jenkins 2015). Under ﬁeld conditions,other photoreceptors, besides UVR8, are likely to participatein the control of UV photoprotection (Morales et al. 2013).The accumulation of epidermal sunscreens is coordinated withgrowth inhibition responses (Ballaré et al. 1995a) and dynami-cally adjusted under ﬂuctuating light conditions to maximizephotoprotection (Barnes et al. 2016a; Barnes et al. 2016b).Effects on biotic interactionsRecent studies have demonstrated that plant functionalresponses to proximity signals can impact plant interactionsnot only with other plants (i.e. competition) but also with avariety of other organisms, including herbivores, pathogens,symbionts and herbivore predators.Interactions with enemiesAﬂurry of recent research has demonstrated that low R:FR
ratios down-regulate defence responses in shade-intolerantspecies (reviewed in Ballaré 2014). Inactivation of phyB leadsto increased susceptibility to insect herbivores and microbialpathogens of various lifestyles. This increased plant susceptibil-ity to pathogens and herbivores has been linked to reducedexpression of defence-related traits, including phenoliccompounds (Izaguirre et al.2006; Moreno et al.2009), glucosin-olates (Engelen-Eigles et al. 2006; Cargnel et al. 2014), latex(Agrawal et al. 2012) and extra ﬂoral nectar (Izaguirre et al.2013).The observed reduction of defence responses can beexplained by simultaneous attenuation, under low R:FR ratios,of the two major hormonal pathways that orchestrate plant
defence, namely the SA and JA signalling pathways (reviewedin Ballaré 2014). The mechanisms that mediate the effects ofphyB inactivation on SA signalling are not well understood.Reduced induction of SA synthesis (Griebel & Zeier 2008)and response to SA (de Wit et al. 2013) have been documentedunder conditions of phyB inactivation, and attenuation of SAunder low R:FR ratios correlated with reduced levels ofphosphorylation of the SA-signalling component NONE-XPRESSOR of PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENE 1(NPR1) (de Wit et al. 2013). In the case of JA responses, shad-ing has been shown to reduce herbivory-induced JA accumula-tion (Agrawal et al.2012), and inactivation of phyB consistentlyreduces plant sensitivity to exogenous JA (Moreno et al. 2009;Cerrudo et al. 2012; de Wit et al. 2013). Sensitivity to JA underlow R:FR ratios is attenuated as a consequence of increasedturnover of DELLA proteins (presumably in response toincreased GA activity) (Leone et al. 2014) and increased
stability of jasmonate ZIM domain (JAZ) repressor proteins(Chico et al. 2014; Leone et al. 2014). Destabilization of MYCtranscription factors in response to low R:FR may also contrib-ute to attenuating defence responses (Chico et al. 2014).Physical interaction (and mutual interference) between thegrowth-repressing DELLA proteins and defence-repressingJAZ proteins is thought to be critical in the regulation ofresource allocation between growth and immunity (Hou et al.2010; Yang et al. 2012). Therefore, the ability of phyB to affectthe stability of members of these two protein families repre-sents a critical link between the photoperception of neighbourproximity and the transcriptional programmes that optimizeresource allocation between shade-avoidance and defenceresponses under variable conditions of competition (Ballaré2014; Mazza & Ballaré 2015).Interactions with beneficial microorganisms
Interactions with beneficial microorganismsThere is growing evidence that photoreceptors, particularlyphyB, can regulate plant interactions in the rizosphere. Plantnutrition is often dependent on associations between rootsand bene ﬁcial microorganisms, such as nitrogen- ﬁxing bacteria,and mycorrhizae. Early studies have demonstrated that thesesymbiotic associations are modulated by light quality(reviewed by Gundel et al. 2014). For example, supplementalFR radiation perceived by the shoots reduces nodulation in
FR radiation perceived by the shoots reduces nodulation inlegumes (Kasperbauer et al. 1984; Kasperbauer & Hunt1994). Similarly, simulated canopy shade reduces mycorrhizalcolonization in several plant species (de la Rosa et al. 1998;Skálová & V osátka 1998; Pechá čková 1999). The developmentof symbiosis and the subsequent maintenance of the symbiontrepresent a metabolic cost to the host plant, and the exchangeof carbon for nutrients between plants and root symbionts istightly regulated (Helber et al.2011). Therefore, it is reasonableto expect that photoreceptors that inform the plant about theprevailing light conditions (and hence the conditions for carbonassimilation) have a role modulating the establishment andsymbiotic interactions. Recent work suggests that the positiveeffects of phyB on legume –Rhizobium interactions is mediatedby enhanced JA signalling (Suzuki et al. 2011). Similarly, the
positive effects of high R:FR ratios and phyB on colonizationof tomato and Lotus japonicas roots by arbuscular mycorrhizaecorrelate with enhanced expression of JA markers in the rootsand increased concentrations in the root exudates of (+)-5-deoxystrigol, a strigolactone that functions as an inducer offungal hyphal branching (Nagata et al. 2015).GROWTH-DEFENCE BALANCEThe demonstration that, in addition to the well-known effects ongrowth-related processes, photor eceptors are key regulators ofplant immunity has lent support t o the idea that these proteinshave an important role in balanc ing allocation between growthand defence (discussed in Ballaré 2014). When shade-intolerantplants are simultaneously challenged with competition andherbivory or pathogen attack, foraging for light through growthresponses often takes priorit y over plant immune responses.Short-term studies with Arabidopsis demonstrate that it is
possible to genetically uncouple the effects of light on growthfrom the effects of light on defence. For example, the sav3mutant of Arabidopsis, which does not respond to supplemen-tal FR radiation with increased leaf elongation and the classicrepertoire of changes in shoot morphology, still displays a lowdefence phenotype in bioassays (Moreno et al. 2009; Cerrudoet al. 2012). Conversely, the cry1mutant, which shows a consti-tutively elongated phenotype under white light, does notNeighbour detection and shade avoidance 2537©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
display increased susceptibility to infection by the fungusBotrytis cinerea (Cerrudo et al. 2012). More importantly, bymutating JAZ genes it has been possible to keep defenses athigh levels in plants that express a classic SAS morphologicalrepertoire in response to phyB inactivation (Cerrudo et al.2012; Leone et al. 2014; Campos et al. 2016; Cerrudo et al.2017).The demonstration in Arabidopsis that it is possible toexperimentally uncouple the effects of light on growth fromthe effects of light on defence indicate that at least in the shortterm, plants are able to defend their tissues from consumerorganisms even if they are committing resources to expressshade-avoidance responses to outcompete their neighbours.At the same time, these observations beg the question ofwhy, then, do plants normally repress their defenses when theyface a high risk of competition? A possible explanation is that itis advantageous for the plant to make the decision of curtailing
expenditures in defence while it still has plenty of resources.Unlike escape responses in animals, which can be very rapid,escaping from competition in plants often requires new growth,which could be slow and demanding in terms of carbon andother resources. Therefore, rapid use of information aboutneighbour proximity in the mechanisms that control resourceallocation might be very important for plants that grow in com-petitive environments. It is also worth noting that plants appearto have evolved strategies to minimize the ﬁtness costs ofdown-regulating defenses in response to competition signals.As explained in the succeeding texts, these strategies take ad-vantage of the modular nature of the plant body and the com-plex biotic scenario in which plants interact with their attackers.Shrewd allocation
Shrewd allocationPlants are modular organisms, and as such they can save re-sources by activating defence responses only in their most valu-able modules. Not all plant parts have the same importance forthe capture of resources. For example, those leaves that areplaced in well-illuminated strata of the plant canopy have ahigh potential to contribute to the carbon balance of the plant.In contrast, leaves that become shaded have a relatively lowvalue and will eventually activate a senescence programmeleading to leaf abscission. Whereas the induction of defencein response to attack is generally systemic (Ross 1961; Green& Ryan 1972), the repression of defence responses by photore-ceptor signals appears to be localized (Izaguirre et al. 2013). InPassi ﬂora edulis plants, wounding and MeJA treatment acti-vated the systemic production of extra ﬂoral nectar (an indirect
defence), and this response could be suppressed locally in indi-vidual branches by supplementing the light received by thosebranches with FR radiation (Izaguirre et al.2013). This suggeststhat when activating a defence programme in response toattack, the plant can, because of its modular organization,‘sacriﬁce’those modules that encountered poor or not so prom-ising light conditions and concentrate its defence resources inthe most valuable parts of the organism. The assignment of‘value ’to the different plant parts for this self-pruning strategycould be based on phyB status (where high Pfr levels wouldmean favorable light conditions), as in the P. edulis case.However, under natural conditions, other physiological differ-ences between sun and shade branches may contribute tolocally adjust the expression of the defence response. One ofthese additional signals could be the level of cytokinins(discussed in Ballaré 2014). Cytokinins are positive regulators
of defence and JA responses (Choi et al. 2010; Dervinis et al.2010; Brütting et al. 2017), and because of their higher transpi-ration rates, sun leaves have higher levels of cytokinins thanshaded leaves (Boonman et al. 2007).Calling for helpLow R:FR ratios can alter the emission of constitutive and JA-
ration rates, sun leaves have higher levels of cytokinins thanshaded leaves (Boonman et al. 2007).Calling for helpLow R:FR ratios can alter the emission of constitutive and JA-induced VOCs in Arabidopsis, and these changes can beperceived by herbivorous insects (Kegge et al. 2013). A recentstudy suggested that shifts in the blend of VOCs induced byphyB inactivation could play an important role in the attractionof predatory insects. Working with tomato, Cortés et al. (2016)found that when phyB was inactivated (by mutation or supple-mental FR), leaf defenses were down-regulated, as expected;however, at the same time, phyB inactivation led the plants toproduce a blend of JA-induced monoterpenes that increasedtheir attractiveness to the predatory mirid bug Macrolopuspigmaeus (Cortés et al. 2016). This predator can provideindirect protection to tomato plants by feeding on their insectherbivores (Lins et al. 2014). If the pattern documented in
tomato represents a general strategy, these results suggest thatplants exposed to low R:FR ratios could minimize the cost ofdown-regulating direct defenses by ﬁnely adjusting the blendof volatile compounds that they emit in response to herbivory,turning themselves more attractive to prey-seeking carnivorousinsects (Cortés et al. 2016).CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIESTheﬁeld of plant photobiology has come a long way since thepioneering attempts to connect plant responses to shade withthe activity of phytochrome. During the last decade, researchon the photoresponses of Arabidopsis seedlings, usinghypocotyl elongation as the principal physiological readout,has been very successful in elucidating the main signallingcomponents that connect photoreceptors (particularly phyB)with growth responses (Fig. 1). At the same time, research inother systems and conditions has revealed that photoreceptorsmodulate virtually all aspects of plant acclimation to varying
light conditions in canopies. This modulation includes someresponses that were never thought to be connected withlight signalling, such as, for example, nutrient uptake andchemical communication between plants and other organ-isms (Fig. 2). The future of the ﬁeld is full of opportunitiesand interesting challenges, some which are brie ﬂy outlinedin the succeeding paragraphs.Dealing with complexity and signal interactionsThe light environment of plant canopies is complex and in-cludes a multiplicity of shade signals. R:FR-centred researchhas proven to be highly successful in elucidating the main2538 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
elements of the core SAS pathway. Nevertheless, the demon-stration that even mutants that fail to respond to R:FR ratioshow strong shade-avoidance responses to plant proximity(Keller et al. 2011) indicates that if the aim is to understandplant responses in nature, research will have to consider abroader array of light signals and photoreceptors. In addition,we know from physiological studies carried out more than fourdecades ago that the pathways activated by different photore-ceptors often interact in the with each other (Mohr 1972). Sincethe signalling components downstream of individual photore-ceptors have now been studied at an appreciable depth, it is be-coming feasible to include them in signalling networks, whichconsider several photoreceptors and plant responses to lightin a more integrative way (Hayes et al. 2014; Mazza & Ballaré2015; de Wit et al. 2016b; Goyal et al. 2016). This is highly im-
portant also when trying to translate knowledge on SAS con-trol to crops in order to modulate (aspects of) shadeavoidance; simply selecting against R:FR responses, for exam-ple, will not necessarily eliminate responses to light intensity orother proximity signals.Complexity is not only a matter of multiple light colours butit is also a consequence of spatial and temporal variations inthese light signals. Not all parts of a plant experience the exactsame combination of light cues, and these light cues can be dy-namic over time. This is usually not a problem if the goal is tounderstand a simple system, such as the Arabidopsis seedling,where there is little room for spatial variation in light quality,and the studied responses are complete in a very short periodof time. But ﬁeld studies with more mature plants indicate thatmany important photoresponses are locally controlled by thelight environment of particular organs or parts. Examples in-
clude, among others, tillering responses in grasses (Deregibuset al. 1985), stem elongation in even-height canopies (Ballaréet al. 1990), leaf senescence (Rousseaux et al. 1996; Rousseauxet al. 1997) and reproductive abortion in soybean (Heindl &Brun 1983). The modular nature of the plant body and theresponse to local light signals are essential aspects of plantphotomorphogenesis.A successful way to deal with the evident need for under-standing the increasing complexity in biological research is toinclude computational modelling. This can be achieved atmany different organizational levels. Functional structuralplant models (FSP models) are a great tool to integrate a widevariety of physiological processes in a spatially explicit way,creating virtual plant stands in which parameters of plantgrowth can be modi ﬁed. These parameters can include SASin response to multiple light signals as occurring in these stands(Evers et al. 2007; Bongers et al. 2014). Computational models
can also be used to understand interactions between lightsignals and resources (Hersch et al. 2014) or to predict func-tional responses to signalling gradients (van Berkel et al. 2013).Dealing with processes other than growthresponsesGiven the historical focus on the effects of light on growth, it isnot surprising that most of the efforts to elucidate downstreamsignalling pathways have concentrated on growth-related hor-mones, such as auxin, GA and BR. However, it has recentlybecome clear that photoreceptors are major modulators ofthe hormonal pathways that control plant defence, includingJA and SA. This modulation is sensitive to the changes in thelight spectrum associated with neighbour proximity, whichmay have important implications for the regulation of defenceresponses in crops (Ballaré et al. 2012). Given the heightenedinterest in tradeoffs between plant growth and defence (Yanget al. 2012; Leone et al. 2014; Shyu & Brutnell 2015; Campos
et al. 2016; Cerrudo et al. 2017; Havko et al. 2016; Kliebenstein2016; Smakowska et al. 2016), and the realization that photore-
et al. 2016; Cerrudo et al. 2017; Havko et al. 2016; Kliebenstein2016; Smakowska et al. 2016), and the realization that photore-ceptors play a key role feeding proximity information into thesignalling mechanisms that make adaptive decisions in the faceof these tradeoffs, we expect that a major challenge in futureresearch will be to elucidate the mechanisms by which photore-ceptors control defence signalling pathways.Translating to cropsWhereas the mechanisms involved in the photocontrol of manyimportant responses are now very well established, virtuallynothing is known about the role of photoreceptors in control-ling yield and defence-related traits in crops under ﬁeld condi-tions. As the amount of information on molecular responses tolight signals in cultivated species continues to grow (Kebrom &Brutnell 2007; Bush et al. 2015; Horvath et al. 2015; Kharshiing& Sinha 2015; Carriedo et al.2017; Wang et al.2016), the oppor-
tunities to manipulate those responses using traditional breed-ing, transformation, genome editing or other technologies willobviously increase. A major challenge will be to identify whichresponses should be manipulated in order to have a signi ﬁcantimpact on crop yield, yield stability, crop health and/or plantquality. For example, it could be interesting to eliminate theeffects of those light proximity signals that redirect resourcesto stem or petiole elongation at the expense of other desirablefunctions, such as plant defence. However, at the same time, itwould be important to retain the ability of plant shoots tophototropically locate gaps in the crop canopy, in order to max-imize light interception, or to adjust stomatal behaviour as afunction of the prevailing light conditions, in order to optimizegas exchange. The recent progress in dissecting the signallingpathways that control speci ﬁc decisions downstream of thephotoreceptors provides an opportunity to target speci ﬁc
signalling elements so as to manipulate individual responses.For example, a step forward might be to uncouple defence re-sponses from proximity perception in crop plants (Ballaré et al.2012). Recent studies in Arabidopsis show that null mutationsinJAZ genes can reduce or eliminate the negative effect oflow R:FR ratios and phyB inactivation on plant immunityagainst necrotrophic pathogens and chewing insects, butwithout affecting morphological responses to shade signals(Cerrudo et al. 2012; Campos et al. 2016; Cerrudo et al. 2017).These ﬁndings hint at possible ways to develop crop plants thatretain strong defence responses even when grown at high den-sity. Re ﬁnement of technologies such as high-throughput se-quencing and development of new model systems and geneticresources will surely help to identify targets for cropNeighbour detection and shade avoidance 2539©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
improvement. In a related vein, recent advances in arti ﬁciallighting technology, including the development of high-outputLED arrays (Huché-Thélier et al. 2015; Demotes-Mainardet al. 2016), provide great potential for applying our increasedunderstanding of plant photobiology to improve the yield,health and produce quality in horticultural crops.CONFLICT OF INTERESTSThe authors have no con ﬂicts of interest to declare.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSResearch in our laboratories is ﬁnancially supported by grantsfrom CONICET (Consejo Nacional de InvestigacionesCientí ﬁcas y Técnicas), ANPCyT (Agencia Nacional dePromoción Cientí ﬁca y Tecnológica) and UBACyT(Universidad de Buenos Aires Ciencia y Técnica), to C.L.B.,and grants from NWO (the Netherlands Organisation forScienti ﬁc Research), to R.P.REFERENCESAgrawal A., Kearney E., Hastings A. & Ramsey T. (2012) Attenuation of the
jasmonate burst, plant defensive traits, and resistance to specialist monarchcaterpillars on shaded common milkweed ( Asclepias syriaca ).Journal ofChemical Ecology 38,8 9 3–901.Anten N.P.R., Casado-Garcia R. & Nagashima H. (2005) Effects of mechanicalstress and plant density on mechanical characteristics, growth, and lifetimereproduction of tobacco plants. American Naturalist 166,6 5 0–660.Ballaré C.L. (1999) Keeping up with the neighbours: phytochrome sensing andother signalling mechanisms. Trends in Plant Science 4,9 7–102.Ballaré C.L. (2014) Light regulation of plant defense. Annual Review of PlantBiology 65,3 3 5–363.Ballaré C.L., Barnes P.W., Flint S.D. & Price S. (1995a) Inhibition of hypocotylelongation by ultraviolet-B radiation in de-etiolating tomato seedlings. II.Time-course, comparison with ﬂavonoid responses and adaptive signi ﬁcance.Physiologia Plantarum 93,5 9 3–601.Ballaré C.L., Mazza C.A., Austin A.T. & Pierik R. (2012) Canopy light and plant
health. Plant Physiology 160,1 4 5–155.Ballaré C.L., Sánchez R.A., Scopel A.L., Casal J.J. & Ghersa C.M. (1987) Earlydetection of neighbour plants by phytochrome perception of spectral changesin reﬂected sunlight. Plant, Cell and Environment 10,5 5 1–557.Ballaré C.L., Scopel A.L., Radosevich S.R. & Kendrick R.E. (1992) Phyto-chrome-mediated phototropism in de-etiolated seedlings. Plant Physiology100,1 7 0–177.Ballaré C.L., Scopel A.L., Roush M.L. & Radosevich S.R. (1995b) How plantsﬁnd light in patchy canopies. A comparison between wild-type andphytochrome-B-de ﬁcient mutant plants of cucumber. Functional Ecology 9,859–868.Ballaré C.L., Scopel A.L. & Sanchez R.A. (1991) Photocontrol of stem elonga-tion in plant neighbourhoods: effects of photon ﬂuence rate under natural con-ditions of radiation. Plant, Cell and Environment 14,5 7–65.Ballaré C.L., Scopel A.L. & Sánchez R.A. (1989) Photomodulation of axis exten-
sion in sparse canopies: role of the stem in the perception of light-quality signalsof stand density. Plant Physiology 89,1 3 2 4 –1330.Ballaré C.L., Scopel A.L. & Sánchez R.A. (1990) Far-red radiation re ﬂected fromadjacent leaves: an early signal of competition in plant canopies. Science247,329–332.Barnes P.W., Flint S.D., Tobler M.A. & Ryel R.J. (2016a) Diurnal adjustment inultraviolet sunscreen protection is widespread among higher plants. Oecologia181,5 5–63.Barnes P.W., Searles P.S., Ballaré C.L., Ryel R.J. & Caldwell M.M. (2000) Non-in-vasive measurements of leaf epidermal transmittance of UV radiation usingchlorophyll ﬂuorescence: ﬁeld and laboratory studies. Physiologia Plantarum109,2 7 4–283.Barnes P.W., Tobler M.A., Keefover-Ring K., Flint S.D., Barkley A.E., Ryel R.J.& Lindroth R.L. (2016b) Rapid modulation of ultraviolet shielding in plants isinﬂuenced by solar ultraviolet radiation and linked to alterations in ﬂavonoids.
Plant, Cell and Environment 39,2 2 2–230.Björkman O. (1981) Responses to different quantum ﬂux densities. In Physiolog-ical Plant Ecology I (eds Lange O.L., Nobel P.S., Osmond C.B. & Ziegler H.),
Plant, Cell and Environment 39,2 2 2–230.Björkman O. (1981) Responses to different quantum ﬂux densities. In Physiolog-ical Plant Ecology I (eds Lange O.L., Nobel P.S., Osmond C.B. & Ziegler H.),pp. 57 –107. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg.Boccalandro H.E., De Simone S.N., Bergmann-Honsberger A., Schepens I.,Fankhauser C. & Casal J.J. (2008) Phytochrome kinase substrate1 regulatesroot phototropism and gravitropism. Plant Physiology 146,1 0 8–115.Boccalandro H.E., Giordano C.V., Ploschuk E.L., Piccoli P.N., Bottini R. & CasalJ.J. (2012) Phototropins but not cryptochromes mediate the blue light-speci ﬁcpromotion of stomatal conductance, while both enhance photosynthesis andtranspiration under full sunlight. Plant Physiology 158,1 4 7 5 –1484.Boccalandro H.E., Rugnone M.L., Moreno J.E., Ploschuk E.L., Serna L.,Yanovsky M.J. & Casal J.J. (2009) Phytochrome B enhances photosynthesisat the expense of water-use ef ﬁciency in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 150,1083–1092.
1083–1092.Bongers F.J., Evers J.B., Anten N.P. & Pierik R. (2014) From shade avoidanceresponses to plant performance at vegetation level: using virtual plantmodelling as a tool. New Phytologist 204,2 6 8–272.Boonman A., Prinsen E., Gilmer F., Schurr U., Peeters A.J.M., Voesenek L.A.C.J. & Pons T.L. (2007) Cytokinin import rate as a signal for photosyntheticacclimation to canopy light gradients. Plant Physiology 143,1 8 4 1 –1852.Briggs W.R. & Christie J.M. (2002) Phototropins 1 and 2: versatile plant blue-lightreceptors. Trends in Plant Science 7,2 0 4–210.Brown B.A. & Jenkins G.I. (2008) UV-B signaling pathways with differentﬂuence-rate response pro ﬁles are distinguished in mature Arabidopsis leaftissue by requirement for UVR8, HY5, and HYH. Plant Physiology146,576–588.Brütting C., Schäfer M., Vanková R., Gase K., Baldwin I.T. & Meldau S. (2017)Changes in cytokinins are suf ﬁcient to alter developmental patterns of defense
metabolites in Nicotiana attenuata .The Plant Journal 89,1 5–30.Bush S.M., Carriedo L., Daniel F., Ichihashi Y., Covington M.F., Kumar R., …Maloof J.N. (2015) Auxin signaling is a common factor underlying naturalvariation in tomato shade avoidance. bioRxiv . DOI:10.1101/031088.Campos M.L., Yoshida Y., Major I.T., de Oliveira Ferreira D., Weraduwage S.M.,Froehlich J.E., …Howe G.A. (2016) Rewiring of jasmonate and phytochromeB signalling uncouples plant growth-defense tradeoffs. Nature Communications7, 12570125. DOI:10.11038/ncomms12570.Cargnel M.D., Demkura P.V . & Ballaré C.L. (2014) Linking phytochrome toplant immunity: low red : far-red ratios increase Arabidopsis susceptibility toBotrytis cinerea by reducing the biosynthesis of indolic glucosinolates andcamalexin. New Phytologist 204,3 4 2–354.Carriedo L.G., Maloof J.N. & Brady S.M. (2017) Molecular control of crop shadeavoidance. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 30,1 5 1–158.
Casal J.J. (2013) Photoreceptor signaling networks in plant responses to shade.Annual Review of Plant Biology 64,4 0 3–427.Casal J.J., Ballaré C.L., Tourn M. & Sanchez R.A. (1994) Anatomy, growth andsurvival of a long-hypocotyl mutant of Cucumis sativus deﬁcient in phyto-chrome b. Annals of Botany 73,5 6 9–575.Casson S.A., Franklin K.A., Gray J.E., Grierson C.S., Whitelam G.C. &Hetherington A.M. (2009) phytochrome B and PIF4 regulate stomataldevelopment in response to light quantity. Current Biology 19,2 2 9–234.Cerrudo I., Caliri-Ortiz M.E., Keller M.M., Degano M.E., Demkura P.V . &Ballaré C.L. (2017) Exploring growth-defense tradeoffs in Arabidopsis. Phyto-chrome B inactivation requires JAZ10 to suppress plant immunity but not totrigger shade avoidance responses. Plant, Cell & Environment .D O I : 1 0 . 1 1 1 1 /pce.12877.Cerrudo I., Keller M.M., Cargnel M.D., Demkura P.V ., de Wit M., Patitucci M.S.,
…Ballaré C.L. (2012) Low red/far-red ratios reduce Arabidopsis resistance toBotrytis cinerea and jasmonate responses via a COI1-JAZ10-dependent,
…Ballaré C.L. (2012) Low red/far-red ratios reduce Arabidopsis resistance toBotrytis cinerea and jasmonate responses via a COI1-JAZ10-dependent,salicylic acid-independent mechanism. Plant Physiology 158,2 0 4 2 –2052.Cifuentes-Esquivel N., Bou-Torrent J., Galstyan A., Gallemí M., Sessa G., SallaM.M., …Martínez-García J.F. (2013) The bHLH proteins BEE and BIMpositively modulate the shade avoidance syndrome in Arabidopsis seedlings.The Plant Journal 75,9 8 9–1002.CiolﬁA., Sessa G., Sassi M., Possenti M., Salvucci S., Carabelli M., Morelli G. &Ruberti I. (2013) Dynamics of the shade avoidance response inArabidopsisthaliana .Plant Physiology 163,3 3 1–353.Cortés L.E., Weldegergis B.T., Boccalandro H.E., Dicke M. & Ballaré C.L. (2016)Trading direct for indirect defense? Phytochrome B inactivation in tomatoattenuates direct anti-herbivore defenses whilst enhancing volatile-mediatedattraction of predators. New Phytologist 212,1 0 5 7 –1071.2540 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Crocco C.D., Locascio A., Escudero C.M., Alabadí D., Blázquez M.A. & Botto J.F. (2015) The transcriptional regulator BBX24 impairs DELLA activity topromote shade avoidance in Arabidopsis thaliana .Nature Communications 6,6202.Chehab E.Â.W., Yao C., Henderson Z., Kim S. & Braam J. (2012) Arabidopsistouch-induced morphogenesis Is jasmonate mediated and protects againstpests. Current Biology 22,7 0 1–706.Chehab E.W., Eich E. & Braam J. (2009) Thigmomorphogenesis: a complex plantresponse to mechano-stimulation. Journal of Experimental Botany 60,4 3–56.Chen D., Xu G., Tang W., Jing Y., Ji Q., Fei Z. & Lin R. (2013) Antagonistic basichelix-loop-helix/bZIP transcription factors form transcriptional modules thatintegrate light and reactive oxygen species signaling in Arabidopsis. The PlantCell 25,1 6 5 7 –1673.Chen X., Yao Q., Gao X., Jiang C., Harberd N.P. & Fu X. (2016) Shoot-to-rootmobile transcription factor HY5 coordinates plant carbon and nitrogen
acquisition. Current Biology 26,6 4 0–646.Chico J.-M., Fernández-Barbero G., Chini A., Fernández-Calvo P., Díez-Díaz M.& Solano R. (2014) Repression of jasmonate-dependent defenses by shade in-volves differential regulation of protein stability of MYC transcription factorsand their JAZ repressors in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell 26,1 9 6 7 –1980.Child R. & Smith H. (1987) Phytochrome action in light-grown mustard: kinetics,ﬂuence-rate compensation and ecological signi ﬁcance. Planta 172,2 1 9–229.Choi J., Huh S.U., Kojima M., Sakakibara H., Paek K.H. & Hwang I. (2010) Thecytokinin-activated transcription factor ARR2 promotes plant immunity viaTGA3/NPR1-dependent salicylic acid signaling in Arabidopsis. DevelopmentalCell 19,2 8 4–295.Das D., St Onge K.R., Voesenek L.A.C.J., Pierik R. & Sasidharan R. (2016)Ethylene- and shade-induced hypocotyl elongation share transcriptomepatterns and functional regulators. Plant Physiology 172,7 1 8–733.
de la Rosa T.M., Aphalo P.J. & Lehto T. (1998) Effects of far-red light on thegrowth, mycorrhizas and mineral nutrition of Scots pine seedlings. Plant andSoil201,1 7–25.de Lucas M., Daviere J.M., Rodriguez-Falcon M., Pontin M., Iglesias-Pedraz J.M., Lorrain S., …Prat S. (2008) A molecular framework for light and gibber-ellin control of cell elongation. Nature 451,4 8 0–484.de Wit M., Galvão V.C. & Fankhauser C. (2016a) Light-mediated hormonalregulation of plant growth and development. Annual Review of Plant Biology67,6 1 3–617.de Wit M., Kegge W., Evers J.B., Vergeer-van Eijk M.H., Gankema P., VoesenekL.A. & Pierik R. (2012) Plant neighbor detection through touching leaf tipsprecedes phytochrome signals. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences of the United States of America 109, 14705 –14710.de Wit M., Keuskamp D.H., Bongers F.J., Hornitschek P., Gommers C.M.M.,Reinen E., …Pierik R. (2016b) Integration of phytochrome and cryptochrome
signals determines plant growth during competition for light. Current Biology26,3 3 2 0 –3326.de Wit M., Spoel S.H., Sanchez Perez G.F., Gommers C.M.M., Pieterse C.M.J.,Voesenek L.A.C.J. & Pierik R. (2013) Perception of low Red:Far-red ratiocompromises both salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid- dependent pathogendefences in Arabidopsis. The Plant Journal 75,9 0–103.Demotes-Mainard S., Péron T., Corot A., Bertheloot J., Gourrierec J.L., TravierS.,…Sakr S. (2016) Plant responses to red and far-red lights, applications inhorticulture. Environmental and Experimental Botany 121,4–21.Deregibus V.A., Sanchez R.A., Casal J.J. & Trlica M.J. (1985) Tillering responsesto enrichment of red light beneath the canopy in a humid natural grassland.Journal of Applied Ecology 22,1 9 9–206.Dervinis C., Frost C.J., Lawrence S.D., Novak N.G. & Davis J.M. (2010) Cytoki-nin primes plant responses to wounding and reduces Insect performance.Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 29,2 8 9–296.
Devlin P.F., Yanovsky M.J. & Kay S.A. (2003) A genomic analysis of the shade
nin primes plant responses to wounding and reduces Insect performance.Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 29,2 8 9–296.Devlin P.F., Yanovsky M.J. & Kay S.A. (2003) A genomic analysis of the shadeavoidance response in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 133,1 6 1 7 –1629.Djakovic-Petrovic T., de Wit M., Voesenek L.A.C.J. & Pierik R. (2007) DELLAprotein function in growth responses to canopy signals. The Plant Journal 51,117–126.Dünser K. & Kleine-Vehn J. (2015) Differential growth regulation in plants —theacid growth balloon theory. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 28,5 5–59.Engelen-Eigles G., Holden G., Cohen J.D. & Gardner G. (2006) The effect oftemperature, photoperiod, and light quality on gluconasturtiin concentrationin watercress ( Nasturtium of ﬁcinale R. Br.). Journal of Agricultural and FoodChemistry 54,3 2 8–334.Evers J.B., Vos J., Chelle M., Andrieu B., Fournier C. & Struik P.C. (2007)Simulating the effects of localized red:far-red ratio on tillering in spring wheat
(Triticum aestivum) using a three-dimensional virtual plant model. NewPhytologist 176,3 2 5–336.Favory J.J., Stec A., Gruber H., Rizzini L., Oravecz A., Funk M., …Ulm R.(2009) Interaction of COP1 and UVR8 regulates UV-B-induced photomor-phogenesis and stress acclimation in Arabidopsis .EMBO Journal28,5 9 1–601.Feng S.H., Martinez C., Gusmaroli G., Wang Y., Zhou J.L., Wang F., …Deng X.W. (2008) Coordinated regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana development bylight and gibberellins. Nature 451,4 7 5–479.Flint S.D. & Caldwell M.M. (1998) Solar UV-B and visible radiation in tropicalforest gaps: measurements partitioning direct and diffuse radiation. GlobalChange Biology 4,8 6 3–870.Franklin K.A. & Quail P.H. (2010) Phytochrome functions in Arabidopsis devel-opment. Journal of Experimental Botany 61,1 1–24.Fraser D.P., Hayes S. & Franklin K.A. (2016) Photoreceptor crosstalk in shadeavoidance. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 33,1–7.
Galen C., Rabenold J.J. & Liscum E. (2007) Functional ecology of a blue lightphotoreceptor: effects of phototropin-1 on root growth enhance droughttolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytologist 173,9 1–99.Galstyan A., Cifuentes-Esquivel N., Bou-Torrent J. & Martinez-Garcia J.F.(2011) The shade avoidance syndrome in Arabidopsis: a fundamental rolefor atypical basic helix-loop-helix proteins as transcriptional cofactors. ThePlant Journal 66,2 5 8–267.González C.V., Ibarra S.E., Piccoli P.N., Botto J.F. & Boccalandro H.E. (2012)Phytochrome B increases drought tolerance by enhancing ABA sensitivity inArabidopsis thaliana. Plant, Cell and Environment 35,1 9 5 8 –1968.Goyal A., Karayekov E., Galvão V.C., Ren H., Casal J.J. & Fankhauser C. (2016)Shade promotes phototropism through phytochrome B-controlled auxinproduction. Current Biology 26,3 2 8 0 –3287.Green T.R. & Ryan C.A. (1972) Wound-induced proteinase inhibitor in plant
leaves: A possible defense mechanism against insects. Science 175,7 7 6–777.Griebel T. & Zeier J. (2008) Light regulation and daytime dependency ofinducible plant defenses in Arabidopsis: Phytochrome signaling controlssystemic acquired resistance rather than local defense. Plant Physiology 147,790–801.Gundel P.E., Pierik R., Mommer L. & Ballaré C.L. (2014) Competing neighbors:light perception and root function. Oecologia 176,1–10.Harberd N.P., Bel ﬁeld E. & Yasumura Y. (2009) The Angiosperm gibberellin-GID1-DELLA growth regulatory mechanism: how an “inhibitor of aninhibitor ”enables ﬂexible response toﬂuctuating environments. Plant Cell21,1 3 2 8 –1339.Havko N., Major I., Jewell J., Attaran E., Browse J. & Howe G.A. (2016) Controlof carbon assimilation and partitioning by jasmonate: an accounting of growth –defense tradeoffs. Plants 5,7 .Hayes S., Velanis C.N., Jenkins G.I. & Franklin K.A. (2014) UV-B detected by
the UVR8 photoreceptor antagonizes auxin signaling and plant shadeavoidance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
the UVR8 photoreceptor antagonizes auxin signaling and plant shadeavoidance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the UnitedStates of America 111, 11894 –11899.Heindl J.C. & Brun W.A. (1983) Light and shade effects on abscission and 14C-photoassimilate partitioning among reproductive structures in soybean. PlantPhysiology 73,4 3 4–439.Helber N., Wippel K., Sauer N., Schaarschmidt S., Hause B. & Requena N. (2011)A versatile monosaccharide transporter that operates in the arbuscular mycor-rhizal fungus Glomus sp is crucial for the symbiotic relationship with plants.Plant Cell 23,3 8 1 2 –3823.Hendricks S.B. & Borthwick H.A. (1959) Photocontrol of plant developmentby the simultaneous excitations of two interconvertible pigments. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America45,3 4 4–349.Hersch M., Lorrain S., de Wit M., Trevisan M., Ljung K., Bergmann S. &
Fankhauser C. (2014) Light intensity modulates the regulatory network ofthe shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences of the United States of America 111,6 5 1 5 –6520.Hisamatsu T., King R.W., Helliwell C.A. & Koshioka M. (2005) The involvementof gibberellin 20-oxidase genes in phytochrome-regulated petiole elongation ofArabidopsis. Plant Physiology 138, 1106 –1116.Hornitschek P., Kohnen M.V., Lorrain S., Rougemont J., Ljung K., López-Vidriero I., …Fankhauser C. (2012) Phytochrome interacting factors 4 and 5control seedling growth in changing light conditions by directly controllingauxin signaling. The Plant Journal 71,6 9 9–711.Hornitschek P., Lorrain S., Zoete V., Michielin O. & Fankhauser C. (2009)Inhibition of the shade avoidance response by formation of non-DNA bindingbHLH heterodimers. EMBO Journal 28,3 8 9 3 –3902.Horvath D.P., Hansen S.A., Moriles-Miller J.P., Pierik R., Yan C., Clay D.E.,
Schef ﬂer B. & Clay S.A. (2015) RNAseq reveals weed-induced PIF3-like asa candidate target to manipulate weed stress response in soybean. NewPhytologist 207,1 9 6–210.Neighbour detection and shade avoidance 2541©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Hou X., Lee L.Y.C., Xia K., Yan Y. & Yu H. (2010) DELLAs modulate jasmonatesignaling via competitive binding to JAZs. Developmental Cell 19,8 8 4–894.Huché-Thélier L., Crespel L., Gourrierec J.L., Morel P., Sakr S. & Leduc N.(2015) Light signaling and plant responses to blue and UV radiations —per-spectives for applications in horticulture. Environmental and Experimental Bot-any121,2 2–38.Izaguirre M.M., Mazza C.A., Astigueta M.S., Ciarla A.M. & Ballaré C.L. (2013)No time for candy: passionfruit ( Passi ﬂora edulis ) plants down-regulatedamage-induced extra ﬂoral nectar production in response to light signals ofcompetition. Oecologia 173,2 1 3–221.Izaguirre M.M., Mazza C.A., Biondini M., Baldwin I.T. & Ballaré C.L. (2006)Remote sensing of future competitors: impacts on plant defenses. Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103,7170–7174.Jenkins G.I. (2009) Signal transduction in responses to UV-B radiation. Annual
Review of Plant Biology 60,4 0 7–431.Kang C.Y., Lian H.L., Wang F.F., Huang J.R. & Yang H.Q. (2009)Cryptochromes, phytochromes, and COP1 regulate light-controlled stomataldevelopment in arabidopsis. The Plant Cell 21,2 6 2 4 –2641.Kasperbauer M.J. (1971) Spectral distribution of light in a tobacco canopy andeffects of end-of-day light quality on growth and development. Plant Physiol-ogy47,7 7 5–778.Kasperbauer M.J. & Hunt P.G. (1994) Shoot/root assimilate allocation and nodu-lation of Vigna unguiculata seedlings as in ﬂuenced by shoot light environment.Plant and Soil 161,9 7–101.Kasperbauer M.J., Hunt P.G. & Sojka R.E. (1984) Photosynthate partitioningand nodule formation in soybean plants that received red or far-red light atthe end of the photosynthetic period. Physiologia Plantarum 61,5 4 9–554.Kebrom T.H. & Brutnell T.P. (2007) The molecular analysis of the shade avoid-ance syndrome in the grasses has begun. Journal of Experimental Botany 58,3079–3089.
3079–3089.Kegge W., Ninkovic V., Glinwood R., Welschen R.A., Voesenek L.A. & Pierik R.(2015) Red: far-red light conditions affect the emission of volatile organic com-pounds from barley (Hordeum vulgare), leading to altered biomass allocationin neighbouring plants. Annals of Botany 115,9 6 1–970.Kegge W. & Pierik R. (2010) Biogenic volatile organic compounds and plant com-petition. Trends in Plant Science 15,1 2 6–132.Kegge W., Weldegergis B.T., Soler R., Eijk M.V.-V., Dicke M., Voesenek L.A.C.J.& Pierik R. (2013) Canopy light cues affect emission of constitutive and methyljasmonate-induced volatile organic compounds in Arabidopsis thaliana .NewPhytologist 200,8 6 1–874.Keller M.M., Jaillais Y., Pedmale U.V., Moreno J.E., Chory J. & Ballaré C.L.(2011) Cryptochrome 1 and phytochrome B control shade-avoidanceresponses in Arabidopsis via partially-independent hormonal cascades. ThePlant Journal 67,1 9 5–207.
Plant Journal 67,1 9 5–207.Keuskamp D.H., Pollmann S., Voesenek L.A.C.J., Peeters A.J.M. & Pierik R.(2010) Auxin transport through PIN-FORMED 3 (PIN3) controls shadeavoidance and ﬁtness during competition. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, 22740 –22744.Keuskamp D.H., Sasidharan R., Vos I., Peeters A.J.M., Voesenek L.A.C.J. &Pierik R. (2011) Blue light-mediated shade avoidance requires combined auxinand brassinosteroid action in Arabidopsis seedlings. The Plant Journal 67,208–217.Kharshiing E. & Sinha S.P. (2015) Plant productivity: can photoreceptors light theway? Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 34,2 0 6–214.Kircher S. & Schopfer P. (2012) Photosynthetic sucrose acts as cotyledon-derivedlong-distance signal to control root growth during early seedling developmentin Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the UnitedStates of America 109, 11217 –11221.
States of America 109, 11217 –11221.Kliebenstein D.J. (2016) False idolatry of the mythical growth versus immunitytradeoff in molecular systems plant pathology. Physiological and MolecularPlant Pathology 95,5 5–59.
Kliebenstein D.J. (2016) False idolatry of the mythical growth versus immunitytradeoff in molecular systems plant pathology. Physiological and MolecularPlant Pathology 95,5 5–59.Kohnen M., Schmid-Siegert E., Trevisan M., Allenbach P.L., Sénéchal F., Müller-Moulé P., …Fankhauser C. (2016) Neighbor detection induces organ-speci ﬁctranscriptomes, revealing patterns underlying hypocotyl-speci ﬁcg r o w t h . ThePlant Cell . DOI:10.1105/tpc.1116.00463.Kozuka T., Kobayashi J., Horiguchi G., Demura T., Sakakibara H., Tsukaya H. &Nagatani A. (2010) Involvement of auxin and brassinosteroid in the regulationof petiole elongation under the shade. Plant Physiology 153,1 6 0 8 –1618.Kunihiro A., Yamashino T., Nakamichi N., Niwa Y., Nakanishi H. & Mizuno T.(2011) PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 4 and 5 (PIF4 andPIF5) activate the homeobox ATHB2 and auxin-inducible IAA29 genes in
the coincidence mechanism underlying photoperiodic control of plant growthofArabidopsis thaliana .Plant and Cell Physiology 52,1 3 1 5 –1329.Lee H.-J., Ha J.-H., Kim S.-G., Choi H.-K., Kim Z.H., Han Y.-J.,…Park C.-M.(2016) Stem-piped light activates phytochrome B to trigger light responses inArabidopsis thaliana roots. Science Signaling 9,r a 1 0 6 –ra106.Leivar P. & Monte E. (2014) PIFs: systems integrators in plant development. ThePlant Cell 26,5 6–78.Leivar P. & Quail P.H. (2011) PIFs: pivotal components in a cellular signaling hub.Trends in Plant Science 16,1 9–28.Leivar P., Tepperman J.M., Cohn M.M., Monte E., Al-Sady B., Erickson E. &Quail P.H. (2012) Dynamic antagonism between phytochromes and PIF familybasic helix-loop-helix factors induces selective reciprocal responses to light andshade in a rapidly responsive transcriptional network in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell24,1 3 9 8 –1419.Leone M., Keller M.M., Cerrudo I. & Ballaré C.L. (2014) To grow or defend?
Low red:far-red ratios reduce jasmonate sensitivity in Arabidopsis seedlingsby promoting DELLA degradation and increasing JAZ10 stability. NewPhytologist 204,3 5 5–367.Li J., Li G., Wang H. & Wang D.X. (2011) Phytochrome signaling mechanisms.The Arabidopsis Book / American Society of Plant Biologists 9e0148.Li L., Ljung K., Breton G., Schmitz R.J., Pruneda-Paz J., Cowing-Zitron C., …Chory J. (2012) Linking photoreceptor excitation to changes in plant architec-ture. Genes & Development 26,7 8 5–790.Lindblom K.L. (2015) Isolation of phytochrome, National Historic ChemicalLandmarks program, pp. http://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/education/whatischemistry/landmarks/isolation-of-phytochrome.html. American Chemi-cal Society.Lins J.C., Loon J.J.A., Bueno V.H.P., Lucas-Barbosa D., Dicke M. & Lenteren J.C. (2014) Response of the zoophytophagous predators Macrolophus pygmaeusandNesidiocoris tenuis to volatiles of uninfested plants and to plants infested by
prey or conspeci ﬁcs.BioControl 59,7 0 7–718.Lorrain S., Allen T., Duek P.D., Whitelam G.C. & Fankhauser C. (2008) Phy-tochrome-mediated inhibition of shade avoidance involves degradation ofgrowth-promoting bHLH transcription factors. The Plant Journal 53,312–323.Mazza C.A. & Ballaré C.L. (2015) Photoreceptors UVR8 and phytochrome Bcooperate to optimize plant growth and defense in patchy canopies. NewPhytologist 207,4–9.Mazza C.A., Boccalandro H.E., Giordano C.V., Battista D., Scopel A.L. &Ballaré C.L. (2000) Functional signi ﬁcance and induction by solar radiationof ultraviolet-absorbing sunscreens in ﬁeld-grown soybean crops. PlantPhysiology 122,1 1 7–125.Millenaar F.F., Van Zanten M., Cox M.C.H., Pierik R., Voesenek L.A.C.J. &Peeters A.J.M. (2009) Differential petiole growth in Arabidopsis thaliana:photocontrol and hormonal regulation. New Phytologist 184,1 4 1–152.Mohr H. (1972) Lectures on Photomorphogenesis . Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Morales L.O., Brosché M., Vainonen J., Jenkins G.I., Wargent J.J., Sipari N., …
Mohr H. (1972) Lectures on Photomorphogenesis . Springer-Verlag, Berlin.Morales L.O., Brosché M., Vainonen J., Jenkins G.I., Wargent J.J., Sipari N., …Aphalo P.J. (2013) Multiple roles for UV RESISTANCE LOCUS8 in regulat-ing gene expression and metabolite accumulation in arabidopsis under solar ul-traviolet radiation. Plant Physiology 161,7 4 4–759.Moreno J.E., Tao Y., Chory J. & Ballaré C.L. (2009) Ecological modulation ofplant defense via phytochrome control of jasmonate sensitivity. Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106,4935–4940.Morgan D.C. & Smith H. (1978) The relationship between phytochrome-photoequilibrium and development in light grown Chenopodium album L.Planta 142,1 8 7–193.Mullen J.L., Weinig C. & Hangarter R.P. (2006) Shade avoidance and theregulation of leaf inclination in Arabidopsis. Plant, Cell and Environment 29,1099–1106.Nagata M., Yamamoto N., Shigeyama T., Terasawa Y., Anai T., Sakai T., …
Suzuki A. (2015) Red/far red light controls arbuscular mycorrhizal colonizationvia jasmonic acid and strigolactone signaling. Plant and Cell Physiology 56,2100–2109.Pechá čková S. (1999) Root response to above-ground light quality –differencesbetween rhizomatous and non-rhizomatous clones of Festuca rubra. PlantEcology 141,6 7–77.Pedmale U.V., Huang S.S.C., Zander M., Cole B.J., Hetzel J., Ljung K., …ChoryJ. (2016) Cryptochromes interact directly with pifs to control plant growth inlimiting blue light. Cell 164,2 3 3–245.Pierik R., Cuppens M.L.C., Voesenek L.A.C.J. & Visser E.J.W. (2004a) Interac-tions between ethylene and gibberellins in phytochrome-mediated shadeavoidance responses in tobacco. Plant Physiology 136,2 9 2 8 –2936.Pierik R. & de Wit M. (2014) Shade avoidance: phytochrome signalling and otheraboveground neighbour detection cues. Journal of Experimental Botany 65,2815–2824.2542 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik
2815–2824.2542 C. L. Ballaré & R. Pierik© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543 13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Pierik R., Djakovic-Petrovic T., Keuskamp D.H., de Wit M. & Voesenek L.A.C.J.(2009) Auxin and ethylene regulate elongation responses to neighbor proxim-ity signals independent of gibberellin and DELLA proteins in Arabidopsis.Plant Physiology 149,1 7 0 1 –1712.Pierik R. & Testerink C. (2014) The art of being ﬂexible: how to escape fromshade, salt, and drought. Plant Physiology 166,5–22.Pierik R., Whitelam G.C., Voesenek L.A.C.J., de Kroon H. & Visser E.J.W.(2004b) Canopy studies on ethylene-insensitive tobacco identify ethylene as anovel element in blue light and plant-plant signalling. The Plant Journal 38,310–319.Poorter H., Niklas K.J., Reich P.B., Oleksyn J., Poot P. & Mommer L. (2012)Biomass allocation to leaves, stems and roots: meta-analyses of interspeci ﬁcvariation and environmental control. New Phytologist 193,3 0–50.Procko C., Burko Y., Jaillais Y., Ljung K., Long J.A. & Chory J. (2016) The
epidermis coordinates auxin-induced stem growth in response to shade. Genesand Development 30,1 5 2 9 –1541.Procko C., Crenshaw C.M., Ljung K., Noel J.P. & Chory J. (2014) Cotyledon-gen-erated auxin is required for shade-induced hypocotyl growth in brassica rapa.Plant Physiology 165,1 2 8 5 –1301.Roig-Villanova I., Bou-Torrent J., Galstyan A., Carretero-Paulet L., Portolés S.,Rodríguez-Concepción M. & Martínez-García J.F. (2007) Interaction of shadeavoidance and auxin responses: a role for two novel atypical bHLH proteins.EMBO Journal 26,4 7 5 6 –4767.Rose J.K.C., Braam J., Fry S.C. & Nishitani K. (2002) The XTH family ofenzymes involved in xyloglucan endotransglucosylation and endohydrolysis:current perspectives and a new unifying nomenclature. Plant and Cell Physiol-ogy43,1 4 2 1 –1435.Ross A.F. (1961) Systemic acquired resistance induced by localized virus infec-tions in plants. Virology 14,3 4 0–358.
tions in plants. Virology 14,3 4 0–358.Rousseaux M.C., Ballaré C.L., Jordan E.T. & Vierstra R.D. (1997) Directedoverepression of PHYA locally suppresses stem elongation and leaf senes-cence responses to far-red radiation. Plant, Cell and Environment 20,1551–1558.Rousseaux M.C., Hall A.J. & Sánchez R.A. (1996) Far-red enrichment andphotosynthetically active radiation level in ﬂuence leaf senescence in ﬁeld-grown sun ﬂower. Physiologia Plantarum 96,2 1 7–224.Sage L.C. (1992) CHAPTER 26 –Shade avoidance. In Pigment of the Imagina-tion, pp. 371 –394. Academic Press, Boston.Salisbury F.J., Hall A., Grierson C.S. & Halliday K.J. (2007) Phytochromecoordinates Arabidopsis shoot and root development. The Plant Journal 50,429–438.Salter M.G., Franklin K.A. & Whitelam G.C. (2003) Gating of the rapid shade-avoidance response by the circadian clock in plants. Nature 426,6 8 0–683.Sasidharan R., Keuskamp D.H., Kooke R., Voesenek L.A. & Pierik R. (2014) In-
teractions between auxin, microtubules and XTHs mediate green shade-induced petiole elongation in Arabidopsis. PloS One 9e90587.Sasidharan R., Voesenek L.A. & Pierik R. (2011) Cell wall modifying proteinsmediate plant acclimatization to biotic and abiotic stresses. Critical Reviews inPlant Sciences 30,5 4 8–562.Schmitt J., Dudley S.A. & Pigliucci M. (1999) Manipulative approaches to testingadaptive plasticity: phytochrome-mediated shade-avoidance responses inplants. The American Naturalist 154,S 4 3–S54.Schmitt J., McCormac A.C. & Smith H. (1995) A test of the adaptive plasticity hy-pothesis using transgenic and mutant plants disabled in phytochrome-mediatedelongation responses to neighbors. American Naturalist 146,9 3 7–953.Sellaro R., Crepy M., Trupkin S.A., Karayekov E., Buchovsky A.S., Rossi C. &Casal J.J. (2010) Cryptochrome as a sensor of the blue/green ratio of natural ra-diation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 154,4 0 1–409.
Sessa G., Carabelli M., Sassi M., Ciol ﬁA., Possenti M., Mittempergher F., …Ruberti I. (2005) A dynamic balance between gene activation and repressionregulates the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development19,2 8 1 1 –2815.
Ruberti I. (2005) A dynamic balance between gene activation and repressionregulates the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development19,2 8 1 1 –2815.Shyu C. & Brutnell T.P. (2015) Growth –defence balance in grass biomass produc-tion: the role of jasmonates. Journal of Experimental Botany 66,4 1 6 5 –4176.Skálová H. & Vosátka M. (1998) Growth response of three Festuca rubra clones tolight quality and arbuscular mycorrhiza. Folia Geobotanica 33,1 5 9–169.Smakowska E., Kong J., Busch W. & Belkhadir Y. (2016) Organ-speci ﬁcr e g u l a -tion of growth-defense tradeoffs by plants. Current Opinion in Plant Biology29,1 2 9–137.Smith H. (1982) Light quality, photoperception, and plant strategy. AnnualReview of Plant Physiology 33,4 8 1–518.Smith H. (1995) Physiological and ecological function within the phytochromefamily. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 46,289–315.Smith H. & Whitelam G.C. (1997) The shade avoidance syndrome: multiple
responses mediated by multiple phytochromes. Plant, Cell and Environment20,8 4 0–844.Sorin C., Salla-Martret M., Bou-Torrent J., Roig-Villanova I. & Martinez-GarciaJ.F. (2009) ATHB4, a regulator of shade avoidance, modulates hormone re-sponse in Arabidopsis seedlings. The Plant Journal 59,2 6 6–277.Steindler C., Matteucci A., Sessa G., Weimar T., Ohgishi M., Aoyama T., MorelliG. & Ruberti I. (1999) Shade avoidance responses are mediated by the ATHB-2 HD-zip protein, a negative regulator of gene expression. Development 126,4235–4245.Suzuki A., Suriyagoda L., Shigeyama T., Tominaga A., Sasaki M., Hiratsuka Y.,…Hirsch A.M. (2011) Lotus japonicus nodulation is photomorphogeneticallycontrolled by sensing the red/far red (R/FR) ratio through jasmonic acid(JA) signaling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the UnitedStates of America 108, 16837 –16842.Tao Y., Ferrer J.L., Ljung K., Pojer F., Hong F., Long J.A., …Chory J. (2008)
Rapid synthesis of auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent pathway is requiredfor shade avoidance in plants. Cell 133,1 6 4–176.Tester M. & Morris C. (1987) The penetration of light through soil. Plant, Cell &Environment 10,2 8 1–286.Toledo-Ortiz G., Johansson H., Lee K.P., Bou-Torrent J., Stewart K., Steel G.,Rodríguez-Concepción M. & Halliday K.J. (2014) The HY5-PIF regulatorymodule coordinates light and temperature control of photosynthetic gene tran-scription. PLoS Genetics 10e1004416.Tong H., Leasure C.D., Hou X., Yuen G., Briggs W. & He Z.H. (2008) Role ofroot UV-B sensing in Arabidopsis early seedling development. Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105,21039 –21044.Trupkin S.A., Legris M., Buchovsky A.S., Rivero M.B.T. & Casal J.J. (2014)Phytochrome B nuclear bodies respond to the low red to far-red ratio and tothe reduced irradiance of canopy shade in arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 165,1698–1708.
1698–1708.Ulm R. & Jenkins G. (2015) Q&A: how do plants sense and respond to UV-Bradiation? BMC Biology 13,4 5 .van Berkel K., de Boer R.J., Scheres B. & ten Tusscher K. (2013) Polar auxintransport: models and mechanisms. Development 140,2 2 5 3 –2268.Viczian A., Klose C., Ádám É. & Nagy F. (2016) New insights of red light-induceddevelopment. Plant, Cell & Environment . DOI:10.1111/pce.12880.Wang H., Wu G., Zhao B., Wang B., Lang Z., Zhang C. & Wang H. (2016)Regulatory modules controlling early shade avoidance response in maizeseedlings. BMC Genomics 17,1–16.Whitelam G.C. & Johnson C.B. (1980) Phytochrome control of nitrate reductaseactivity and anthocyanin synthesis in light-grown Sinapis alba (L.). Differentialresponses of cotyledons and hypocotyls. The New Phytologist 85,4 7 5–482.Yang D.-L., Yao J., Mei C.-S., Tong X.-H., Zeng L.-J., Li Q., …He S.Y . (2012)Plant hormone jasmonate prioritizes defense over growth by interfering with
gibberellin signaling cascade. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Plant hormone jasmonate prioritizes defense over growth by interfering withgibberellin signaling cascade. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesof the United States of America 109,E 1 1 9 2 –E1200.Yu J., Qiu H., Liu X., Wang M., Gao Y., Chory J. & Tao Y. (2015) Characteriza-tion of tub4P287L,aβ-tubulin mutant, revealed new aspects of microtubuleregulation in shade. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology 57,7 5 7–769.Received 9 November 2016; received in revised form 10 January 2017;accepted for publication 13 January 2017Neighbour detection and shade avoidance 2543©2 0 1 7J o h nW i l e y&S o n sL t d , Plant, Cell and Environment ,40,2 5 3 0 –2543
13653040, 2017, 11, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12914 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
