Role of Mitochondria in Photoaging of Human Skin: TheDefective Powerhouse ModelJean Krutmann1and Peter Schroeder1The exact pathogenesis of photoaging of the skin isnot yet known. Earlier, a number of molecular path-ways explaining one or more characteristics ofphotoaged skin have been described, but a unifyingmechanistic concept is still missing. Here we proposethe ‘‘Defective Powerhouse Model of Premature SkinAging’’, which reconciles most of the earlier con-ducted research as one concept. In this model, thepersistence of UV radiation-induced mtDNA deletionsor the infrared radiation-induced disturbance of theelectron flow of the mitochondrial electron transport
chain leads to inadequate energy production indermal fibroblasts. As a consequence of this defectivepowerhouse, retrograde mitochondrial signalingpathways are triggered that then they transducefunctional and structural alterations in the skin. Thismodel, which is supported by a growing number ofrecent studies, is of direct clinical importance inpreventing and treating photoaging in human skin.Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009) 14,44–49; doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.1INTRODUCTIONAmong all environmental factors, solar radiation is the mostimportant in premature skin aging, a process that is alsotermed photoaging (Krutmann and Gilchrest, 2006). In recentyears, substantial progress has been made in elucidating itsunderlying molecular mechanisms. From these studies it isnow clear that UVB (290–320 nm), UVA (320–400 nm), andnear-infrared (IRA; 760–1,400 nm) radiation contribute tophotoaging (Krutmann and Gilchrest, 2006; Schroeder et al.,
2006). UV radiation-induced changes at the level of thedermis are best studied and seem to be largely responsible forthe phenotype of photoaged skin. It is also generally agreedthat UVB acts preferentially on the epidermis, in which it notonly damages DNA in the keratinocytes and melanocytes,but also leads to the production of soluble factors, includingproteolytic enzymes, which then in a second step affect thedermis (Fisher et al., 1997). Longer wavelengths, UVA and, inparticular, IRA radiation penetrate more deeply and exertdirect effects on both the epidermal and dermal compart-ments (Figure 1).The exact mechanisms, by which UVB, UVA, and IRAradiation cause premature skin aging are not yet clear. Anumber of molecular pathways explaining one or more of the
key features of photoaged skin have been identified(reviewed in (Krutmann and Gilchrest, 2006)), but a unifyingconcept linking the different mechanisms and moleculartargets is still missing. Critical questions that remain to beanswered are: Which of the currently known mechanisms areof primary importance and responsible for inducing others?Which characteristics of photoaged skin are merely epiphe-nomina, and to what extent are they causally related topremature skin aging?The current state of knowledge does not allow thesequestions to be answered in a definitive manner. On the basisof recent research conducted by us and others, however, wepropose a concept termed the ‘‘Defective Powerhouse Modelof Premature Skin Aging’’, which can reconcile most of theearlier conducted research in one model. This concept isbased on the hypothesis that solar radiation-induced damageto mitochondria in skin fibroblasts is of key importance in thepathogenesis of the photoaging of human skin.
THE MITOCHONDRIAL THEORY OF AGINGMitochondria are organelles whose main function is togenerate energy for the cell. This is achieved by a multistepprocess called oxidative phosphorylation or the electron
Mitochondria are organelles whose main function is togenerate energy for the cell. This is achieved by a multistepprocess called oxidative phosphorylation or the electrontransport chain (ETC). Located at the inner mitochondrialmembrane are five multiprotein complexes that generate anelectrochemical proton gradient used in the last step of theprocess to generate ATP (adenosine triphosphate) from ADP(adenosine diphosphate). To do this, the multiprotein com-plexes translocate electrons, eventually delivering them tomolecular oxygen. This process is not completely error-freeand misdirection of electrons ultimately leads to thegeneration of reactive oxygen species (ROS), making themitochondrion the site of the highest ROS turnover in thecell. In close proximity with this site lies the mitochondrion’sown genomic material, the mtDNA. Human mtDNA is a16,559-bp circular double-stranded molecule of whichREVIEW
44 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14 &2009 The Society for Investigative DermatologyReceived 14 November 2008; accepted 18 December 20081IUF, Duesseldorf, GermanyCorrespondence: Professor Jean Krutmann, IUF, Auf’m Hennekamp 50, D-40225 Duesseldorf, Germany.E-mail: krutmann@rz.uni-duesseldorf.deAbbreviations: ETC, electron transport chain; IRA, near infrared; KSS, Kearns-Sayre syndrome; ROS, reactive oxygen species
several copies exist per cell. As mitochondria do not exhibitany repair mechanisms to remove bulky DNA lesions,although they do exhibit a base excision repair mechanismand repair mechanisms against oxidative damage, themutation frequency for mtDNA is approximately 50-foldhigher than that of nuclear DNA. In addition, mtDNAlacks histones, which further increases its susceptibility tooxidative stress-induced damage (reviewed in (Berneburget al., 2000)).mtDNA encodes 13 essential components of the ETC, 22transfer RNAs, and two ribosomal RNAs involved in theirtranslation. As a consequence, mutations in mtDNA caninterfere with mitochondrial physiology and result in cellulardysfunction. mtDNA mutations include point mutations aswell as large-scale deletions. So far, more than 100 pointmutations associated with a heterogeneous spectrum ofpathological abnormalities have been described (McKenzieet al., 2004). Deletions of mtDNA are found in a number of
mitochondrial disorders that occur sporadically, or areinherited maternally or in a Mendelian fashion. The best-known mitochondrial disease associated with large-scaledeletions is the Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS). KSS is asporadical disease, which is clinically characterized byprogressive ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, skeletal muscleweakness, retinopathy, cardiac conduction defects, and braindamage (Poulton et al., 1989).In addition to their role in degenerative diseases, mtDNAmutations also play a causative role in normal aging.Accordingly, in many postreplicative tissues, it has beenobserved that mtDNA mutations accumulate with age,accompanied by a decline in mitochondrial function(Wallace, 1992; Ames et al ., 1995; Richter, 1995). Acause–effect relationship between mtDNA mutagenesis andpremature aging is strongly suggested by studies that usemtDNA mutator mice (Trifunovic et al., 2004; Kujoth et al.,
2005). In these animal models, the generation of mtDNApoint mutations causes a premature aging phenotype. Inhumans, recent studies suggest that large-scale deletions, butprobably not point mutations, of the mitochondrial genomeare causally involved in UV radiation-induced photoaging ofthe skin (Krutmann and Gilchrest, 2006).UV-INDUCED MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DELETIONS INPHOTOAGING OF SKINPhotoaged skin is characterized by increased numbers oflarge-scale deletions in the mitochondrial genome (Yanget al ., 1994, 1995; Berneburg et al ., 1997; Birch-Machinet al., 1998). Intraindividual comparison studies have shownthat the so-called common deletion, a 4,977-bp deletion ofmtDNA, is increased by up to 10-fold in photoaged skincompared with sun-protected skin in the same individuals(Berneburg et al., 1997). The amount of the common deletionin human skin does not correlate with chronological aging(Koch et al., 2001), and it has therefore been suggested that
mtDNA mutations such as this are of particular relevance inphotoaging. This concept is supported by the followingobservations: (i) repetitive, sublethal exposures to UVAradiation, at doses that may be acquired during a regularsummer holiday, induce deletions of mtDNA, including thecommon deletion, in cultured primary human skin fibro-blasts, in a singlet oxygen-dependent manner (Berneburget al ., 1999); (ii) this in vitro UV-induced generation of thecommon deletion in skin fibroblasts was associated not onlywith a decrease in mitochondrial function, but also with anupregulation of the collagen-degrading enzyme, matrixmetalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) (Berneburg et al ., 2000); (iii)corresponding in vivo studies have shown that repetitive
exposure three times daily of previously unirradiated humanbuttock skin for a total of 2 weeks to physiological doses ofUVA radiation leads to an approximately 40% increase in thelevels of the common deletion in the dermal, but not theepidermal, compartment of irradiated skin (Berneburg et al.,
2004); (iv) similarly, once weekly use of the sunbed for 3months is associated with a significant increase in the amountof the common deletion in the skin of healthy humanvolunteers, who had not used sunbeds before (Reimann et al.,2008); (v) the UV-induced mtDNA deletions persist atincreased levels for several years, and in some individuals,they increase further (up to 32-fold) in earlier irradiated skin,even in the absence of additional UV exposure (Berneburget al., 2004).The latter observation might be the consequence of clonalexpansion of mtDNA mutation-carrying cells (Nekhaevaet al ., 2002). Alternatively, the presence of UV-inducedmtDNA deletions may lead to a defective respiratory chainand thereby to an increased ROS production, which in avicious cycle, allow mtDNA mutagenesis, independent of theinducing agent (Balaban et al ., 2005; Krutmann andGilchrest, 2006). It is the characteristic of vicious cycles thatthey evolve at ever-increasing speed. Thus, an increase in the
common deletion up to 32-fold, independent of UVexposure, may represent in vivo evidence for the presenceof this cycle in human skin.Regardless of the underlying mechanism, that is, clonalexpansion versus a vicious cycle, the fact is that chronic UVexposure leads to increased levels of mtDNA deletions inhuman skin. Given the great importance of the integrity of themitochondrial genome for proper mitochondrial function, it istempting to speculate that the presence of mtDNA deletionsin the dermal compartment of the human skin translates intoUVBEpidermisDermisSubcutaneous tissueUVA IRAFigure 1 .Penetration of UVB, UVA, and IRA (near infrared) into the humanskin. Whereas UVB is mainly absorbed in the epidermis, UVA and IRA reachthe dermis and directly affect the dermal fibroblasts.www.jidonline.org 45J Krutmann and P SchroederMitochondria and Skin Photoaging
structural and functional consequences, which cause pre-mature aging at the organ level, that is, photoaging.This hypothesis is supported by a number of recent studies.In general, the assessment of the functional consequences ofUV radiation-induced mtDNA mutagenesis is hampered bythe difficulty of discriminating between pathologicalchanges, which occur as a consequence of UV-inducedmtDNA mutagenesis, and those which occur independently,for example, as a consequence of UV-induced signalingcascades that do not require mtDNA mutagenesis as a trigger(Berneburg et al ., 2005). In an attempt to overcome thisdifficulty, phenocopies of cells bearing large-scale deletionsof mtDNA have been generated by gradually depletingmtDNA from unirradiated human skin fibroblasts (Schroederet al., 2008a). In these cells, increased expression of MMP-1
without a concomitant change in the expression of the tissue-specific inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 as well asdecreased expression of collagen type-1 a ´-1, which is thedominant gene involved in collagen de novo synthesis, wasobserved. This altered gene expression pattern is reminiscentof photoaged skin (Fisher et al., 1996, 1997, 1998, 2002) andconsistent with the assumption that the presence of large-scale deletions in mtDNA in human dermal fibroblasts causesa gene expression pattern, which at a functional level couldlead to a rarification of collagen fibers in the surroundingextracellular matrix and thereby to skin wrinkle formation,that is, a clinical hallmark of photoaged human skin(Krutmann and Gilchrest, 2006). Interestingly, this alteredgene expression pattern in skin fibroblasts, which had beenpartially depleted of mtDNA, resulted from intracellular,mitochondria-derived oxidative stress (Schroeder et al .,2008a).
2008a).The above-mentioned studies exclusively used a mono-layer of cultured cells and did not allow definitive conclu-sions about the interaction of mtDNA deletion-carrying skinfibroblasts and the surrounding extracellular matrix. There-fore, in a second, independent experimental approach,human dermal skin equivalent models were generated byseeding primary human dermal fibroblasts into collagen gels.Normally, the fibroblasts contract the collagen gels within 48hours and then start to reorganize these gels by forming adermal equivalent, which closely resembles living humandermis, which is characterized by a balance betweencollagen de novo synthesis and collagen degradation, andwhich can be maintained in culture for several weeks (Boscaet al., 1988; Xu et al., 1998; Bernerd et al., 2005; Marionnetet al., 2006; Mildner et al., 2006). In these studies, cells thatwere matched for donor age, site of biopsy, and passage
number, were used. They were derived either from KSSpatients, who constitutively carry large amounts of the UV-inducible common deletion, or from normal human volun-teers. In this three-dimensional organotypic model system,the following observations were made: (i) KSS fibroblasts (incomparison with normal skin fibroblasts) contracted the gelsfaster and more strongly, and this contraction difference wasbecause of increased mitochondrial ROS production and asubsequent increase in the activity of lysyl oxidase, anenzyme required for the crosslinking of collagen fibers (andthus contraction of collagen gels) (Majora et al ., 2007); (ii)even more important, at later time points when the collagengels had been reorganized, dermal skin equivalents contain-ing KSS fibroblasts showed increased expression of genes,which are thought to be involved in photoaging of humanskin (Krutmann et al ., unpublished observations). Accord-
ing KSS fibroblasts showed increased expression of genes,which are thought to be involved in photoaging of humanskin (Krutmann et al ., unpublished observations). Accord-ingly, 1 to 4-week-old human dermal equivalents containingKSS skin fibroblasts (in comparison with dermal equivalents,which had been generated with normal human skinfibroblasts) were characterized by increased mRNA andprotein expression for the collagen-degrading enzyme, MMP-1, with no upregulation of TIMP-1. This increased expressionwas of functional relevance, because collagen fibers weregreatly reduced in number and collagen degradationfragments were present in increased amounts.Taken together, these studies indicate that the presence of
mtDNA deletions in human skin fibroblasts transducesstructural and functional alterations into the surroundingextracellular matrix, which are closely related to knownpathogenetic features of photoaged human skin. Thesechanges may not be restricted to alterations in collagenmetabolism, but may include other features of photoagedskin as well. Accordingly, increased neovascularization inphotoaged skin has recently been shown to result fromincreased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor,and inhibition of its activity was found to greatly reducewrinkle formation in photoaged skin (Yano et al., 2002). It is,therefore, of interest that KSS fibroblast-containing dermalskin equivalents showed strong and long-lasting vascularendothelial growth factor upregulation compared withorganotypic skin cultures based on normal fibroblasts(Krutmann et al., unpublished observations).Taken together, these studies strongly imply that the
presence of mtDNA deletions in human skin fibroblasts altersthe gene expression pattern of these cells, which, in turn,transduces structural and functional alterations in the dermal,and possibly also in the epidermal compartments of the skin,which, in concert, leads to photoaging. This concept impliesthe presence of a signaling pathway, which is retrograde innature, because it is directed from the mitochondria to thenucleus, as opposed to anterograde signaling from thenucleus to other parts of the cell (Butow and Avadhani,2004). The individual components of this mtDNA deletion-triggered retrograde signaling pathway in human skinfibroblasts are not yet known, but, at least, in the two modelsystems mentioned above, intramitochondrial generation ofROS seems to be involved. A critical role of mitochondria-derived ROS would also be in line with independentobservations showing increased intramitochondrial ROSproduction in human dermal fibroblasts in vivo in photoaged
human skin (Dr GJ Fischer, personal communication).RETROGRADE MITOCHONDRIAL SIGNALING INIRA-INDUCED PHOTOAGINGRetrograde mitochondrial signaling was recently also foundto play a critical role in photoaging induced by IRA radiation.These studies differ from those discussed above, because theydo not require repetitive exposure to generate mtDNA46 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14J Krutmann and P SchroederMitochondria and Skin Photoaging
deletions, but, instead, are based on single exposureprotocols. Specifically, within the last 5 years, it has beenshown unambiguously that a single exposure to IRAradiation, similar to single irradiation with UVB or UVAradiation, disturbs the balance between MMP-1 and TIMP-1in cultured primary human fibroblasts (Schieke et al., 2002)and in human skin in vivo (Schroeder and Krutmann, 2008;Schroeder et al ., 2008c), that is, MMP-1 expression andactivity are upregulated without a concomitant change inTIMP-1 (reviewed in (Schroeder et al ., 2008b). In addition,single exposures, with all three types of radiation, decreasethe expression of genes involved in the collagen de novosynthesis, such as COL1A1 (Buechner et al., 2008). These IRAeffects are most likely of clinical relevance, because animalstudies have identified skin photoaging as a functionaloutcome of chronic IR exposure (Kligman, 1982; Kim et al.,
2005). Thus, IRA, UVB, and UVA all exert similar effects onthe gene expression pattern of human skin fibroblasts. It is,however, important to note that the underlying signalingpathways differ completely. This conclusion is based on thefollowing observations: (i) single exposure to IRA, but not toUVA or UVB radiation, causes intramitochondrial generationof ROS in primary human skin fibroblasts (Schauen et al .,2007; Schroeder et al., 2007); (ii) treatment of primary humanskin fibroblasts with a mitochondrially targeted antioxidantinhibits IRA-, but not UVB- or UVA-induced MMP-1expression (Schroeder et al., 2007); (iii) chemical inhibitionof the mitochondrial ETC inhibits the IRA, but not the UVB orUVA, radiation-induced signaling response (Schroeder et al.,
2007); and (iv) skin fibroblasts with a low respiratory activityshow an increased resistance, and fibroblasts with anincreased respiratory activity show enhanced sensitivity toIRA-, but not UVB- or UVA-induced signaling (Schroederet al., 2007). These observations are consistent with a modelin which IRA radiation is absorbed by constituents of themitochondrial ETC, such as the copper atom in complex IV ofthe respiratory chain (Karu et al ., 2001, 2004). As aconsequence, the electron flow along the complexes of therespiratory chain would be disturbed and ROS would leakout from the ETC (Schroeder et al ., 2007) into themitochondrial matrix. Through yet unknown signaling stepsthis ROS-generated signal would then be transferred throughthe mitochondrial membrane and reach the cytoplasm of thefibroblasts, where it could ultimately lead to mitogen-activated protein kinase activation (Schieke et al ., 2002,
2003) and subsequently to altered nuclear transcription ofgenes, such as MMP-1 or COL1A1 (Schieke et al ., 2002;Buechner et al., 2008). In support of this concept is the recentdescription of signal transduction mechanisms between themitochondrial ETC and the mitochondrial permeabilitytransition pore (Wang et al., 2008).THE DEFECTIVE POWERHOUSE MODEL OF PREMATURESKIN AGINGOn the basis of the studies described above, we propose herethe ‘‘Defective Powerhouse Model of Cutaneous Aging’’(Figure 2). In human dermal fibroblasts, the persistence ofUV-induced mtDNA deletions (insert, left side) or the IRAradiation-induced disturbance of the electron flow of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain (insert, right side) leads toinadequate energy production, that is, the defective power-house. As a consequence, retrograde mitochondrial signalingprocesses are being initiated, which change the geneexpression pattern of dermal fibroblasts in a way that disturbscollagen metabolism, induces neovascularization, and whichmay also be responsible for other features of photoaged skin,for example, the development of an inflammatory infiltrate(dermatoheliosis). The intradermal presence of the defectivepowerhouse and the resulting chronic oxidative stress couldalso explain the presence of oxidized proteins in the upperpart of the dermis of photoaged skin (Sander et al., 2002). We
envision that the dermal defective powerhouse also impactson the epidermis and accounts, at least in part, for epidermalchanges typically found in photoaged human skin (Thieleet al., 2006). Our model thus integrates a major part of thecurrent knowledge as it concerns the molecular, cellular,UVADefectivepowerhouseDefectivepowerhouseEpidermisDermismtDNADermalfibroblastMitochondrialrespiratory chainMitochondrialrespiratory chainRosRos RosRosRetrograde signalingRetrograde signalingAltered gene expressionAltered gene expressionSubcutaneous tissueCollagen  /barb4downneovascularizationIRAUVAMitochondriaDefective powerhouseIRAFigure 2 .Defective Powerhouse Model of cutaneous aging. UVA and IRA(near infrared) through different mechanisms lead to the disruption of themitochondrial function (‘‘Defective powerhouse’’), which results in thechanges in the dermal compartment of the skin and leads to photoaging.
Insert/lower panel: Repetitive UVA irradiation results in the increasedformation of large-scale deletions of mtDNA (left). In addition, even a singledose of IRA leads to a disruption of the mitochondrial electron transport chain(right). Both events cause an increased production of ROS (reactive oxygenspecies) and thereby initiate retrograde signaling responses.www.jidonline.org 47J Krutmann and P SchroederMitochondria and Skin Photoaging
structural, and functional alterations that characterize photo-aged human skin. It reconciles the concept about theimportance of altered collagen metabolism for photoagingof human skin proposed earlier (Fisher et al ., 1997). It isunique in offering an explanation for the chronic nature of thephotoaging process. We would like to emphasize that ourmodel does not exclude the possibility that UV radiationdirectly, without the induction of mtDNA deletions, causesfunctional and structural alterations within the epidermis, andless so to the dermis, by triggering signaling pathways thatoriginate from the nuclear, cytoplasmic, or cell membranecompartment of skin cells (Fisher et al ., 1997; Stege et al .,2000; Fritsche et al ., 2007), and which contribute topremature skin aging. In a sense, the defective powerhousemodel thus complements concepts proposed earlier, whichare based on the direct elicitation of signaling pathways byUV radiation (reviewed in (Rittie et al., 2006)).
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PREVENTION ANDTREATMENT OF PHOTOAGINGThe model described above is of direct clinical relevancebecause it implies that mitochondrially targeted interventionstrategies would be highly efficient in the prevention and/ortreatment of photoaging of the skin. We have, therefore,developed a research program, which aims to restore theproper ‘‘powerhouse’’, that is, the mitochondrial function.This approach includes the development/identification ofsubstances, which protect (Schroeder et al., 2008c) or restoremitochondrial integrity (PCT/EP2008/005587), or interferewith signaling pathways that result from detrimental retro-grade signaling pathways.CONFLICT OF INTERESTThe authors state no conflict of interest.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis work has been supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft(DFG) SFB 728, Project B4 and C1, the BMU and the BMBF, CompetenceNetwork Radiation Research: Biological Effects of UV Radiation.REFERENCES
REFERENCESAmes BN, Shigenaga MK, Hagen TM (1995) Mitochondrial decay in aging.Biochim Biophys Acta 1271:165–70Balaban RS, Nemoto S, Finkel T (2005) Mitochondria, oxidants, and aging.Cell 120:483–95Berneburg M, Gattermann N, Stege H, Grewe M, Vogelsang K,Ruzicka T et al. (1997) Chronically ultraviolet-exposed human skinshows a higher mutation frequency of mitochondrial DNA as comparedto unexposed skin and the hematopoietic system. Photochem Photobiol66:271–5Berneburg M, Gremmel T, Kurten V, Schroeder P, Hertel I, von Mikecz Aet al. (2005) Creatine supplementation normalizes mutagenesis ofmitochondrial DNA as well as functional consequences. J InvestDermatol 125:213–20Berneburg M, Grether-Beck S, Kurten V, Ruzicka T, Briviba K, Sies H et al.(1999) Singlet oxygen mediates the UVA-induced generation of thephotoaging-associated mitochondrial common deletion. J Biol Chem274:15345–9Berneburg M, Plettenberg H, Krutmann J (2000) Photoaging of human skin.
Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 16:239–44Berneburg M, Plettenberg H, Medve-Konig K, Pfahlberg A, Gers-Barlag H,Gefeller O et al. (2004) Induction of the photoaging-associatedmitochondrial common deletion in vivo in normal human skin. J InvestDermatol 122:1277–83Bernerd F, Asselineau D, Frechet M, Sarasin A, Magnaldo T (2005)Reconstruction of DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum skinin vitro : a model to study hypersensitivity to UV light. PhotochemPhotobiol 81:19–24Birch-Machin MA, Tindall M, Turner R, Haldane F, Rees JL (1998)Mitochondrial DNA deletions in human skin reflect photo- rather thanchronologic aging. J Invest Dermatol 110:149–52Bosca AR, Tinois E, Faure M, Kanitakis J, Roche P, Thivolet J (1988) Epithelialdifferentiation of human skin equivalents after grafting onto nude mice.J Invest Dermatol 91:136–41Buechner N, Schroeder P, Jakob S, Kunze K, Maresch T, Calles C et al. (2008)
Changes of MMP-1 and collagen type Ialpha1 by UVA, UVB and IRA aredifferentially regulated by Trx-1. Exp Gerontol 43:633–7
Buechner N, Schroeder P, Jakob S, Kunze K, Maresch T, Calles C et al. (2008)Changes of MMP-1 and collagen type Ialpha1 by UVA, UVB and IRA aredifferentially regulated by Trx-1. Exp Gerontol 43:633–7Butow RA, Avadhani NG (2004) Mitochondrial signaling: the retrograderesponse. Mol Cell 14:1–15Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, Wang ZQ, Varani J, Kang S et al. (1996)Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing and retinoidantagonism. Nature 379:335–9Fisher GJ, Kang S, Varani J, Bata-Csorgo Z, Wan Y, Datta S et al. (2002)Mechanisms of photoaging and chronological skin aging. Arch Dermatol138:1462–70Fisher GJ, Talwar HS, Lin J, Lin P, McPhillips F, Wang Z et al. (1998)Retinoic acid inhibits induction of c-Jun protein by ultravioletradiation that occurs subsequent to activation of mitogen-activatedprotein kinase pathways in human skin in vivo .J Clin Invest101:1432–40Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, Voorhees JJ (1997)
Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultraviolet light.N Engl J Med 337:1419–28Fritsche E, Schafer C, Calles C, Bernsmann T, Bernshausen T, Wurm M et al.(2007) Lightening up the UV response by identification of thearylhydrocarbon receptor as a cytoplasmatic target for ultraviolet Bradiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:8851–6Karu TI, Pyatibrat LV, Afanasyeva NI (2004) A novel mitochondrial signalingpathway activated by visible-to-near infrared radiation. PhotochemPhotobiol 80:366–72Karu TI, Pyatibrat LV, Kalendo GS (2001) Cell attachment to extracellularmatrices is modulated by pulsed radiation at 820 nm and chemicals thatmodify the activity of enzymes in the plasma membrane. Lasers SurgMed 29:274–81Kim HH, Lee MJ, Lee SR, Kim KH, Cho KH, Eun HC et al. (2005)Augmentation of UV-induced skin wrinkling by infrared irradiation inhairless mice. Mech Ageing Dev 126:1170–7Kligman LH (1982) Intensification of ultraviolet-induced dermal damage by
infrared radiation. Arch Dermatol Res 272:229–38Koch H, Wittern KP, Bergemann J (2001) In human keratinocytes theCommon Deletion reflects donor variabilities rather than chronologicaging and can be induced by ultraviolet A irradiation. J Invest Dermatol117:892–7Krutmann J, Gilchrest BA (2006) Photoaging of skin. In: Skin Aging . (GilchrestBA, Krutmann J, eds). New York: Springer, 33–44Kujoth GC, Hiona A, Pugh TD, Someya S, Panzer K, Wohlgemuth SE et al.(2005) Mitochondrial DNA mutations, oxidative stress, and apoptosis inmammalian aging. Science 309:481–4Majora M, Maresch T, Schneider M, Schroeder P, Krutmann J (2007) HIF-1 a-mediated signalling induces functional alterations in fibroblasts harbour-ing large scale deletions of the mitochondrial DNA. (abstr.)Marionnet C, Pierrard C, Vioux-Chagnoleau C, Sok J, Asselineau D, Bernerd F(2006) Interactions between fibroblasts and keratinocytes in morphogen-esis of dermal epidermal junction in a model of reconstructed skin.
J Invest Dermatol 126:971–9McKenzie M, Liolitsa D, Hanna MG (2004) Mitochondrial disease: mutationsand mechanisms. Neurochem Res 29:589–60048 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14J Krutmann and P SchroederMitochondria and Skin Photoaging
Mildner M, Ballaun C, Stichenwirth M, Bauer R, Gmeiner R, Buchberger Met al. (2006) Gene silencing in a human organotypic skin model.Biochem Biophys Res Commun 348:76–82Nekhaeva E, Bodyak ND, Kraytsberg Y, McGrath SB, Van Orsouw NJ,Pluzhnikov A et al. (2002) Clonally expanded mtDNA point mutationsare abundant in individual cells of human tissues. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA 99:5521–6Poulton J, Deadman ME, Gardiner RM (1989) Tandem direct duplications ofmitochondrial DNA in mitochondrial myopathy: analysis of nucleotidesequence and tissue distribution. Nucleic Acids Res 17:10223–9Reimann V, Kramer U, Sugiri D, Schroeder P, Hoffmann B, Medve-Koenigs Ket al. (2008) Sunbed use induces the photoaging-associated mitochon-drial common deletion. J Invest Dermatol 128:1294–7Richter C (1995) Oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA and its relationshipto ageing. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 27:647–53Rittie L, Fisher GJ, Voorhees JJ (2006) Retenoid therapy for photoaging.
In:Skin Aging . (Gilchrest BA, Krutmann J, eds). New York: Springer,143–56Sander CS, Chang H, Salzmann S, Muller CS, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S,Elsner P et al. (2002) Photoaging is associated with protein oxidation inhuman skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 118:618–25Schauen M, Hornig-Do HT, Schomberg S, Herrmann G, Wiesner RJ (2007)Mitochondrial electron transport chain activity is not involved inultraviolet A (UVA)-induced cell death. Free Radic Biol Med 42:499–509Schieke S, Stege H, Kurten V, Grether-Beck S, Sies H, Krutmann J (2002)Infrared-A radiation-induced matrix metalloproteinase 1 expression ismediated through extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation inhuman dermal fibroblasts. J Invest Dermatol 119:1323–9Schieke SM, Schroeder P, Krutmann J (2003) Cutaneous effects of infraredradiation: from clinical observations to molecular response mechanisms.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 19:228–34
Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 19:228–34Schroeder P, Gremmel T, Berneburg M, Krutmann J (2008a) Partial depletionof mitochondrial DNA from human skin fibroblasts induces a geneexpression profile reminiscent of photoaged skin. J Invest Dermatol128:2297–303Schroeder P, Haendeler J, Krutmann J (2008b) The role of near infraredradiation in photoaging of the skin. Exp Gerontol 43:629–32Schroeder P, Krutmann J (2008) In vivo relevance of infrared a radiation-induced skin damage. Reply to Piazena and Kelleher, Letter to the Editor,Free Radic Biol Med ,2 0 0 8 Free Radic Biol Med 44:1870–1Schroeder P, Lademann J, Darvin ME, Stege H, Marks C, Bruhnke S et al.(2008c) Infrared radiation-induced matrix metalloproteinase in humanskin: implications for protection. J Invest Dermatol 128:2491–7Schroeder P, Pohl C, Calles C, Marks C, Wild S, Krutmann J (2007) Cellularresponse to infrared radiation involves retrograde mitochondrial signal-ing.Free Radic Biol Med 43:128–35
Schroeder P, Schieke S, Morita A (2006) Premature skin aging by infraredradiation, tobacco smoke and ozone. In: Skin Aging . (Gilchrest BA,Krutmann J, eds). New York: Springer, 45–54Stege H, Roza L, Vink AA, Grewe M, Ruzicka T, Grether-Beck S et al. (2000)Enzyme plus light therapy to repair DNA damage in ultraviolet-B-irradiated human skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:1790–5Thiele J, Barland CO, Ghadially R, Elias PM (2006) Permability andantioxidant barriers in aged epidermis. In: Skin Aging . (Gilchrest BA,Krutmann J, eds). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 65–79Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, Spelbrink JN, Rovio AT, BruderCEet al. (2004) Premature ageing in mice expressing defectivemitochondrial DNA polymerase.Nature 429:417–23Wallace DC (1992) Mitochondrial genetics: a paradigm for aging anddegenerative diseases? Science 256:628–32Wang W, Fang H, Groom L, Cheng A, Zhang W, Liu J et al. (2008) Superoxideflashes in single mitochondria. Cell 134:279–90
flashes in single mitochondria. Cell 134:279–90Xu J, Zutter MM, Santoro SA, Clark RA (1998) A three-dimensional collagen
Wang W, Fang H, Groom L, Cheng A, Zhang W, Liu J et al. (2008) Superoxideflashes in single mitochondria. Cell 134:279–90Xu J, Zutter MM, Santoro SA, Clark RA (1998) A three-dimensional collagenlattice activates NF-kappaB in human fibroblasts: role in integrin alpha2gene expression and tissue remodeling. J Cell Biol 140:709–19Yang JH, Lee HC, Lin KJ, Wei YH (1994) A specific 4977-bp deletion ofmitochondrial DNA in human ageing skin. Arch Dermatol Res286:386–90Yang JH, Lee HC, Wei YH (1995) Photoageing-associated mitochondrial DNAlength mutations in human skin. Arch Dermatol Res 287:641–8Yano K, Oura H, Detmar M (2002) Targeted overexpression of theangiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin-1 in the epidermis of transgenicmice prevents ultraviolet-B-induced angiogenesis and cutaneous photo-damage. J Invest Dermatol 118:800–5www.jidonline.org 49J Krutmann and P SchroederMitochondria and Skin Photoaging
