Short- and Long-Term Effects of UV Radiation on thePigmentation of Human SkinSergio G. Coelho1, Wonseon Choi1, Michaela Brenner1, Yoshinori Miyamura1, Yuji Yamaguchi1, RainerWolber2, Christoph Smuda2, Jan Batzer2, Ludger Kolbe2, Shosuke Ito3, Kazumasa Wakamatsu3, Barbara Z.Zmudzka4, Janusz Z. Beer4, Sharon A. Miller4and Vincent J. Hearing1The incidence of skin cancer, including cutaneous melanoma, has risen substantially in recent years, andepidemiological and laboratory studies show that UV radiation is a major causative factor of this increase. UVdamage also underlies photoaging of the skin, and these deleterious effects of UV can be, in part, prevented inskin with higher levels of constitutive pigmentation. We review the clinical studies we have made in recent yearsregarding the rapid and the long-term responses of the pigmentary system in human skin to UV exposure.Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009) 14,32–35; doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.10
INTRODUCTIONThe incidence of skin cancer, especially melanoma,has increased substantially in recent years, probablyas a result, in part, of increased exposure of fair-skinnedpopulations to UV radiation [NCI Seer Statistics, http://seer.cancer.gov/]. Epidemiological and laboratory studiesprovide convincing evidence that UV exposure is a majorcausative factor in melanomagenesis (Gilchrest et al., 1999;Landi et al ., 2003) and certainly is a critical factor inphotoaging (Yaar and Gilchrest, 1998; Halder and Ara,2003).Constitutive pigmentation of human skin provides excel-lent protection against cellular and DNA damage due to UVexposure (Tadokoro et al ., 2003; Miyamura et al ., 2007;
Brenner and Hearing, 2008), and this protection is due to anumber of properties of the melanins produced. Melanin hasa broad UV-visible absorption spectrum because of its strongscattering component (Kollias and Baqer, 1987; Chedekel,1995). Melanin is produced by melanocytes residing at thebasal layer of the epidermis but then is rapidly transferred toadjacent keratinocytes. Following the transfer, melanosomesare distributed toward the surface of the skin, where theyshield nuclear DNA in underlying cells from UV (reducingphotodamage) and protect collagen and elastin in the dermis(reducing photoaging) (Pathak, 1995; Kobayashi et al., 1998).Constitutive pigmentation of the skin plays a critical role inminimizing DNA damage from UV (Tadokoro et al ., 2003,2005; Yamaguchi et al ., 2006, 2008b) and in reducing therisk of photocarcinogenesis (Gilchrest, 1993; Gilchrest et al.,1999).Our collaborative research groups have performed a series
of clinical studies examining the effects of different wave-lengths, doses, and dose intervals of UV exposure on humanskin of various racial/ethnic origins and phototypes. Thesestudies have been reported in the literature in whichinterested readers can go for details (Tadokoro et al., 2003,2005; Yamaguchi et al ., 2006, 2007, 2008a, b; Miyamuraet al., 2007; Brenner and Hearing, 2008; Brenner et al., 2009;Coelho et al., 2009; Miller et al., 2008; Wolber et al., 2008).Considering the sum of these studies, we are able to drawconclusions about the effects of UV on human skin and thekinetics of the biological responses elicited.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONClinical studies on the effects of UV on human skinSubjects with a wide variety of skin phototypes, with different
racial/ethnic backgrounds, were recruited for our studies,which examined the effects of individual or repetitive UVirradiation on human skin, and at various times (up to severalyears) after initial UV exposure. The sum of these analysesrevealed that even within each racial/ethnic group there wasa great range in the constitutive levels of skin pigmentation,that there was a great variation in the ranges of MED andphotosensitivity of the subjects in each group, and that therewas also a wide range in the ability to increase skin
was also a wide range in the ability to increase skinpigmentation in response to UV (termed facultative pigmen-tation), as well as in the rate of increased pigmentation and itspersistence.The different time points examined after UV exposure alsorevealed four clear and distinct stages in pigmentationORIGINAL ARTICLE32 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14 &2009 The Society for Investigative DermatologyReceived 14 November 2008; accepted 12 January 20091Pigment Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA;2R&D SkinResearch, Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany;3Department of Chemistry, Fujita Health University School of Health Sciences, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan and4Center for Devices and Radiological Health, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
Correspondence: Dr Vincent J. Hearing, Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 37, Room 213 2, MSC4256, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. E-mail: hearingv@nih.gov
responses. (1) Immediate pigment darkening, which developsin minutes and can remain for several hours (Honigsmannet al ., 1986; Routaboul et al ., 1999), is gray/black in colorand is thought to be due to the direct effects of UV on existingmelanin or melanin precursors, perhaps oxidizing them todarker colors (Lim and Soter, 1993). (2) Persistent pigmentdarkening, which occurs within hours and remains for days(Moyal et al ., 2000, 2006), is thought to result from newlysynthesized melanin in the epidermis (Tadokoro et al., 2003,2005). (3) Delayed pigmentation, which develops in days andremains for weeks (Ortonne, 1990), results from prolongedincreases in melanin content (Brenner et al ., 2009; Milleret al ., 2008). (4) Long-lasting pigmentation, which remains49 months after initial UV exposure, results from prolongedactivation of the pigmentary system (Brenner et al ., 2009;Coelho et al., 2009).Kinetics of pigmentary responses to UV in human skin
To evaluate the sequence of events that occurs in human skinthat would increase pigmentation after one or more UVexposures, we examined biopsies of human skin of differentphototypes at various times after a single or multiple UVexposure(s). These biopsies were measured for melanincontent (using Fontana-Masson staining or chemical analysis)and for various melanocyte-specific markers (for example,MITF, TYR, and MART1). Skin color was measured byreflectometry, and other parameters, such as melanosomedistribution and melanocyte density, were also evaluated.The composite results of the studies are summarized inTable 1.The sequence of events, when considered with thedevelopment of color in skin of phototypes II and III afterUV exposure, provides a very clear picture of what occurs inthe skin following UV exposure at the molecular level. Theinitial response noted (from the markers tested) is an increasein MITF levels, MITF being a transcription factor known as the
master regulator of melanocyte function. Significant increasesin MITF levels occur within 1 day of UV exposure and noother marker tested responds noticeably within that timeframe, other than the dramatic and quick increase in visibleskin color known as immediate pigment darkening (Figure 1).As tyrosinase levels and melanin synthesis (determinedimmunohistochemically and by chemical analysis) do notincrease within the first few days, it is clear that the earlierhypothesis that immediate pigment darkening represents anoxidation and/or polymerization of existing melanin (ormelanin intermediates) was correct. MITF levels continue toincrease up to 1 week after UV exposure but then begin todecline and, by week 3 (even with repeated UV exposure),MITF has returned to its baseline constitutive level.By week 1, the expression of tyrosinase, Pmel17, andMART1 (and other melanosomal proteins) has increased
significantly, whereas the melanin content has increased onlyslightly ( B10%). The major effect on pigmentation at thistime point is a large redistribution of the melanosomes thatexisted before UV from the basal layer of the epidermis tolayers higher up in the skin. In light of the very minor increasein melanin content at 1 week after UV exposure, it is clearthat the visible increase in skin color (termed persistentpigment darkening, shown in Figure 1) is due to the upwardmovement of melanosomes toward the surface of the skin,where the visible color increases and presumably, themelanin is more effective in preventing damage from furtherUV exposures to underlying cells.By weeks 3–5, the melanocytic system becomes fully
melanin is more effective in preventing damage from furtherUV exposures to underlying cells.By weeks 3–5, the melanocytic system becomes fullyactivated, levels of melanogenic proteins are maximal, levelsof melanin synthesis are increased, and even the density ofmelanocytes in the skin is increased (all at levels two- tothreefold higher than before UV exposure). The sum of theseevents leads to a pronounced increase in visible skin colorknown as delayed pigmentation (Figure 1). How long delayedpigmentation lasts varies from individual to individual andnot much is known about the factors that determine it.An interesting consideration is which wavelength region ofUV causes the increased skin pigmentation, and in a separatestudy (Wolber et al., 2008), we compared the effects of UVATable 1. Melanocyte markers studied (summary of results with skin phototypes 2–3)Marker Day 0 Day 1 Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 5 X9 monthsMITF1+ ++ +++ ++ + + +TYR1+ + ++ +++ ++ ++ +
MITF1+ ++ +++ ++ + + +TYR1+ + ++ +++ ++ ++ +Pmel171+ + ++ +++ ++ ++ +MART11+ + ++ +++ ++ ++ +Melanin2+ + ++ ++ ++ ++ +Melanin3+ + + + ++ ++ +Melanosome redistribution + + ++ + + + +Melanocyte density4+ + +++ + + +Visible skin color5+ ++ +++ +++ +++ +++ +1Assessed as intensity of staining.2Melanin content as assessed by immunohistochemistry of Fontana-Masson stain.3Melanin content as assessed by chemical analysis.4Comparable results were obtained with stains for TYR, MART1, Pmel17, and MITF.5Measured as reflectance.www.jidonline.org 33SG Coelho et al.Effects of UV on the Pigmentation of Human Skin
with UVB in eliciting increases in skin color. UVB is moreeffective at stimulating skin pigmentation than UVA, but bothwavelengths can elicit comparable increases in skin pigmen-tation with appropriate doses, although the mechanisms aredistinct. UVA has no effect on melanin content, activation ofmelanocyte differentiation, or other parameters measured,yet UVA exposure stimulates visible skin pigmentationsignificantly. Presumably, this is due to the oxidation ofexisting melanins and their precursors and/or due to theeffects on the distribution of melanosomes in skin, perhapsfrom the known effects of UVA on cytoskeletal components(Jimbow and Fitzpatrick, 1975). Thus, UVA-induced in-creases in skin pigmentation are comparable with prolongedimmediate pigment darkening. In contrast, UVB stimulatesthe melanogenic system, as discussed elsewhere in thispaper.Recently, our follow-up studies examined the same
Recently, our follow-up studies examined the samesubjects from 9 months to 3 years after UV exposure (theseindividuals stated that they had no further significant UVexposure after the original protocol). Interestingly, in asignificant portion of this population ( B30%), visibleincreases in skin color remained in areas that were UVexposed earlier. We have termed this phenomenon long-lasting pigmentation, and studies are underway to determinewhy this occurs in some individuals and not in others, and todetermine whether these factors might be involved in varioushyperpigmentary diseases, particularly in those that are UVrelated.In sum, our studies have determined that melanocytedensity is comparable in dorsal skin of subjects fromall racial/ethnic skin types (ranging from types 1 to 6),although the amount of melanins produced by thesemelanocytes varies significantly and results in the widevariety of human skin colors. Melanocyte density can be
increased B2- to 3-fold within 3–4 weeks of repetitive UVexposure. Visible skin pigmentation can be increasedvisibly 7- to 10-fold by repetitive UV exposure, althoughmelanin content varies only B2-fold, suggesting that thetype(s) of melanin produced and/or their distribution inthe skin is critical to the greater effect of UV on skincolor. The long-term effects of UV on human skin can persistfor years, even in the absence of further UV exposure.As a complete turnover of the epidermis usually occursevery 4–5 weeks, how the pigmentary system remainsactivated in some cases even years later should be studiedin more detail. The mechanism(s) underlying long-lastingpigmentation are a subject of great interest for future study, asthey may provide important clues about the regulation ofmelanocyte differentiation and give further insights intoabnormal hyperpigmentation of human skin in UV-relatedpigmentary diseases.MATERIALS AND METHODSStudy subjects, UV irradiation, and dosimetry
Study subjects, UV irradiation, and dosimetryThese studies involved volunteer subjects with skin phototypes 1–6,as reported in the initial studies for each protocol (Tadokoro et al.,2003; Miller et al., 2008; Wolber et al., 2008). The studies adheredto the Helsinki guidelines and were approved by the ResearchInvolving Human Subjects Committees of the US Food and DrugAdministration. All subjects gave written, informed consent. Subjects(labeled ‘‘T’’) from one of the studies (Miller et al., 2008) were UVexposed one to three times per week for 4–5 weeks, whereas subjects(labeled ‘‘S’’) from a different study (Tadokoro et al., 2003) receiveda single UV exposure, and subjects (labeled ‘‘B’’) from yet anotherstudy (Wolber et al., 2008) were UV exposed five times a week for2 weeks.Before UV5 minutes after UV 4+ weeks after UV 1 day after UV 1.5 years after UV1 week after UV Before UV 8 days after UV
Figure 1 .Examples of phases of increased pigmentation in human skin following UV exposure. (a) Subject T35; top left: control unirradiated skin before UVexposure; bottom left: immediate pigment darkening, 5 minutes after UV exposure; top right: persistent pigment darkening, 1 week after UV exposure; bottom
exposure; bottom left: immediate pigment darkening, 5 minutes after UV exposure; top right: persistent pigment darkening, 1 week after UV exposure; bottomright: delayed pigmentation, 4 þweeks after UV exposure. ( b) Subject S91; top left: control unirradiated skin; bottom left: 1 day after MED exposure; top right:persistent pigment darkening, 8 days after UV; bottom right: long-lasting pigmentation, 1.5 years after UV exposure.34 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14SG Coelho et al.Effects of UV on the Pigmentation of Human Skin
Biopsies and immunohistochemical analysisSkin biopsies were taken from control and UV-exposed sites atvarious times after UV exposure. Each biopsy was placed dermis sidedown on a Millipore filter and was then fixed in 4% formaldehyde,embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 3- mm thickness, mounted onsilane-coated glass slides, and then stained using immunohisto-chemistry, as described earlier (Tadokoro et al ., 2003, 2005;Yamaguchi et al ., 2004, 2006). Staining patterns were analyzedusing a Leica DMRB/DMLD fluorescence microscope, and aninternal control was used each time to control for reproducibleantibody staining. Negative controls omitting the primary antibodywere performed each time.Melanocyte density and melanin content
Melanocyte density and melanin contentMelanocytes were counted following staining for tyrosinase, MITF,Pmel17, MART1, and other markers as detailed in the originalarticles, and their density along the epidermal/dermal border wasdetermined as cells per mm. Fluorescence intensities for antibodiesdetecting melanocyte-specific markers were normalized against 40-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining. For measurements of melanincontent, specimens were stained by the Fontana-Masson methodand were also measured by chemical analysis (Wolber et al., 2008).Transmitted light intensity was measured by the Leica DMRB\DMLDmicroscope and ScionImage software was used to analyze melaninquantity from integrated density in the skin sections, as describedearlier (Yamaguchi et al., 2006, 2008a).CONFLICT OF INTERESTThe authors state no conflict of interest.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the
National Cancer Institute at NIH, and by the Office of Science, Office ofWomen’s Health and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health, Foodand Drug Administration (FDA).REFERENCESBrenner M, Coelho SG, Beer JZ, Miller SA, Wolber R, Smuda C et al. (2009)Long-term molecular changes in human skin after repetitive in situ UVirradiation. J Invest Dermatol 129:1002–11Brenner M, Hearing VJ (2008) The protective role of melanin against UVdamage in human skin. Photochem Photobiol 84:539–49Chedekel MR (1995) Photophysics and photochemistry of melanin. In:Melanin: Its Role in Human Photoprotection . (Zeise L, Chedekel MR,Fitzpatrick TB, eds). Overland Park: Valdenmar Publ, 11–22Coelho SG, Zhou Y-C, Bushar HF, Miller SA, Zmudzka BZ, Hearing VJ et al.(2009) Long-lasting pigmentation (LLP) of human skin, a new type ofcutaneous response to UV. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 22:238–41Gilchrest BA (1993) Sunscreens – a public health opportunity. N Engl J Med329:1193–4
329:1193–4Gilchrest BA, Eller MS, Geller AC, Yaar M (1999) The pathogenesis ofmelanoma induced by ultraviolet radiation. N Engl J Med 340:1341–8Halder RM, Ara CJ (2003) Skin cancer and photoaging in ethnic skin.Dermatol Clin 21:725–32Honigsmann H, Schuler G, Aberer W, Romani N, Wolff K (1986) Immediatepigment darkening phenomenon. A reevaluation of its mechanisms.J Invest Dermatol 87:648–52Jimbow K, Fitzpatrick TB (1975) Changes in distribution patterns ofcytoplasmic filaments in human melanocytes during ultraviolet-mediated melanin pigmentation. J Cell Biol 65:481–8Kobayashi N, Nakagawa A, Muramatsu T, Yamashina Y, Shirai T, HashimotoMW et al. (1998) Supranuclear melanin caps reduce ultravioletinduced DNA photoproducts in human epidermis. J Invest Dermatol110:806–10Kollias N, Baqer AH (1987) Absorption mechanisms of human melanin in thevisible, 400–720 nm. J Invest Dermatol 89:384–8Landi MT, Baccarelli A, Tarone RE, Pesatori A, Tucker MA, Hedayati M et al.
(2003) DNA repair, dysplastic nevi, and sunlight sensitivity in thedevelopment of cutaneous malignant melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst94:94–101Lim HW, Soter NA (1993) Clinical Photomedicine . New York: MarcelDekker, Inc.Miller SA, Coelho SG, Zmudzka BZ, Bushar HF, Yamaguchi Y, Hearing VJet al. (2008) Dynamics of pigmentation induction by repeated UV
Dekker, Inc.Miller SA, Coelho SG, Zmudzka BZ, Bushar HF, Yamaguchi Y, Hearing VJet al. (2008) Dynamics of pigmentation induction by repeated UVexposures: dose, dose interval and UV spectrum dependence. Br JDermatol 159:921–30Miyamura Y, Coelho SG, Wolber R, Miller SA, Wakamatsu K, Zmudzka BZet al. (2007) Regulation of human skin pigmentation and responses toultraviolet radiation. Pigment Cell Res 20:2–13Moyal D, Chardon A, Kollias N (2000) Determination of UVA protectionfactors using the persistent pigment darkening (PPD) as the end point.(Part 1). Calibration of the method. Photodermatol PhotoimmunolPhotomed 16:245–9Moyal D, Wichrowski K, Tricaud C (2006) In vivo persistent pigmentdarkening method: a demonstration of the reproducibility of the UVAprotection factors results at several testing laboratories. PhotodermatolPhotoimmunol Photomed 22:124–8Ortonne JP (1990) The effects of ultraviolet exposure on skin melaninpigmentation. J Int Med Res 18:8C–17C
pigmentation. J Int Med Res 18:8C–17CPathak MA (1995) Functions of melanin and protection by melanin. In:Melanin: Its Role in Human Photoprotection . (Zeise L, Chedekel MR,Fitzpatrick TB, eds). Overland Park: Valdenmar Publ, 125–34Routaboul C, Denis A, Vinche A (1999) Immediate pigment darkening:description, kinetic and biological function. Eur J Dermatol 9:95–9Tadokoro T, Kobayashi N, Zmudzka BZ, Ito S, Wakamatsu K, Yamaguchi Yet al. (2003) UV-induced DNA damage and melanin content in humanskin differing in racial/ethnic origin and photosensitivity. FASEB J17:1177–9Tadokoro T, Yamaguchi Y, Batzer J, Coelho SG, Zmudzka BZ, Miller SA et al.(2005) Mechanisms of skin tanning in different racial/ethnicgroups in response to ultraviolet radiation. J Invest Dermatol124:1326–32Wolber R, Schlenz K, Wakamatsu K, Smuda C, Nakanishi Y, Hearing VJ et al.(2008) Pigmentation effects of solar simulated radiation as comparedwith UVA and UVB radiation. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 21:487–91
Yaar M, Gilchrest BA (1998) Aging versus photoaging: postulated mechan-isms and effectors. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 3:47–51Yamaguchi Y, Beer JZ, Hearing VJ (2008a) Melanin mediated apoptosis ofepidermal cells damaged by ultraviolet radiation: factors influencing theincidence of skin cancer. Arch Dermatol Res 300(Suppl 1):S43–50Yamaguchi Y, Brenner M, Hearing VJ (2007) The regulation of skinpigmentation. J Biol Chem 282:27557–61Yamaguchi Y, Coelho SG, Zmudzka BZ, Takahashi K, Beer JZ, Hearing VJ et al.(2008b) Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer formation and p53 production inhuman skin after repeated UV irradiation. Exp Dermatol 17:916–24Yamaguchi Y, Itami S, Watabe H, Yasumoto K, Abdel-Malek ZA, Kubo T et al.(2004) Mesenchymal–epithelial interactions in the skin: increasedexpression of dickkopf1 by palmoplantar fibroblasts inhibits melanocytegrowth and differentiation. J Cell Biol 165:275–85Yamaguchi Y, Takahashi K, Zmudzka BZ, Kornhauser A, Miller SA,
Tadokoro T et al. (2006) Human skin responses to UV radiation:pigment in the upper epidermis protects against DNA damage in thelower epidermis and facilitates apoptosis. FASEB J 20:1486–8www.jidonline.org 35SG Coelho et al.Effects of UV on the Pigmentation of Human Skin
