Journal of PathologyJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251Published online in Wiley InterScience(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/path.2098Review ArticleSkin ageing and its treatmentL Baumann*Department of Dermatology, Univer sity of Miami, Miami Beach, FL, USA*Correspondence to:L Baumann, Department ofDermatology, University ofMiami, 4701 N. MeridianAvenue, Suite 7450, MiamiBeach, FL 33140, USA.E-mail: lsb@derm.netNo conﬂicts of interest weredeclared.AbstractThe effects of chronic sun exposure on skin a re readily apparent when skin not typicallyexposed to the sun and skin regularly exposed to the sun are compared. While the sun isnot the only aetiological factor in the dyna mic process of skin ageing, it is the primaryexogenous cause among several internal and env ironmental elements. Thus, photo-ageing,the main focus of this article, is a subset of extrinsic skin ageing. The inﬂuence of the
sun in extrinsic skin ageing, as well as its role i n potentially altering the normal course ofintrinsic (also known as natural or cellular) age ing, is discussed. Telomeres, the specializedstructures found at the ends of chromosomes, are believed to be integral to cellular ageingas well as in the development of cancer. The age ing process, both intrinsic and extrinsic,is also believed to be inﬂuenced by the formation of free radicals, also known as reactiveoxygen species. The loss of collagen is considere d the characteristic histological ﬁnding inaged skin. Wrinkling and pigmentary changes a re directly associated with photo-ageing andare considered its most salient cutaneous manif estations. Such photodamage represents thecutaneous signs of premature ageing. In addition, deleterious consequences of chronic sunexposure, speciﬁcally various forms of photo -induced skin cancer, are also linked to acute
and chronic sun exposure. The only known stra tegies aimed at preventing photo-ageinginclude sun avoidance, using sunscreens to blo ck or reduce skin exposure to UV radiation,using retinoids to inhibit collagenase synt hesis and to promote collagen production, andusing anti-oxidants, particularly in combin ation, to reduce and neutralize free radicals.Copyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd.Keywords: photo-ageing; extrinsic ageing; in trinsic ageing; telomeres; free radicals;collagenIntroductionThe contribution or facilitating role of sunlight towardpremature skin ageing has been discussed and debatedby dermatologists since the end of the 1800s [1],but convincing the public regarding the risks of sunexposure remains an uphill battle, despite success inthe use of the skin protection factor (SPF) systemin topical products. Still, an inordinate number of
patients visiting dermatologists complain about, andseek treatment for, the most salient manifestations ofsolar exposure — wrinkling and unwanted pigmenta-tion, the tell-tale symptoms of photo-ageing.While the sun is not the only aetiological factorin skin ageing, it is the primary exogenous causeamong several internal and environmental elements.This chapter will focus chieﬂy on photo-ageing, or theextrinsic skin ageing due to the inﬂuence of the sun,but also on the role of the sun in potentially alteringthe normal course of intrinsic, or natural, ageing. Inaddition, how both kinds of ageing affect the skin willbe discussed, along with strategies aimed at preventingphoto-ageing.Cutaneous ageingAs implied above, there are two primary skin ageingprocesses, intrinsic and extrinsic. Variations in individ-ual genetic background are thought to govern intrinsicageing, which results as time passes. By deﬁnition,
this form of ageing is inevitable and, thus, apparentlynot subject to manipulation through changes in humanbehaviour. Conversely, extrinsic ageing is engenderedby factors originating externally that are introducedto the human body, such as smoking, excessive alco-
behaviour. Conversely, extrinsic ageing is engenderedby factors originating externally that are introducedto the human body, such as smoking, excessive alco-hol consumption, poor nutrition, and chronic exposureto the sun. Exposure to such elements, which fallswithin the voluntary realm, although it may sometimesoccur under duress, is not inevitable and thus repre-sents premature skin ageing. Of these external factors,sun exposure is considered to be far and away themost signiﬁcantly deleterious to the skin. Indeed, 80%of facial ageing is believed to be due to chronic sunexposure [2].Skin that ages intrinsically is smooth and unblem-ished, and characterized by normal geometric pat-terns, with some exaggerated expression lines. His-tologically, such skin manifests epidermal and dermalCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.www.pathsoc.org.uk
242 L. Baumannatrophy, ﬂattening of the epidermal rete ridges, as wellas reduced numbers of ﬁbroblasts and mast cells [3,4].In addition, increases are seen in the number of col-lagen ﬁbrils as well as the ratio of collagen III tocollagen I [5].Exposed areas of the skin, typically the face, chestand extensor surfaces of the arms, display the major-ity of extrinsically aged skin, which results from thecumulative effects of life-long ultraviolet radiation(UVR) exposure. Rhytides, pigmented lesions (such asephelides, lentigines, and patchy hyperpigmentation)and depigmented lesions (eg guttate hypomelanosis)comprise the clinical presentation of photo-aged skin.Losses in tone and elasticity are also observed inphoto-aged skin, along with increased skin fragility,areas of purpura due to blood vessel weakness, andbenign lesions (eg acrochordons, keratoses, and telang-iectases). On the Glogau Photo-ageing Scale, whichclassiﬁes the extent of c linical photodamage, patients
with a signiﬁcant history o f sun exposure would likelyreceive a score that is higher than expected for theirage, just as patients with a history of minimal sunexposure would likely score lower than expected fortheir age.The histopathological identiﬁcation of photo-agedskin is made easily, as it is characterized by elastosis.Epidermal atrophy and distinct alterations in collagenand elastic ﬁbres are also associated with photo-aged skin. In particular, skin that is marked byextreme or severe photo-ageing exhibits fragmented,thickened and more soluble collagen ﬁbres [6]. Elasticﬁbres also experience fragmentation and may exhibitprogressive cross-linkage and calciﬁcation [7]. Suchmarked deterioration in the condition of collagen andelastic ﬁbres has been demonstrated to progress withcontinued exposure to UV radiation. Overall, ageingskin is marked by increased inelasticity, fragmentationand collagen bundle fragility [8].Intrinsic ageing
Intrinsic ageingTelomeres, the specialized structures found at the endsof eukaryotic chromosomes, have come under increas-ing scrutiny and are now believed to play an essen-tial role in the intrinsic ageing process at a cellu-lar level. Intact telomeres are integral in extendingthe lifespan of cells [9]. With age, telomere lengthshortens. This telomeric erosion has come to be seenas a gauge by which to measure ageing, a verita-ble internal ageing clock, and the basis for one ofthe presently favoured theories on ageing [10]. Oneimplication of this theory places ageing and canceron opposite sides of the same coin. That is, telom-
erase, the cellular reverse transcriptase enzyme thatstabilizes or lengthens telomeres, is expressed in about85–90% of all human tumours but absent in manysomatic tissues [11,12]. Consequently, most cancercells, unlike healthy ones, are not programmed forapoptosis, or cell death. In other words, the pres-ence of telomerase is associated with telomere sta-bility and tumourigenesis, its absence with telomereshortening and somatic tissue ageing. It is impor-tant to note that the epidermis is one of the fewregenerative tissues to express telomerase [13]. Fur-ther, in a recent investigation of progressive telomereshortening, in 52 specimens of normal human epi-dermis and 48 specimens of lingual epithelium col-lected at autopsy from subj ects who died between 0
and 101 years of age, researchers determined that thetelomere shortening associated with ageing is charac-terized by tissue-speciﬁc loss rates [14]. Indeed, thenatural, progressive shortening of telomeres may beone of the primary mechanisms of cellular ageing inskin [15]. Telomeres and other cellular constituentsalso sustain low-grade oxidative damage as a result
also sustain low-grade oxidative damage as a resultof aerobic cellular metabolism, which contributes tointrinsic ageing [16]. Currently, there are no avail-able topical skin care products, systemic drugs or othertreatment options that target telomerase because cur-rent data do not adequately demonstrate that extendingtelomere length can be safely performed. One argu-ment for eventual telomerase-based therapies is thebelief that inhibiting telomerase may also have anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inducing effects not relatedto the role this ribonucleoprot ein plays in shorteningtelomeres during cell division [17].Werner syndrome (WS) is an autosomal recessivedisorder in which the causative gene, WRN , encodesa member of the RecQ -like subfamily of DNA heli-cases [18]. The Werner protein (Wrn), a multifunc-tional nuclear protein exhibiting 3′–5′exonuclease andATP-dependent helicase activities, is known to playa role in numerous DNA metabolic pathways and to
a role in numerous DNA metabolic pathways and tobe available in WS patients at reduced levels [19].Patients with WS exhibit signs of accelerated age-ing and the premature onset of various age-relateddisorders; among these, the incidence of sarcomasand other tumours of mesenchymal origin is higherthan in the population at large [20]. In one study,mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts derived from homozygousWS embryos exhibited premature loss of prolifera-tive capacity [21]. In a more recent mouse modelstudy, investigators found that exhaustion of telomerereserves elicited WS and telomere dysfunction pro-voked various Werner-like s ymptoms, including hairgreying, alopecia, cataracts, osteoporosis, type II dia-betes and premature death [22]. In addition, accel-erated replicative senescence, chromosomal instabil-ity, especially non-epithelial tumours often associatedwith WS, were exhibited in this model, with telom-
ere shortening implicated as the primary cause. Giventhe association of WS and telomere shortening and theroles of telomeres and telomerase in cellular ageing,further research into these interconnected phenomenawill likely have an impact on further elucidating ourunderstanding of the ageing process, as well as poten-tial therapeutic approaches.Extrinsic ageingExtrinsic ageing is largely preventable, by nature andby deﬁnition. Factors with clearly exogenous origins,J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 243including smoking, poor nutrition and especially solarexposure, are the main causes of extrinsic, premature,cutaneous ageing. Moreover, sun exposure, as statedpreviously, is believed to account for 80% of facialageing [23]. Skin damage results from ultravioletexposure through several mechanisms, including theformation of sunburn cells as well as thymine andpyrimidine dimers, collagenase production, and theinduction of an inﬂammatory response. Sunburn cells,or UV-induced apoptotic cells, have long been usedas markers by which to evaluate skin damage causedby sun exposure. UV-induced apoptosis is mediatedby caspase-3, high levels of which are thought to begood indicators of the presence of cellular apoptosis[24]. Activation of apoptosis occurs in a pathway thatinvolves caspase-7 [25]. Mast cells and macrophagesare found in greater numbers in photo-aged skinand are also thought to be involved in its causativemechanism [26].
mechanism [26].Signalling through p53 after telomere disruption isalso linked to ageing in addition to photodamage, inassociation with UVB more so than UV A [27,28].Histological examination has demonstrated that moreinﬁltrating mononuclear cells are found in skin chron-ically exposed to the sun in comparison to protectedskin [29]. While much more remains to be understoodregarding the mechanisms through which a cascade ofadverse health effects are induced by UV exposure,it is well known that photo-ageing, photocarcinogene-sis and photo-immunosuppression are sequelae of UVexposure, particularly the UV A range (320–400 nm)[30].Interestingly, telomeres do not appear to play acentral role in extrinsic ageing. In a recent study, inwhich telomere length was measured in 76 specimensof epidermis from sun-protected sites, 24 specimens of
epidermis from sun-exposed sites and 60 specimensof dermis, comparisons showed telomere length tobe shorter in the epidermis. Intrinsic senescence wasevidenced by reduction in telomere length in theepidermis and dermis with age. Telomere shorteningwas not associated with photo-ageing in this study,as telomere length was not shown to be signiﬁcantlydifferent between sun-exposed and sun-protected sites[31].Currently, sun avoidance and the use of sunscreensare the only defence against sunburn cell formation;they can also protect against thymine dimer forma-tion. Theoretically, the fewer sunburn cells present,the lower the skin damage level due to UV expo-sure.Characteristics of ageing skinThe key difference between intrinsic and extrinsicageing is that the latter falls within the volitionalcontrol of the individual. N evertheless, there aresalient features exhibited by aged skin, regardless of
the cause(s) of skin ageing. The changes undergone byskin as it ages occur throughout the epidermis, dermisand subcutaneous tissue and can manifest in discreteand broad alterations in skin topography.EpidermisWhen considering the visually obvious nature of skin,it seems counter-intuitive to suggest that the age-related changes in the dermis are more pronouncedthan those in the epidermis, but this is nonethelessthe case. That said, the epidermis does manifest someimportant changes related to ageing. While some stud-ies indicate that aged skin is characterized by a thinnerepidermis [32], other studies do not point to such aﬁnding [33]. There is general agreement, however, thatthe thickness of the stratum corneum does not changewith age. In a study comparing the effects of intrin-sic and extrinsic ageing, hi stopathological examinationof 83 biopsies from sun-exposed and protrected skinin healthy volunteers aged 6–84 years revealed epi-
dermal thickness to be constant across the decades inboth sun-exposed and -protected skin, with the thick-ness found to be greater in sun-exposed skin [34].In a different study, the spinous layer of a wrinklewas shown to be thinner at the base than at the ﬂanks
ness found to be greater in sun-exposed skin [34].In a different study, the spinous layer of a wrinklewas shown to be thinner at the base than at the ﬂanks[35]; in addition, according to this study, fewer kera-tohyaline granules are present in the wrinkle base ascompared to the ﬂanks.In aged skin, the intersection of the epidermisand dermis, known as the dermal–epidermal junction(DEJ), is known to be altered, ie aged epidermismanifests a ﬂattened DEJ with a correspondinglydiminished connecting surface area. In a study ofabdominal skin, DEJ surface area was shown to bereduced from 2 .64 mm2in subjects aged 21–40 yearsto 1.90 mm2in subjects aged 61–80 [36]. It is thoughtthat such a loss of DEJ surface area may contribute tothe increased fragility of the skin associated with ageand may also lead to reduced nutrient transfer betweenthe dermal and epidermal layers.Decreased cell turnover
Decreased cell turnoverOther important age-related changes occur in theepidermal layer. Between the third and eighth decadesof life, the epidermal turnover rate slows from 30% to50% [37]. Stratum corneum transit time was shown byKligman to be 20 days in young adults and 30 or moredays in older adults [38]. Such a cell cycle lengtheningin older adults coincides with a protracted stratumcorneum replacement rate, epidermal atrophy, slowerwound healing and often less effective desquamation.Indeed, older patients have been demonstrated torequire double the time to re-epithelialize followingdermabrasion resurfacing procedures in comparison toyounger patients [39]. The cascade of changes relatedto decelerated cell turnover results, in older skin, in thedevelopment of heaps of corneocytes that render theskin surface rough and dull in appearance. In responseto these phenomena, many cosmetic dermatologistsJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/path
J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
244 L. Baumannuse products (eg hydroxy acids, retinoids) to acceleratethe cell cycle, in the belief that a faster turnover ratewill yield improvements in skin appearance and speedwound healing following cosmetic procedures.DermisApproximately 20% of dermal thickness disappears aspeople become elderly [40]. Aged dermis has beenshown through structural examination to be relativelyacellular and avascular [41]. Changes in collagenproduction and the development of fragmented elasticﬁbres also characterize normal aged dermis. Dermisthat is also photo-aged exhibits disorganized collagenﬁbrils and the accumulation of abnormal elastin-containing material [42,43]. As the three primarystructural components of the dermis, collagen, elastinand glycosaminoglycans have been the subjects of themajority of anti-ageing research pertaining to the skin.CollagenThe primary structural component of the dermis andthe most abundant protein found in humans, collagen
is responsible for conferring strength and support tohuman skin. Over time, the structural proteins andmain components of the skin deteriorate, resulting inthe cutaneous signs of ageing. Intrinsically aged skin ischaracterized by epidermal and dermal atrophy as wellas ﬂattening of the rete ridges [44]. Knowledge of therole of collagen in the ageing process over 30 yearsago helped to establish the use of bovine collagen as aﬁlling agent to temporarily replace collagen lost withage in soft tissue augmentation procedures. Injectablehuman-derived products, such as Zyderm and Zyplast,have also emerged during the last decade for thesepurposes. Other products that contain ingredients suchas vitamin C and glycolic acid, and labelled as ‘anti-wrinkle creams’, are promoted in some cases fortheir claimed capacity to enhance collagen synthesis.Such products are not harmful, but cannot yet trulymatch the desired effects. In fact, little is known
even about the pathogenesis of wrinkles [45]. Thefact that neither an animal nor an in vitro model ofwrinkling has yet been established may help to explainthis gap in knowledge. It is well known, however,that alterations in collagen play an integral role inthe ageing process. This, in turn, partly explains thepopularity of collagen-containing products intendedfor ‘anti-ageing’ purposes.Of the dry skin mass, 70% is comprised of colla-gen [46]. In aged skin, collagen is characterized bythickened ﬁbrils, organized in rope-like bundles, thatappear to be in disarray in comparison to the patternobserved in younger skin [47]. In addition, lower lev-els of collagen are synthesized, in vivo andin vitro ,by aged ﬁbroblasts. The ratio of collagen types foundin human skin also changes with age. In young skin,collagen I comprises 80% and collagen III comprisesabout 15% of total skin collagen; in older skin, theratio of Type III to Type I collagen has been shown to
increase, due, signiﬁcantly, to an appreciable loss ofcollagen I [48]. In addition, the overall collagen con-tent per unit area of skin surface is known to declineapproximately 1%/year [49]. In irradiated skin, colla-gen I levels have been shown to be reduced by 59%[50]; this reduction was found to be linked to the extentof photodamage [51]. Although collagen I is the mostabundant and signiﬁcant collagen type found in theskin, the effects of ageing are seen in other types ofcollagen in human dermis.An integral constituent of the DEJ, collagen IVimparts a structural framework for other molecules andplays a key role in maintaining mechanical stability.No signiﬁcant differences have been found in collagenIV levels in sun-exposed skin compared to unexposedskin, but signiﬁcantly lower levels of collagen IV havebeen identiﬁed at the base of wrinkles in comparisonto the ﬂanks of the same wrinkles. The mechanicalstability of the DEJ may be adversely affected by this
loss of collagen IV, thereby contributing to wrinkleformation [52].
to the ﬂanks of the same wrinkles. The mechanicalstability of the DEJ may be adversely affected by thisloss of collagen IV, thereby contributing to wrinkleformation [52].Collagen VII is the primary constituent in anchoringﬁbrils that attach the basement membrane zone tothe underlying papillary dermis. In one study, asigniﬁcantly lower number of anchoring ﬁbrils wereidentiﬁed in patients with chronically sun-exposed skinin comparison to normal controls. It was theorized bythe researchers that wrinkles may form as a result ofa weakened bond between the dermis and epidermis,due to anchoring ﬁbril degradation [53]. A more recentstudy showed such a loss of collagen VII to be moremarked in the base of the wrinkle (as seen withcollagen IV in the same study) [54].In the last 15 years, the pathogenesis of UVR-induced collagen damage has been well understoodand characterized. For instance, it is known that UVRexposure signiﬁcantly up-regulates the synthesis of
several types of collagen-degrading enzymes knownas matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). First, UV expo-sure leads to an increase in the amount of the transcrip-tion factor c-jun; c-fos, the other transcription factorinvolved in this mechanistic chain, is already abun-dant without UV exposure. Activator protein-1 (AP-1)is then formed by the combination of c-jun and c-fos. In turn, AP-1 activates the MMP genes, whichstimulate the production of collagenase, gelatinase andstromelysin. Collagen degradation is mediated by AP-1 activation and by inhibition of transforming growthfactor (TGF) βsignalling [55]. Research in humans hasshown that within hours of UVB exposure, MMPs,speciﬁcally collagenase and gelatinase, are produced[56]. Multiple exposures to UVB engender a sus-tained induction of MMPs [57]. Given that collagenaseattacks and degrades collagen, long-term elevations inthe levels of collagenase and other MMPs likely yieldthe disorganized and clumped collagen identiﬁed in
photo-aged skin. Notably, these MMPs may repre-sent the mechanism through which collagen I levelsdecline in response to UV exposure. By characterizingJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 245the wide-ranging effects of UV in activating cell sur-face growth factor and cytokine receptors, researchershave been able to ascertain that skin ageing (extrin-sic and intrinsic) is marked by elevated AP-1 activityand MMP expression, inhibited TGF βsignalling, aswell as reduced collagen synthesis and greater colla-gen degradation [58]. These changes are likely to beexacerbated by photo-ageing.ElastinAlterations in elastic ﬁbres are so strongly associatedwith photo-aged skin that ‘elastosis’, an accumulationof amorphous elastin material, is considered pathog-nomonic of photo-aged skin. Indeed, UV exposureinduces a thickening and coiling of elastic ﬁbres inthe papillary dermis. These changes also occur in thereticular dermis as a result of chronic UV exposure[59]. Examination by electron microscopy of elasticﬁbres in UV-exposed skin has revealed a reduction in
the number of microﬁbrils and increases in interﬁbril-lar areas, the complexity of the shape and arrangementof the ﬁbres and the number of electron-dense inclu-sions [60]. In addition, small amounts of sugar andlipids and an abnormally high level of polar aminoacids have been found in elastin extracted from theskin of elderly patients [61]. The underlying aetiologyof age-related changes in elastin is not as well under-stood as such changes in collagen; however, matrixmetalloproteinases are thought to play a role becauseMMP-2 has been demonstrated to degrade elastin [62].The initial response of elastic ﬁbres to photodam-age is understood, however, to be hyperplastic, result-ing in a greater amount of elastic tissue. The levelof sun exposure determines the magnitude of thehyperplastic response. In aged elastic ﬁbres, a sec-ondary response to photodamage occurs but is degen-erative, with decreases observed in skin elasticity and
resiliency [63,64]. Older skin that has experienced thisdegenerative reaction is characterized by changes inthe normal pattern of immature elastic ﬁbres, calledoxytalan, that are located in the papillary dermis.These ﬁbres form a network in young skin that ascendsperpendicularly from the uppermost section of the pap-illary dermis to just beneath the basement membrane.This network gradually disappears with age, however[65]. Consequently, skin elasticity is also graduallylost with age [66]. The phenomenon of sagging skinoften observed in the elderly may, in fact, be due inlarge part to this loss of elasticity.Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)GAGs, along with collagen and elastin, are among theprimary constituents of dermal skin and are responsi-ble for conferring the outward appearance of the skin.These polysaccharide chains, with repeating disaccha-ride units attached to a core protein, are also importantmolecules because they exhibit the capacity to bind
water up to 1000 times their volume. There are numer-ous members in the GAG family, including hyaluronicacid (HA), dermatan sulphate (both of which are twoof the most prevalent GAGs) and chondroitin sulphate.These compounds render normal skin plump, soft andhydrated, and are believed to assist in maintainingproper salt and water balance. Several studies sug-gest that GAGs, particularly HA, have been found tobe reduced in amount in photo-aged skin [67]. Somestudies offer conﬂicting reports, however, suggestingno changes in the level of GAGs in aged skin [68].The fact that HA is synthesized in the epidermis aswell as the dermis likely accounts for this discrepancyin ﬁndings. In skin that ages intrinsically, the total HAlevel in the dermis remains stable; however, epidermalHA diminishes almost completely [69].Hyaluronic acidPhotoaged skin has been shown to be characterizedby reduced levels of hyaluronic acid (HA) and ele-vated levels of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans
[70]. Such patterns, intriguingly, are also observedin scars. HA is found in young skin at the periph-
vated levels of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans[70]. Such patterns, intriguingly, are also observedin scars. HA is found in young skin at the periph-ery of collagen and elastin ﬁbres and where thesetypes of ﬁbres intersect. In aged skin, such connec-tions with HA disappear [71]. It is possible that thedecreases in HA levels, which contribute to its disas-sociation with collagen and elastin as well as reducedwater binding, may be involved in the changes notedin aged skin, including wrinkling, altered elasticity,reduced turgidity and diminished capacity to supportthe microvasculature of the skin.As one of the primary GAGs, HA can bind 1000times its weight in water, and may help the skinretain and maintain water. It is found in all connectivetissue and is produced mainly by ﬁbroblasts andkeratinocytes in the skin [72]. HA is localized not onlyin the dermis but also in the epidermal intercellularspaces, especially the middle spinous layer, but not
in the stratum corneum (SC) or stratum granulosum[73]. Aged skin, which is less plump than youthfulskin, is characterized by decreased levels of HA. Therole of HA in skin hydration is not clear and HAdoes not penetrate the skin upon topical application[74]; however, this has not stopped many companiesfrom putting HA in topical skin care products andclaiming efﬁcacy. HA is used successfully, however,as a temporary dermal ﬁlling agent in soft tissueaugmentation procedures.MelanocytesWith age, there is a reduction in the number ofmelanocytes in the range 8–20%/decade. Clinically,this decrease is observed as a reduction in the numberof melanocytic nevi in older patients [75]. The skinof older patients is less able to protect itself from thesun because melanin, which is reduced in the elderly,absorbs carcinogenic UV radiation. Therefore, olderpeople are more susceptible to developing sun-induced
cancers. For this reason, sun protection remains impor-tant even for elderly patients, despite the fact thatJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
246 L. Baumannthe majority of an individual’s harmful sun exposureoccurs during the ﬁrst two decades of life. It is not‘too late’ for healthy elderly people to begin adding asunscreen to their skin care regimens.VasculatureAged skin has been shown through numerous stud-ies to be relatively avascular. In one study a 35%reduction in the venous cross-sectional area in agedskin was demonstrated in comparison to young skin[76]. Such a loss in the vascular network is especiallynoticeable in the papillary dermis, with the disappear-ance of the vertical capillary loops. Reduced bloodﬂow, depleted nutrient exchange, inhibited thermoreg-ulation, decreased skin surface temperature and skinpallor are associated with the reduction of vascularity.Subcutaneous tissueSite-speciﬁc changes, including gains and losses, areknown to occur in subcutaneous tissues that alsoinﬂuence the appearance of the elderly and their skin.Subcutaneous fat diminishes in the face, dorsal aspects
of the hands and the shins. Fat amasses with ageing,though, in other regions, particularly the waist inwomen and the abdomen in men [77].The role of free radicals in photo-ageingThe ageing process is believed to be at least partiallydue to the formation and activity of free radicals, alsoknown as reactive oxygen species (ROS). Free radicalsare composed of oxygen molecules with an unpairedelectron and are engendered by several exogenous andendogenous factors, including UV exposure, pollution,stress, smoking and normal metabolic processes. Fur-ther, some evidence suggests that free radicals inducealterations in gene expression pathways, which in turncontribute to the degradation of collagen and the accu-mulation of elastin emblematic of photo-aged skin[78]. Anti-oxidants neutralize free radicals by supply-ing another electron, delivering an electron pair to anoxygen molecule and stabilizing it in the process.Changes in skin appearanceDry skin
Changes in skin appearanceDry skinDry, scaly skin is frequently seen in the elderly.The degradation or loss of skin barrier function withincreasing age is partly accountable for this manifes-tation. The recovery of damaged barrier function hasbeen demonstrated to be slower in aged skin, resultingin greater susceptibility to developing dryness. Thisis a multifactorial process due, in part, to lower lipidlevels in lamellar bodies [79] and a decrease in epi-dermal ﬁlaggrin [80]. Increased trans-epidermal waterloss (TEWL) is also exhibited by aged skin, leavingthe stratum corneum more susceptible to becoming dryin low-humidity environments. In addition to dryness,aged skin is often characterized by roughness, wrin-kling, skin pallor, hyper- or hypopigmentations, laxity,fragility, easy bruising and benign neoplasms.Benign neoplasms in ageing skinWith age, the appearance and surface texture of skincan change dramatically, as represented by the devel-
opment of acrochordons (skin tags), cherry angiomas,seborrheic keratoses, lentigos (sun spots) and seba-ceous hyperplasias, among other lesions and cuta-neous alterations. Patients of dermatologists and plas-tic surgeons often request removal of these benignneoplasms. Various destructive treatment modalitiesare available, including hyfrecation and sundry laseroptions.TreatmentPhotoaged skin is treated with various in-ofﬁce pro-cedures and numerous topical agents, most of whichare intended to ‘resurface’ the epidermis. Essentially,this translates to removing the damaged epidermisand, in some cases, dermis, and replacing the tissuewith remodelled skin layers. Several anti-oxidants areincorporated into topical sk in care products, includingvitamins C and E, co-enzyme Q10, ferulic acid, greentea, idebenone, pycnogenol and silymarin. Resurfac-ing procedures have been shown to sometimes spur
ing procedures have been shown to sometimes spurthe formation of new collagen with a normal stainingpattern, as opposed to the basophilic elastotic massesof collagen characteristic of photo-aged skin [81]. It is
the formation of new collagen with a normal stainingpattern, as opposed to the basophilic elastotic massesof collagen characteristic of photo-aged skin [81]. It ispossible that the potential of growth factors, cytokinesand telomerase will eventually be harnessed via tech-nological advancement and innovation in the burgeon-ing ﬁelds of tissue engineering and gene therapy [82].Although there are several treatments available foraged skin, prevention of extrinsic ageing remainsthe best approach and should be encouraged to allpatients. Of course, this entails avoiding exposureto the sun, using sunscreen when sun avoidance isimpossible, avoiding cigarette smoke and pollution,eating a diet high in fruits and vegetables, and takingoral anti-oxidant supplements or topical anti-oxidantformulations. The regular use of prescription retinoidscan also help prevent or treat wrinkles.PreventionThe formation of rhytides is considered the most
The formation of rhytides is considered the mostconspicuous and common manifestation, and nearly asine qua non feature, of skin ageing. Wrinkles appearas a result of changes in the lower, dermal layers of theskin. It might come as a surprise to many consumers,given the ubiquity of advertising that touts the newesttopical formulations to e liminate wrinkles and therelated expenditure of millions of dollars by consumersJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 247on these ‘anti-ageing’ products, that few skin careproduct ingredients have the capacity to penetrate farenough into the dermis to ameliorate deep wrinkles.Prevention of wrinkle development, therefore, hasassumed a fundamental status in anti-ageing skin care[83]. To prevent the formation of wrinkles, it isnecessary to halt the degradation of the skin’s threeprimary structural constituents, collagen, elastin andHA, since all three components are known to declinewith age. Consequently, most anti-ageing proceduresand products are designed or formulated with theintention of salvaging at least one of these basiccutaneous substances. Because the technology requiredto suitably deliver these compounds into the skin hasnot yet been developed, topical products containingcollagen, elastin or HA are unable to serve as adequatereplacements for what is lost from the skin throughageing. Although no products replenish these key skin
components, some products do promote the naturalsynthesis of these substances. For example, collagenproduction has been shown to be stimulated by the useof retinoids [84], vitamin C [85] and copper peptide.Collagen synthesis may also be brought about throughthe use of oral vitamin C [86]. In animal models,retinoids have been shown to increase production ofHA [87] and elastin [88]. HA levels are also thought tobe augmented with glucosamine supplementation [89].There are no products yet approved for increasing theproduction of, or enhancing, elastin.Because inﬂammation is a known contributor tothe degradation of collagen, elastin and HA, reducinginﬂammation is another integral approach to prevent-ing wrinkle formation. Anti-oxidants, all of which dis-play various distinguishing characteristics and activ-ities, are believed to be an important focus in thisendeavour, as these free radical scavengers protect
the skin via several mechanisms that are just begin-ning to be elucidated. Skin inﬂammation is a knownsequela of free radicals directly acting on cytokineand growth factor receptors in dermal cells and ker-atinocytes. Cytokines and growth factors are known toplay a role in skin ageing, but the exact nature of theirsigniﬁcance has not yet been clariﬁed. Presently, thesecompounds are understood to function synergisticallyin a complex cascade of events requiring the inclusionof several types of cytokines and growth factors [90].The process is thought to be induced by UV expo-sure, which affects growth factor and cytokine recep-tors in keratinocytes and dermal cells, contributing todownstream signal transduction by spurring mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways (speciﬁ-cally, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-jun N-terminal protein kinase, and p38), which collect incell nuclei and form cFos–cJun complexes of tran-
cell nuclei and form cFos–cJun complexes of tran-scription factor AP-1 and trigger the MMPs col-lagenase, 92 kDa gelatinase and stromelysin, whichattack collagen and other connective tissue of the skin[91,92].The direct effects of free radicals on the ageingprocess and cutaneous ageing are understood withgreater clarity and certainty, however. For example,free radical activation of the MAP kinase pathwayshas been shown to stimulate collagenase production,which leads to the breakdown of collagen [93]. Specif-ically, Kang et al showed that pretreating human skinwith the anti-oxidants genistein and N-acetyl cysteineinhibited the UV induction of the cJun-driven enzymecollagenase. The use of anti-oxidants to hinder thesepathways is thought to inhibit photo-ageing by pre-venting collagenase production and its resulting detri-mental inﬂuence on collagen. Interestingly, this studyshowed that, although geni stein and N-acetyl cys-
teine exhibit anti-oxidant activity, these anti-oxidantsexerted no effect on UV-induced erythema. Previouswork has also pointed to the likelihood that using
teine exhibit anti-oxidant activity, these anti-oxidantsexerted no effect on UV-induced erythema. Previouswork has also pointed to the likelihood that usinganti-oxidants in combination confers synergistic ben-eﬁts. In a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group,placebo-controlled study of the effects of an oral com-bination of vitamins C and E, carotenoids, seleniumand proanthocyanidins, participants who took the anti-oxidant combination before exposure to UVB exhib-ited a difference in MMP-1 production in compar-ison to the placebo group ( p<0.05) [94]. Similarto the study by Kang, there were no signiﬁcant dif-ferences between the oral anti-oxidant group and theplacebo group regarding minimal erythema dose of theskin.In yet another recent study of the effects of com-bined anti-oxidants, one group of subjects was treateddaily with a base cream containing 0.05% ubiquinone(co-enzyme Q10), 0.1% vitamin E and 1% squa-lene, and 50 mg co-enzyme Q10, 50 mgD-RRR- α-
D-RRR- α-tocopheryl acetate and 50 µg selenium were orallyadministered, while the second group was treatedwith base cream only [95]. Patients treated withthe topical anti-oxidant cream alone exhibited sig-niﬁcant increases in the concentration of co-enzymeQ10, D-RRR- α-tocopherol and squalene in the sebum(although not in the stratum corneum or plasma). Thegroup treated both topically and orally also demon-strated higher levels of vitamin E and co-enzyme Q10in the stratum corneum.In terms of preventing the effects of photo-ageing,it is not yet known which anti-oxidants are the mosteffective. Using topical and oral anti-oxidants in com-bination will likely be the favoured recommendationin the near future. Anti-oxidants should also be used incombination with sunscreens and retinoids to enhancetheir protective effects. Indeed, it is worth remem-bering that not all sunscreens have an anti-oxidanteffect and not all anti-oxidants have a sunscreen effect.
However, a recent Duke University study has demon-strated that vitamins C and E combined with ferulicacid impart both a sunscreen effect and an anti-oxidanteffect [96].Some notable anti-oxidantsConceivably, volumes could be written on the plethoraof natural compounds found in recent years to exhibitJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
248 L. Baumannanti-oxidant activity. That is to say, an exhaustivesurvey of green tea, tea tree oil, grape seed extract,vitamins C and E, ferulic acid, etc. would far exceedthe limits of this chapter. A few of the anti-oxidantingredients that have recently gained favour and atten-tion are brieﬂy discussed here.Coenzyme Q10 or ubiquinone is a fat-soluble anti-oxidant found in all cells as part of the electrontransportation chain responsible for energy production,and has been shown to exhibit antiapoptotic activity[97]. It also naturally occurs in ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, spinachand nuts. Like the key constituents of the skin, co-enzyme Q10 has been shown to diminish with age inanimals and humans [98]. While UV light is known toremove vitamins C and E, glutathione and co-enzymeQ10 from the epidermal and dermal layers of the skin,co-enzyme Q10 is consistently the ﬁrst anti-oxidant tobe depleted in the skin.Derived from tropical fern, Polypodium leucoto-
Derived from tropical fern, Polypodium leucoto-mos (PL) extract has exhibited potent anti-oxidantactivity. The incidence of phototoxicity was demon-strated to decrease after oral PL administration insubjects receiving psoralen–UV A (PUV A) treatment[99], as well as in normal healthy subjects [100].In another study, PL-treated keratinocytes and ﬁbro-blasts exposed to UV displayed signiﬁcantly amelio-rated membrane integrity, mitigated lipid peroxida-tion, increased elastin expression and inhibited MMP-1 expression [101].Silymarin, a naturally occurring polyphenolic ﬂavo-noid or ﬂavonolignans compound derived from theseeds of the milk thistle plant Silybum marianu ,has been shown in several animal studies to exhibitanti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory and immunomodula-tory properties that may contribute to preventing skincancer as well as photo-ageing [102]. The beneﬁcialinﬂuence of silymarin is primarily ascribed to sily-bin, which has been demonstrated to be bioavailable
in skin and other tissues after systemic administra-tion [103]. In addition, topical application of silybinbefore or directly after UV exposure has been foundto confer potent protection against UV-induced epi-dermal damage, by depleting thymine dimer-positivecells [104].Pycnogenol, a plant-derived substance found inmany plant extracts, such as pine bark, grapes andapples, is rich in the potent free radical-scavenginggroup of compounds known as procyanidins (alsocalled proanthocyanidins). Procyanidins are also con-tained in several other plants or parts thereof knownfor conferring anti-oxidant activity, including grapeseed, grape skin, bilberry, cranberry, blackcurrant,green tea, black tea, blueberry, blackberry, straw-berry, black cherry, red wine and red cabbage. Inone study, Skh : hr hairless mice pretreated with pyc-nogenol concentrations of 0.05–0.2% demonstrated adose-dependent reduction of the inﬂammatory sun-
dose-dependent reduction of the inﬂammatory sun-burn reaction (oedema) following minimally inﬂam-matory daily exposures to solar-simulated UV radi-ation [105]. In another study, oral supplementationwith pycnogenol appeared to ease the effects ofUV radiation on the skin, speciﬁcally reducing ery-thema, in 21 volunteers [106]. The UV radiationlevel necessary to reach one minimal erythema dose(MED) was signiﬁcantly elevated during supplemen-tation. In addition to its anti-oxidant activity, pyc-nogenol is known to impart anti-inﬂammatory effects,which are believed to result, at least in part, fromits inhibition of IFN γ-induced expression of ICAM-1[107].Of course, sun avoidance and sunscreen use arewell established to be the primary components inanti-ageing regimens, although still underappreciatedby many segments of the public. A recent studyin the Journal of the American Medical Association
well established to be the primary components inanti-ageing regimens, although still underappreciatedby many segments of the public. A recent studyin the Journal of the American Medical Associationspeciﬁcally reinforces the utility of sunscreen; inthis study, children with the proclivity to freckledeveloped 30–40% fewer freckles when daily treatedwith an SPF 30 sunscreen, as compared to children nottreated with a sunscreen [108]. This study buttressesdermatologists’ recommendations for sun protectionin preventing the development of these pigmented
in preventing the development of these pigmentedlesions, which not only make the skin appear olderbut are associated with an increased risk of melanoma.Clearly, sun avoidance is not easy to manage and isoften impossible, as well as being an unpopular orpoorly received suggestion among many patients. Thatsaid, practitioners should gauge the receptivity of theirpatients and recommend as stringent a sun-avoidanceregimen as will likely be accepted. At the very least,patients should be discouraged from any exposure totanning beds or engaging in unnecessary sun exposure,particularly between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Using aWood’s light to show patients the sun damage thatthey have already incurred can be a useful approachtoward persuading them to curb their sun exposure andstrive for feasible sun avoidance. This demonstrationcan also convince patients to incorporate protectivemeasures, such as use of sunscreens, anti-oxidants andretinoids, particularly si nce many patients mistakenly
believe, before being convinced otherwise, that theirsun exposure is minimal and that any behaviouralmodiﬁcation is unwarranted. Indeed, sunscreen shouldbe recommended for daily use, even when the patientintends to remain indoors. Along these lines, patientsshould be reminded that UV A rays have the capacityto penetrate glass, so they should also limit theirrisk at home and at work by not lingering near sun-splashed windows. UV A shields placed on windowscan provide some protection, however. Finally, sun-protective clothing, such as a broad-brimmed hat andSPF 45 clothing, should be encouraged for patientsas general advice for when sun avoidance is notpractical and for those who anticipate prolongedexposure.ConclusionSkin ageing is a dynamic, multifactorial process,best characterized and understood in dichotomousJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 249expressions: intrinsic or natural ageing is cellularlydetermined as a function of heredity, is inevitableand results in cutaneous alterations; extrinsic ageing,which also manifests in cutaneous changes, originatesfrom exogenous sources and is avoidable. In otherwords, intrinsic ageing is a natural result of the passageof time, and not subject to the realm or whims ofhuman control or behaviour. Extrinsic ageing resultsfrom various factors, but exposure to the sun is theprimary source. Therefore, photo-ageing is roughlysynonymous with, although technically a subset of,extrinsic ageing.The American Academy of Dermatology, practisingdermatologists and other clinicians have been preach-ing the mantra that ‘there is no such thing as a healthytan’, with some portion of the populace absorbingthis message. Citing the attendant wrinkling and pig-
mentary changes associated with photo-ageing and thepotentially more serious consequences of chronic sunexposure can be effective approaches for doctors, asthis method appeals to an individual’s strong concernabout appearance. The clinical appearance of photo-ageing is characterized by rough, dry skin, mottledpigmentation and wrinkling. Such cutaneous manifes-tations, particularly when extensive or severe, can beharbingers of skin cancer. It is important for physiciansto impress upon patients that photodamage representsthe cutaneous signs of premature ageing. A summaryof the role of telomeres in cellular ageing and cancerand/or a brief discussion of the differences betweenintrinsic and extrinsic ageing might prove useful inaltering the behaviour of patients and stemming thetide of photodamage, photo-ageing, and photo-inducedskin cancers.The only known defences against photo-ageingbeyond sun avoidance are using sunscreens to block
or reduce the amount of UV reaching the skin,using retinoids to inhibit collagenase synthesis and topromote collagen production, and using anti-oxidants,particularly in combination, to reduce and neutralizefree radicals.References1. Unna PG. Histopathologie der Hautkrankheiten . A. Herschwald:Berlin, 1894.2. Uitto J. Understanding premature skin aging. N Engl J Med1997; 337(20):1463–1465.3. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.4. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen.2001; 98(10):1091–1095.5. Lovell CR, Smolenski KA, Duance VC, Light ND, Young S,Dyson M. Type I and III collagen content and ﬁbre distributionin normal human skin during ageing. Br J Dermatol1987; 117(4):419–428.6. Lavker RM. Structural alterations in exposed and unexposed agedskin. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):59–66.7. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Aging of skin. In Fitzpatrick’s
Dermatology in General Medicine Vo l 2 , 5thedn. McGraw-Hill:New York, 1999; 1700.8. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.9. Geserick C, Blasco MA. Novel roles for telomerase in aging.Mech Ageing Dev 2006; 127(6):579–583 [Epub 3 March 2006].10. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss. ClinExp Dermatol 2001; 26(7):562–565.11. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss. ClinExp Dermatol. 2001; 26(7):562–565.12. Pendino F, Tarkanyi I, Dudognon C, Hillion J, Lanotte M,Aradi J, et al. Telomeres and telomerase: pharmacological targetsfor new anticancer strategies? Curr Cancer Drug Targets2006; 6(2):147–180.13. Boukamp P. Skin aging: a role for telomerase and telomeredynamics? Curr Mol Med. 2005; 5(2):171–177.14. Nakamura K, Izumiyama-Shimomura N, Sawabe M, Arai T,Aoyagi Y, Fujiwara M, et al. Comparative analysis of telomere
lengths and erosion with age in human epidermis and lingualepithelium. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119(5):1014–1019.15. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.16. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skin
15. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.16. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skinaging/photoaging. Micron 2004; 35(3):155–159.17. Pendino F, Tarkanyi I, Dudognon C, Hillion J, Lanotte M,Aradi J, et al. Telomeres and telomerase: pharmacological targetsfor new anticancer strategies? Curr Cancer Drug Targets2006; 6(2):147–180.18. Lebel M, Leder P. A deletion within the murine Werner syn-drome helicase induces sensitivity to inhibitors of topoisomeraseand loss of cellular pro liferative capacity. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA 1998; 95(22):13097–13102.19. Ahn B, Harrigan JA, Indig FE, Wilson DM III, Bohr V A.Regulation of WRN helicase activity in human base excisionrepair. JB i o lC h e m 2004; 279(51):53465–53474 [Epub 22September 2004].20. Poot M, Gollahon KA, Emond MJ, Silber JR, Rabinovitch PS.Werner syndrome diploid ﬁbroblasts are sensitive to 4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide and 8-methoxypsoralen: implications for
the disease phenotype. FA SE B J 2002; 16(7):757–758 [Epub 12Mar 2002].21. Lebel M, Leder P. A deletion within the murine Werner syn-drome helicase induces sensitivity to inhibitors of topoisomeraseand loss of cellular pro liferative capacity. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA 1998; 95(22):13097–13102.22. Chang S, Multani AS, Cabrera NG, Naylor ML, Laud P, Lom-bard D, et al. Essential role of limiting telomeres in the pathogen-esis of Werner syndrome. Nat Genet 2004; 36(8):877–882 [Epub4 July 2004].23. Uitto J. Understanding premature skin aging. N Engl J Med1997; 337(20):1463–1465.24. Yao W, Malaviya R, Magliocco M, Gottlieb A. Topical treatmentof UVB-irradiated human subjects with EGCG, a green teapolyphenol, increases caspase-3 activity in keratinocytes. JA mAcad Dermatol 2005; 52(3, pt 2):150.25. Pinnell S, Lin F-Y, Grichnik J. A topical anti-oxidant solutioncontaining vitamin C, vitamin E, and ferulic acid prevents
ultraviolet radiation induced caspase-3 induction in skin. JA mAcad Dermatol 2005; 52(3, pt 2):158.26. Bosset S, Bonnet-Duquennoy M, Barre P, Chalon A, Kurfurst R,Bonte F, et al. Photo-ageing shows histological features ofchronic skin inﬂammation without clinical and molecularabnormalities. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149(4):826–835.27. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skinaging/photoaging. Micron 2004; 35(3):155–159.28. Kappes UP, Luo D, Potter M, Schulmeister K, Runger TM.Short- and long-wave UV light (UVB and UV A) inducesimilar mutations in human skin cells. J Invest Dermatol2006; 126(3):667–675.29. Bosset S, Bonnet-Duquennoy M, Barre P, Chalon A, Kurfurst R,Bonte F, et al. Photo-ageing shows histological features ofchronic skin inﬂammation without clinical and molecularabnormalities. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149(4):826–835.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright
Copyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
250 L. Baumann30. Marrot L, Bela ¨ıdi JP, Meunier JR. Importance of UV A photopro-tection as shown by genotoxic related endpoints: DNA damageand p53 status. Mutat Res 2005; 571(1–2):175–184.31. Sugimoto M, Yamashita R, Ueda M. Telomere length of theskin in association with chronological aging and photoaging.J Dermatol Sci 2006; 43(1):43–47 [Epub 9 March 2006].32. Lavker RM. Structural alterations in exposed and unexposed agedskin. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):59–66.33. Whitton JT, Everall JD. The thickness of the epidermis. Br JDermatol 1973; 89(5):467–476.34. El-Domyati M, Attia S, Saleh F, Brown D, Birk DE, Gasparro F,et al. Intrinsic aging vs. photoaging: a comparative histopatholog-ical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin. ExpDermatol 2002; 11(5):398–405.35. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-
protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.36. Katzberg AA. The area of the dermo–epidermal junction inhuman skin. Anat Rec 1958; 131:717.37. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Aging of skin. In Fitzpatrick’sDermatology in General Medicine Vo l 2 , 5thedn. McGraw-Hill:New York, 1999; 1697–1706.38. Kligman AM. Perspectives and problems in cutaneous gerontol-ogy. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):39–46.39. Orentreich N, Selmanowitz VJ. Levels of biological functionswith aging. Trans NY Acad Sci 1969; 31:992.40. Ibid.41. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.42. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.43. El-Domyati M, Attia S, Saleh F, Brown D, Birk DE, Gasparro F,et al. Intrinsic aging vs. photoaging: a comparative histopatholog-
ical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin. ExpDermatol 2002; 11(5):398–405.44. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.45. Kligman AM, Zheng P, Lavker RM. The anatomy and pathogen-esis of wrinkles. Br J Dermatol 1985; 113(1):37–42.46. Gniadecka M, Nielsen OF, Wessel S, Heidenheim M, Chris-tensen DH, Wulf HC. Water and protein structure in photoagedand chronically aged skin. J Invest Dermatol1998; 111(6):1129–1133.47. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.48. Oikarinen A. The aging of ski n: chronoaging versus photoaging.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 1990; 7(1):3–4.49. Shuster S, Black MM, McVitie E. The inﬂuence of age and sexon skin thickness, skin collagen and density. Br J Dermatol1975; 93(6):639–643.50. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.
Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.51. Grifﬁths CE, Russman AN, Majmudar G, Singer RS, Hamil-ton TA, V oorhees JJ. Restoration of collagen formation in photo-damaged human skin by tretinoin (retinoic acid). N Engl J Med1993; 329(8):530–535.52. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.53. Craven NM, Watson RE, Jones CJ, Shuttleworth CA, Kielty CM,Grifﬁths CE. Clinical features of photodamaged human skin areassociated with a reduction in collagen VII. Br J Dermatol1997; 137(3):344–350.54. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.
55. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skin
55. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skinaging. Ageing Res Rev 2002; 1(4):705–720.56. Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, Wang ZQ, Varani J, Kang S,et al. Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing andretinoid antagonism. Nature 1996; 379(6563):335–339.57. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.58. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skinaging. Ageing Res Rev 2002; 1(4):705–720.59. Mitchel RE. Chronic solar dermatosis: a light and elec-tron microscopic study of the dermis. J Invest Dermatol1967; 48(3):203–220.60. Tsuji T, Hamada T. Age-related changes in human dermal elasticﬁbres. Br J Dermatol 1981; 105(1):57–63.61. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.
1):571–585.62. Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, Herrmann G,Ma W, Kuhr L, et al. Photoaging of the skin from phenotypeto mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.63. Matsuoka L, Uitto J. Alterations in the elastic ﬁbers in cutaneousaging and solar elastosis. In Aging and the Skin , Balin A,Kligman AM (eds). Raven: New York, 1989; 141–151.64. Lavker RM. Cutaneous aging: ch ronologic versus photoaging. InPhotodamage (1st edn), Gilchrest BA (ed.). Blackwell Science:Cambridge, MA, 1995; 128.65. Montagna W, Carlisle K. Structural changes in aging human skin.J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):47–53.66. Escofﬁer C, de Rigal J, Rochefort A, Vasselet R, Leveque JL,Agache PG. Age-related mechani cal properties of human skin:anin vivo study. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 93(3):353–357.67. Ghersetich I, Lotti T, Campanile G, Grappone C, Dini G.Hyaluronic acid in cutaneous intrinsic aging. Int J Dermatol1994; 33(2):119–122.
1994; 33(2):119–122.68. Pearce RH, Grimmer BJ. Age and the chemical constitution ofnormal human dermis. J Invest Dermatol 1972; 58(6):347–361.69. Elsner P, Maibach HI. Cosmeceuticals and Active Cosmetics:Drugs versus Cosmetics (2nd edn). Marcel Dekker: New York,2005.70. Bernstein EF, Underhill CB, Hahn PJ, Brown DB, Uitto J.Chronic sun exposure alters both the content and dis-tribution of dermal glycosaminoglycans. Br J Dermatol1996; 135(2):255–262.71. Ghersetich I, Lotti T, Campanile G, Grappone C, Dini G.Hyaluronic acid in cutaneous intrinsic aging. Int J Dermatol1994; 33(2):119–122.72. Tammi R, S ¨a¨am¨anen AM, Maibach HI, Tammi M. Degradationof newly synthesized high molecular mass hyaluronan in theepidermal and dermal compar tments of human skin in organculture. J Invest Dermatol 1991; 97(1):126–130.73. Sakai S, Yasuda R, Sayo T, Ishikawa O, Inoue S. Hyaluronanexists in the normal stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol2000; 114(6):1184–1187.
2000; 114(6):1184–1187.74. Rieger M. Hyaluronic acid in cosmetics. Cosm Toil1998; 113(3):35–42.75. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.76. Gilchrest BA, Stoff JS, Soter NA. Chronologic aging alters theresponse to ultraviolet-induced inﬂammation in human skin.J Invest Dermatol 1982; 79(1):11–15.77. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.78. Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, Herrmann G,Ma W, Kuhr L, et al. Photoaging of the skin from phenotypeto mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
to mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 25179. Ghadially R, Brown BE, Sequeira-Martin SM, Feingold KR,Elias PM. The aged epidermal pe rmeability barrier. Structural,functional, and lipid biochemi cal abnormalities in humans and asenescent murine model. J Clin Invest 1995; 95(5):2281–2290.80. Tezuka T, Qing J, Saheki M, Kusuda S, Takahashi M. Terminaldifferentiation of facial epidermis of the aged: immunohistochem-ical studies. Dermatology 1994; 188(1):21–24.81. Nelson BR, Majmudar G, Grifﬁths CE, Gillard MO, Dixon AE,Tavakkol A, et al. Clinical improvement following dermabrasionof photoaged skin correlates w ith synthesis of collagen I. ArchDermatol 1994; 130(9):1136–1142.82. Ostler EL, Wallis CV, Aboalchamat B, Faragher RG. Telomeraseand the cellular lifespan: implications of the aging process.J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2000; 13(suppl 6):1467–1476.83. Baumann L. How to prevent photoaging? J Invest Dermatol2005; 125(4):xii–xiii.
2005; 125(4):xii–xiii.84. Varani J, Warner RL, Ghar aee-Kermani M, Phan SH, Kang S,Chung JH, et al. Vitamin A antagonizes decreased cell growthand elevated collagen-degradin g matrix metalloproteinases andstimulates collagen accumulatio n in naturally aged human skin.J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114(3):480–486.85. Nusgens BV, Humbert P, Rougier A, Colige AC, Haftek M,Lambert CA, et al. Topically applied vitamin C enhances themRNA level of collagens I and III, their processing enzymesand tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in the humandermis. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(6):853–859.86. Kockaert M, Neumann M. Systemic and topical drugs for agingskin. J Drugs Dermatol 2003; 2(4):435–441.87. Margelin D, Medaisko C, Lombard D, Picard J, Fourtanier A.Hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulfate are selectively stimulatedby retinoic acid in irradiated and nonirradiated hairless mouseskin. J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106(3):505–509.
88. Tajima S, Hayashi A, Suzuki T. Elastin expression is up-regulated by retinoic acid but not by retinol in chick embryonicskin ﬁbroblasts. J Dermatol Sci 1997; 15(3):166–172.89. Matheson AJ, Perry CM. Glucosamine: a review of itsuse in the management of osteoarthritis. Drugs Aging2003; 20(14):1041–1060.90. Fitzpatrick RE. E ndogenous growth factor s as cosmeceuticals.Dermatol Surg 2005; 31(7, pt 2):827–831; discussion, 831.91. Fisher GJ, V oorhees JJ. Molecular mechanisms of photoagingand its prevention by retinoic aci d: ultraviolet irradiation inducesMAP kinase signal transduction cascades that induce Ap-1-regulated matrix metalloproteinases that degrade human skinin vivo .J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1998; 3(1):61–68.92. Kang S, Chung JH, Lee JH, Fisher GJ, Wan YS, Duell EA, et al.Topical N-acetyl cysteine and genis tein prevent ultraviolet-light-induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.
J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.93. Kang S, Chung JH, Lee JH, Fisher GJ, Wan YS, Duell EA, et al.Topical N-acetyl cysteine and genis tein prevent ultraviolet-light-induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.94. Greul AK, Grundmann JU, Heinrich F, Pﬁtzner I, Bernhardt J,Ambach A, et al. Photoprotection of UV-irradiated human skin:an antioxidative combination of vitamins E and C, carotenoids,selenium and proanthocyanidins. Skin Pharm Appl Skin Physiol2002; 15(5):307–315.95. Passi S, De Pita O, Grandinetti M, Simotti C, Littaru GP. Thecombined use of oral and topical lipophilic anti-oxidants increasestheir levels both in sebum and stratum corneum. Biofactors2003; 18(1–4):289–297.96. Lin FH, Lin JY, Gupta RD, Tournas JA, Burch JA, Selim MA,et al. Ferulic acid stabilizes a solution of vitamins C and Eand doubles its photoprotection of skin. J Invest Dermatol2005; 125(4):826–832.
2005; 125(4):826–832.97. Papucci L, Schiavone N, Witort E, Donnini M, Lapucci A, Tem-pestini A, et al. Coenzyme q10 prevents apoptosis by inhibiting
2005; 125(4):826–832.97. Papucci L, Schiavone N, Witort E, Donnini M, Lapucci A, Tem-pestini A, et al. Coenzyme q10 prevents apoptosis by inhibitingmitochondrial depolarization independently of its free radicalscavenging property. JB i o lC h e m 2003; 278(30):28220–28228.98. Beyer RE, Ernster L. The anti-oxidant role of coenzyme Q. InHighlights in Ubiquinone Research , Lenaz G, et al (eds). Taylorand Francis: London, 1990; 191–213.99. Middlekamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Garcia-CaballeroT, Rius-Diaz F, Fitzpatrick TB, et al. Orally administeredPolypodium leucotomos extract decreases psoralen–UV A-induced phototoxicity, pigmentation, and damage of human skin.J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 50(1):41–49.100. Middlekamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Goukassian D,Rius-Diaz F, Mihm MC, et al.O r a l Polypodium leucotomosextract decreases ultr aviolet-induced damage of human skin. JA mAcad Dermatol 2004; 51(6):910–918.
Acad Dermatol 2004; 51(6):910–918.101. Philips N, Smith J, Keller T, Gonzalez S. Predominant effects ofPolypodium leucotomos on membrane integrity, lipid peroxida-tion, and expression of elastin and matrixmetalloproteinase-1 inultraviolet radiation exposed ﬁbroblasts, and keratinocytes. JD e r -matol Sci 2003; 32(1):1–9.102. Katiyar SK. Silymarin and skin cancer prevention: anti-inﬂammatory, anti-oxidant and immunomodulatory effects(review). Int J Oncol 2005; 26(1):169–176.103. Zhao J, Agarwal R. Tissue distribution of silibinin, the majoractive constituent of silymarin, in mice and its associationwith enhancement of phase II enzymes: implications in cancerchemoprevention. Carcinogenesis 1999; 20(11):2101–2108.104. Dhanalakshmi S, Mallikarjuna GU, Singh RP, Agarwal R. Silib-inin prevents ultraviolet radia tion-caused skin damages in SKH-1hairless mice via a decrease in thymine dimer positive cells andan up-regulation of p53-p21/Cip1 in epidermis. Carcinogenesis
2004; 25(8):1459–1465.105. Sime S, Reeve VE. Protection from inﬂammation, immunosup-pression and carcinogenesis induced by UV radiation in mice bytopical pycnogenol. Photochem Photobiol 2004; 79(2):193–198.106. Saliou C, Rimbach G, Moini H, McLaughlin L, Hosseini S,Lee J, et al. Solar ultraviolet-induced erythema in humanskin and nuclear factor-kappa-B -dependent gene expression inkeratinocytes are modulated by a French maritime pine barkextract. Free Radic Biol Med 2001; 30(2):154–160.107. Bito T, Roy S, Sen CK, Packer L. Pine bark extract pycnogenoldownregulates IFN-gamma-induced adhesion of T cells to humankeratinocytes by inhibiting i nducible ICAM-1 expression. FreeRadic Biol Med 2000; 28(2):219–227.108. Gallagher RP, Rivers JK, Lee TK, Bajdik CD, McLean DI,Coldman AJ. Broad-spectrum sunscreen use and the developmentof new nevi in white children: a randomized controlled trial. JA mMed Assoc 2000; 283(22):2955–2960.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/path
J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
