The Pathogenesis of Photoaging: The Role of Neutrophilsand Neutrophil-Derived EnzymesFeiko Rijken1and Piet L.B. Bruijnzeel1The hallmark of photoaged skin is solar elastosis,which is probably an end product of elastic fiberdegradation. Exposure of human skin to a certainthreshold of UV, infrared radiation (IR), and heat leadsto an influx of neutrophils. These neutrophils arepacked with potent proteolytic enzymes capable ofdegrading collagen and, particularly, elastic fibers.Neutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes are heldresponsible for the extracellular matrix (ECM) damageobserved in several non-dermatological conditions.Furthermore, neutrophil elastase, a major product ofneutrophils, is strongly associated with solar elastosisin mice. Taken together with our data that showin vivo proteolytic activity of neutrophil-derived
elastase and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) inUV-exposed skin, we have hypothesized earlier thatneutrophils are major contributors to the photoagingprocess. Although several groups have shown thatMMPs are also induced in skin exposed to relativelylow doses of UV, IR, and heat, clinical data indicatethat high(er) doses of UV, IR, and heat are necessary toinduce photoaging or photoaging-like pathology inthe skin. Therefore, we propose that MMPs generatedby suberythemogenic doses of UV and low doses ofIR/heat are involved in cellular processes other thanECM degradation.Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009) 14,67–72; doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.15CLINICAL AND HISTOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND
CLINICAL AND HISTOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS ANDTHE ORIGIN OF ELASTOTIC MATERIAL: A HALLMARK OFPHOTOAGED SKIN‘‘Photoaging’’ is the process by which sunlight or artificial UVgradually induces clinical and histological changes in skin.Typical photoaged skin is characterized by dryness, a roughtexture, irregular pigmentation, telangiectasia, yellowishcolor, plaque-like thickening, deep creases, and fine wrinkles(Gilchrest, 1989). These clinical changes are reflected byhistological changes in both the epidermis and dermis. Theepidermis may be relatively normal or show alterations suchas epidermal hyperplasia or atrophy, disappearance ofdermal papillae, thickening of the basement membrane,focally increased numbers and irregular distribution ofmelanocytes and melanosomes, atypical keratinocytes, para-keratosis, and thickening of the stratum corneum. Theseepidermal changes are responsible for irregular pigmentationand roughening of the skin surface (Gilchrest, 1989).
The most conspicuous dermal histological defect, and thehallmark of photoaged skin, is the accumulation of elastoticmaterial in the upper and middle dermis (so-called solarelastosis). By electron microscopy, fully developed photo-aged skin shows alternating areas of fibrous, granular, andhomogenous elastotic material (Braverman and Fonferko,1982; Tsuji, 1984; Matsuta et al ., 1987). The fibrous areasconsist of increased numbers of thickened and tangled elasticfibers. The granular and homogenous areas are believed to bethe result of fragmentation of these thickened and tangledfibers. Although there is convincing evidence that theelastotic material is derived from elastic fibers, its origin hasbeen the subject of much debate (Matsuta et al., 1987). Otherhypotheses include that the elastotic material could be (1) adegradation product of collagen fibers (Mitchell, 1967), (2) adegradation product of both collagen and elastic fibers
(Niebauer and Stockinger, 1965), and (3) an abnormalproduct of UV-stimulated fibroblasts (Nurnberger et al .,1978). Braverman and Fonferko (1982) observed decreasedamounts of collagen in areas of elastosis, but found nomorphological evidence that collagen degeneration partici-pated in the production of the elastotic material. On the basisof electron microscopic studies and immunohistochemicalstaining patterns of multiple markers of the extracellularmatrix (ECM), several groups have concluded that the
of electron microscopic studies and immunohistochemicalstaining patterns of multiple markers of the extracellularmatrix (ECM), several groups have concluded that theelastotic material in photoaged skin must be derivedprimarily from degenerated elastic fibers (Chen et al., 1986;Matsuta et al., 1987).Other observations in the upper and middle dermis ofphotoaged skin include the presence of deformed collagenfibers, a decrease in the total amount of collagen, increasedamounts of ground substance, and dilated blood vessels(Oikarinen, 1990).&2009 The Society for Investigative Dermatology www.jidonline.org 67REVIEWReceived 14 November 2008; accepted 13 January 20091Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan, Utrecht, The NetherlandsCorrespondence: Dr Feiko Rijken, Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherl ands.E-mail: F.rijken@umcutrecht.nl
E-mail: F.rijken@umcutrecht.nlAbbreviations: ECM, extracellular matrix; IR, infrared radiation; MED, minimal erythema dose; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; SSR, solar simulat ing radiation
THE ROLE OF UV-INDUCED REACTIVE OXYGENSPECIES: DIRECT AND INDIRECT DAMAGE TO THE ECMIn vivo , under normal circumstances, low levels of reactiveoxygen species are generated continuously. These reactiveoxygen species are involved in signaling pathways, cellactivation, cell proliferation, and cell differentiation (Saueret al ., 2001). The body defends itself against excessiveendogenous or exogenous oxidative stress of this sort withantioxidant enzymes and non-enzymatic antioxidants. Dur-ing UV exposure, however, this protective system can beoverwhelmed, resulting in direct and indirect damage tocellular and extracellular components, including the ECMproteins (Sander et al., 2002). Furthermore, depending on thethreshold of damage, oxidative stress can result in an influxof inflammatory cells including neutrophils (Scharffetter-Kochanek et al., 1997)NEUTROPHIL INFLUX INDUCED BY ERYTHEMOGENIC
NEUTROPHIL INFLUX INDUCED BY ERYTHEMOGENICBUT ALSO SUBERYTHEMOGENIC DOSES OF UVNeutrophils are known for their destructive capacity and areconsidered to be responsible for the ECM damage observed inseveral conditions (Janoff, 1972; Weiss, 1989; Gadek, 1992;Golub et al ., 1995). Furthermore, neutrophils have beenreported to infiltrate the skin following exposure to erythe-mogenic doses of UVB, solar simulating radiation (SSR), andnatural sunlight (Fisher et al., 2001; Rijken et al., 2004; Choet al., 2008). There are several explanations concerning whyneutrophils have received relatively little attention withrespect to photoaging. First, neutrophils cannot be recog-nized morphologically in frozen skin sections and may evenbe difficult to recognize in paraffin-embedded skin sectionswhen their numbers are small. A neutrophil elastase stainingor other markers for neutrophils are often necessary toappreciate the number of infiltrating neutrophils (Rijken et al.,
2005). Second, the hypothesis by which keratinocyte- andfibroblast-derived MMPs are considered responsible forthe ECM damage seen in photoaged skin (Fisher et al .,1997) has received wide support and may have diverted theattention from other possible mechanisms. Third, neutrophilsand their products can only be detected in skin thathas recently been exposed to UV. Finally, a certain thresholdof damage is necessary for neutrophils to infiltrate theskin. This threshold, however, should not be overestimated.For example, depending on several factors, 15 minutes(or even less) of sun exposure can be enough for white-skinned persons to develop subtle sunburns (Samanek et al.,2006).It has been established that a single erythemogenic dose ofsunlight/UV is accompanied by infiltrating neutrophils(Rijken et al ., 2004, 2005). Moreover, depending on the
dose (which must not be too low) and the interval (whichmust not be too long), multiple suberythemogenic doses ofsunlight can also lead to erythema and an influx ofneutrophils. Novakovic et al . (2001) showed that exposureof white skin to a 0.75 minimal erythema dose (MED) of SSRfor 4 consecutive days would produce the same intensity oferythema as one exposure to 3 MED of SSR. Lee et al.exposed white skin to 0.5 MED of SSR for 4 consecutive days,which led to erythema and an influx of neutrophils (manu-script in preparationMost studies investigating the effect of chronic UVexposure on the skin of laboratory animals have not beenfocussed on infiltrating neutrophils. In addition, tissuesamples in these studies may have been collected at a timewhen the neutrophilic infiltrate had already resolved.Furthermore, multiple ‘‘suberythemogenic’’ doses of UVcan also induce a neutrophil influx in animal (mouse) skin(Gomi et al ., poster presentation IID, 2008). Importantly,
mouse skin exposed to ‘‘erythemogenic’’ doses of UV tendsto show edema rather than erythema (van Weelden et al .,1988). In sum, we believe that it is important to useneutrophil-specific markers to determine the presence orabsence of neutrophils in irradiated human or animal skin.
1988). In sum, we believe that it is important to useneutrophil-specific markers to determine the presence orabsence of neutrophils in irradiated human or animal skin.KERATINOCYTE- AND FIBROBLAST-DERIVED MATRIXMETALLOPROTEINASES VERSUS NEUTROPHIL-DERIVEDPROTEOLYTIC ENZYMESA hypothetical model for the pathophysiology of photoaginghas been presented by Fisher et al . (1996, 1997). Theysuggested that skin damage after a single exposure to UV isonly partially repaired and that microscopic damage accu-mulates after each exposure, eventually leading to theclinical and histopathological signs of photoaged skin. Fisheret al. (1996, 1997) postulated that this microscopic damage is
caused by specific matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Theyshowed that MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-9 are inducedfollowing exposure of human skin to suberythemogenicdoses of UVB. These MMPs are capable of breaking downskin collagens. On the basis of the (1) localization ofimmunohistochemically stained MMPs, (2) in situ hybridiza-tion of mRNA, (3) in situ zymography, and (4) literature data,they concluded that the MMPs were fibroblast and keratino-cyte derived. The expression of MMP protein by fibroblastsfollowing UV exposure was, however, not based on co-localization of MMPs and a specific marker for fibroblasts,but was based on the morphology of MMP-positive cells inin vivo experiments and on in vitro data. In their in vivostudies, MMP mRNA was located mostly in the epidermis andMMP protein was also induced mainly in this compartment(Fisher et al., 1997). They concluded that keratinocytes are
the major source of MMPs. However, the ECM damageobserved in photoaged skin is located mostly in the upper andmiddle dermis. To explain this, they proposed that keratino-cyte-derived MMPs diffuse from epidermis into the dermis,where most of the MMP enzyme activity had been detected.In a separate study, Fisher et al . (2001) studied neutrophil-derived MMP-8; MMP-8 was induced in skin exposed to 2MED of UVB and 2 MED of SSR. On the basis of the findingthat trans-retinoic acid failed to inhibit MMP-8 expressionfollowing UV exposure, but did inhibit degradation ofcollagen type I (indirect detection method), they concludedthat MMP-8 was not enzymatically active and therefore didnot contribute to photoaging.More recently, our group has suggested that neutrophils,rather than keratinocytes and fibroblasts, may be the keyplayers in photoaging (Rijken et al ., 2006). In a series of68 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14F Rijken and PLB Bruijnzeel
The Pathogenesis of Photoaging
experiments we showed that, following exposure of whiteskin to erythemogenic doses of SSR, infiltrating neutrophilsand not keratinocytes or fibroblasts were the major sources ofproteolytic enzymes (particular MMPs and neutrophil elas-tase, the latter being quantitatively most prominent). Further-more, prominent in vivo protein staining and in situ enzymeactivity was detected only in skin exposed to erythemogenicdoses and not in skin exposed to suberythemogenic doses ofSSR (Rijken et al., 2004, 2005).Despite a significant amount of literature and clinical datathat directly or indirectly supports our view (Janoff, 1972;Weiss, 1989; Nathan, 2006), neutrophils had only beenreported as likely important contributors to photoaging in amurine model (Starcher and Conrad, 1995). Neutrophils are
the most abundant white blood cell and, as mentionedabove, following a certain threshold of tissue damage, theyleave the bloodstream rapidly and migrate toward sites oftissue damage. A major product of activated neutrophils andan important immunohistochemical marker is neutrophilelastase (Shapiro, 2002). Together with cathepsin G andproteinase-3, neutrophil elastase belongs to the group ofserine proteases produced by neutrophils. These serineproteases are normally rapidly and irreversibly inhibited byeffective plasma antiproteinases ( a1-proteinase inhibitor, a2-macroglobulin, and secretory leucoproteinase inhibitor)
present in the blood and the interstitium (Weiss, 1989).Neutrophil elastase is a potent proteolytic enzyme capable ofdegrading both elastic and collagen fibers (Travis, 1988). Thebiological functions of neutrophil elastase include involve-ment in migration of neutrophils by means of focalproteolysis, killing of microorganisms, and degradation oractivation of various proteins, including ECM proteins,receptors, cytokines, and chemokines (Shapiro, 2002; Chuaand Laurent, 2006).Neutrophils have been shown to express MMP-8, MMP-9,and MMP-12 (Murphy et al., 1980; Ilumets et al., 2007), andin our studies MMP-1 also co-localized with neutrophilelastase in infiltrating cells following SSR exposure (Rijkenet al ., 2005). Although, similar to other cells including
fibroblasts, these proteolytic enzymes are normally stored invesicles in an inactive form, our studies provide convincingevidence that they are, in fact, enzymatically active in UV-exposed skin (Rijken et al., 2004, 2005; Chua and Laurent,2006). The probable mechanism by which neutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes are activated (and/or preventedfrom being inactivated by antiproteinases) and cause ECMdamage is reviewed by Weiss (1989) and Chua and Laurent(2006). It involves complex interaction with nicotinamideadenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-derived oxygenmetabolites, which inactivate antiproteinases and activateMMPs, and it occurs at or just outside the plasma membranesof neutrophils. It is likely that in this setting, neutrophil-derived enzymes, particularly neutrophil elastase, cause ECMdamage that may eventually result in solar elastosis.Although the role of neutrophils has been under-rated in
photoaging, neutrophils and their products have beenidentified as a major cause of tissue destruction in severalother conditions, including lung emphysema, rheumatoidarthritis, periodontitis, and wound infection (Gadek, 1992;Golub et al., 1995; Edwards and Hallett, 1997; Singer andMcClain, 2002). The important role of neutrophil elastase inphotoaging of mouse skin has convincingly been shown byStarcher and Conrad (1995), who investigated the effect ofchronic UV exposure on neutrophil elastase-deficient mice.Neutrophil elastase and wild-type mice were exposed to acombination of UVA/UVB, three times a week, for a period of6 months. At the end of this period, the neutrophil elastase-deficient mice had not developed any significant solarelastosis, in contrast to the wild-type mice.In humans, black skin is much less susceptible to sunburn
In humans, black skin is much less susceptible to sunburnand photoaging than white skin, most likely due todifferences in pigmentation (Taylor, 2002). A higher melanincontent and a different melanosomal dispersion pattern inblack skin provide better protection against the damagingeffects of sunlight and increase the physical dose of sunlightnecessary to induce a sunburn. As mentioned above, sunburnis accompanied by an influx of neutrophils. Thus, in blackskin, the threshold for neutrophils to begin infiltrating the skinis increased and, as a consequence and in accordance withour model, photoaging would be delayed. Taken together,direct and indirect evidence suggests that neutrophils andneutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes are likely to con-tribute to the process of photoaging.UV-INDUCED MMPs DERIVED FROM DIFFERENT CELL
UV-INDUCED MMPs DERIVED FROM DIFFERENT CELLTYPES: ECM DEGRADATION OR OTHER(EXTRA)CELLULAR FUNCTIONS?In our studies, significant amounts of MMPs were inducedonly in skin exposed to erythemogenic doses of SSR, andthese MMPs were linked to infiltrating neutrophils (Rijkenet al ., 2004, 2005). Lahmann et al . (2001) also found thatMMP-1 mRNA was induced only by erythemogenic doses ofSSR. However, it has been shown that specific MMPs areinduced by suberythemogenic doses of UVB and bycombinations of infrared radiation (IR)/visible light, and evenby solar heat alone (Fisher et al ., 1996; Cho et al ., 2008).These MMPs are probably keratinocyte and/or fibroblastderived, as there are very few or no infiltrating neutrophils atthis stage.It is generally assumed that these keratinocyte- and/orfibroblast-derived MMPs are major contributors to photoa-ging. We here suggest that sunlight-induced keratinocyte-derived MMPs may actually be involved in cellular processesother than ECM damage.
Recently, Cho et al . (2008) showed that significantamounts of MMP-1 and MMP-9 mRNA and protein (up to90% of the expression in non-protected sunlight-exposedskin) are induced in sun-exposed, cloth-covered skin. Thisindicates that solar heat induces MMP-1 and MMP-9.However, in their experiments, solar heat did not induce anerythema reaction, and consequently neutrophils were notdetected in solar heat-exposed skin. The authors concludedthat as solar heat induces MMPs, it contributes to photoaging.We maintain that if solar heat-induced MMPs really play animportant role in photoaging, one would expect to find atleast some clinical signs of photoaging in skin surfaces thatwww.jidonline.org 69F Rijken and PLB BruijnzeelThe Pathogenesis of Photoaging
are regularly exposed to solar heat, such as the swimmingtrunk- and hair-covered skin. These signs are, however,absent. Therefore, solar heat-induced MMPs most likely serveanother function.An especially illustrative example of the lack of signs ofphotoaging in solar heat-exposed, cloth-covered skin isprovided by albino patients living in the tropics. One of thefirst signs of chronic photodamage in these patients is solarelastosis in the neck region, an area of the skin that is easilyand often unintentionally exposed to the sun (Figure 1)(Lookingbill et al ., 1995). In fact, many of these patientsalmost continuously suffer from sunburn in the neck region.On the other hand, their cloth-protected skin, which is alsoexposed to high doses of solar heat, does not sunburn anddoes not show signs of photoaging. On the basis of theexperiments of Cho et al. (2008), one would expect to find
MMP induction in solar heat-exposed, cloth-covered skin ofalbino patients, but apparently these MMPs do not contributeto photoaging.Incidentally, papers propagating the role of (solar) heat orIR in photoaging often refer to the clinical phenomenoncalled ‘‘erythema ab igne’’ or related conditions. Erythema abigne is a condition caused by repeated exposure to heat and/or IR, and it exhibits histological similarities to solar elastosis(Finlayson et al ., 1966; Chan and Chiu, 2007). However,contrary to the doses involved in sun-exposed, cloth-coveredskin, the induction of erythema ab igne involves much higherdoses of heat or IR. Furthermore, erythema ab igne, similar tosunburn, is characterized by an influx of neutrophils in itsacute phase (Finlayson et al., 1966). Therefore, also in thiscondition, neutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes may beresponsible for the histopathological changes that are present.Besides their function in ECM remodeling, MMPs are
known to be involved in signal transduction and, particularly,chemokine and cytokine (in)activation (Parks et al ., 2004;Pardo and Selman, 2005). For example, MMP-1, -2, -3, -7, -9,Figure 1 .An albino patient showing sunburn and photoaging in the neckregion. Note that solar heat-exposed but UV-protected, cloth-covered skinshows no signs of acute or chronic photodamage.Solar elastosis Accumulation of ECM damageInfiltrating neutrophilsCytokinesChemokinesMMPsECM degradationIncomplete repair of the ECMROSElastaseMMPsActivation andproliferationChronic effectAcute effectabcdFigure 2 .The pathogenesis of photoaging: we propose that, besides directly induced ECM damage by UV-induced reactive oxygen species, neutrophil-derivedproteolytic enzymes are the most important contributors to the ECM damage seen in photoaged skin. (a–d) We further propose that UV-, infrared (IR)-, and
solar heat-induced keratinocyte-derived matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play more important roles in cellular processes other than extracellu lar matrix (ECM)damage ( a).70 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14F Rijken and PLB BruijnzeelThe Pathogenesis of Photoaging
-12, and -17 can activate tumor necrosis factor (Parks et al.,2004) in vitro, and MMP-9 cleaves desmoglein on apoptotickeratinocytes (Cirillo et al ., 2007). Parks et al . (2004) statethat ‘‘matrix degradation is neither the sole nor the mainfunction of MMPs,’’ and that ‘‘a specific MMP secreted byone cell type would probably carry out a different functionthan the same MMP produced by another cell type.’’Taking all of this information together, we believe thatkeratinocyte-derived MMPs may be involved in other cellularprocesses (such as cell maturation, activation, migration, andproliferation) rather than in ECM degradation, whereasneutrophil-derived MMPs are the most likely candidates forthe latter activity.SUMMARY
SUMMARYMany studies investigating the pathophysiology of photoa-ging focus on the induction of MMPs and collagen degrada-tion. However, the most conspicuous histopathologicalchange observed in photoaged skin is related to the elasticand not the collagen fiber network. MMPs have been shownto be induced by suberythemogenic doses of UV, IR, andsolar heat. However, clinical data do not support a majorcontribution of low doses of UV (for example, sun-exposedblack skin and ventral forearm skin, which are regularlyexposed to suberythemogenic doses of UV but show little or
no solar elastosis), IR, and solar heat to the photoagingprocess. In fact, clinical data indicate that high(er) doses ofUV are necessary to induce photoaging. Furthermore, highdoses of IR/heat can lead to solar elastosis-like pathology.Exposure of skin to higher doses of UV (for example, subtlesunburn) and IR/heat (for example, erythema ab igne) leads toan influx of neutrophils that are packed with collagen andelastic fiber-degrading proteolytic enzymes. Neutrophilelastase, a major product of neutrophils, is an especiallypotent proteolytic enzyme, and it is associated with solarelastosis in mice. In humans, neutrophil-derived proteolyticenzymes are held responsible for the ECM damage observed
in lung emphysema, rheumatoid arthritis, wound infection,and other conditions. Here we propose that, besides directlyinduced ECM damage by UV-induced reactive oxygenspecies, neutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes are the mostimportant contributors to the ECM damage seen in photoagedskin (Figure 2). We further propose that UV-, IR-, and solarheat-induced keratinocyte-derived MMPs may play moreimportant roles in cellular processes other than ECM damage.CONFLICT OF INTERESTThe authors state no conflict of interest.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank J.W.M. Engelen and the Regional Dermatology Training Center inMoshi, Tanzania, for providing Figure 1.REFERENCESBraverman IM, Fonferko E (1982) Studies in cutaneous aging: I. The elasticfiber network. J Invest Dermatol 78:434–43Chan CC, Chiu HC (2007) Images in clinical medicine. Erythema ab igne.N Engl J Med 356:e8Chen VL, Fleischmajer R, Schwartz E, Palaia M, Timpl R (1986) Immuno-
chemistry of elastotic material in sun-damaged skin. J Invest Dermatol87:334–7Cho S, Lee MJ, Kim MS, Lee S, Kim YK, Lee DH et al. (2008) Infrared plusvisible light and heat from natural sunlight participate in the expressionof MMPs and type I procollagen as well as infiltration of inflammatorycell in human skin in vivo .J Dermatol Sci 50:123–33Chua F, Laurent GJ (2006) Neutrophil elastase: mediator of extracellularmatrix destruction and accumulation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 3:424–7Cirillo N, Femiano F, Gombos F, Lanza A (2007) Metalloproteinase 9 is the outerexecutioner of desmoglein 3 in apoptotic keratinocytes. Oral Dis 13:341–5Edwards SW, Hallett MB (1997) Seeing the wood for the trees: the forgottenrole of neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunol Today 18:320–4Finlayson GR, Sams WM Jr, Smith JG Jr (1966) Erythema ab igne:a histopathological study. J Invest Dermatol 46:104–8Fisher GJ, Choi HC, Bata-Csorgo Z, Shao Y, Datta S, Wang ZQ et al. (2001)
Ultraviolet irradiation increases matrix metalloproteinase-8 protein in
a histopathological study. J Invest Dermatol 46:104–8Fisher GJ, Choi HC, Bata-Csorgo Z, Shao Y, Datta S, Wang ZQ et al. (2001)Ultraviolet irradiation increases matrix metalloproteinase-8 protein inhuman skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 117:219–26Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, Wang ZQ, Varani J, Kang S et al. (1996)Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing and retinoidantagonism. Nature 379:335–9Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, Voorhees JJ (1997)Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultraviolet light.N Engl J Med 337:1419–28Gadek JE (1992) Adverse effects of neutrophils on the lung. Am J Med92:27S–31SGilchrest BA (1989) Skin aging and photoaging: an overview. J Am AcadDermatol 21:610–3Golub LM, Sorsa T, Lee HM, Ciancio S, Sorbi D, Ramamurthy NS et al. (1995)Doxycycline inhibits neutrophil (PMN)-type matrix metalloproteinases inhuman adult periodontitis gingiva. J Clin Periodontol 22:100–9
Gomi T, Takeuchi H, Watanabe H (2008) Increases in neutrophil infiltrationand neutrophil elastase by chronic low-dose UV irradiation in murineskin. J Invest Derm 128:S206 (abstr.)Ilumets H, Rytila P, Demedts I, Brusselle GG, Sovijarvi A, Myllarniemi Met al. (2007) Matrix metalloproteinases -8, -9 and -12 in smokers andpatients with stage 0 COPD. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2:369–79Janoff A (1972) Neutrophil proteases in inflammation. Annu Rev Med23:177–90Lahmann C, Young AR, Wittern KP, Bergemann J (2001) Induction of mRNAfor matrix metalloproteinase 1 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases1 in human skin in vivo by solar simulated radiation. PhotochemPhotobiol 73:657–63Lookingbill DP, Lookingbill GL, Leppard B (1995) Actinic damage and skincancer in albinos in northern Tanzania: findings in 164 patients enrolledin an outreach skin care program. J Am Acad Dermatol 32:653–8Matsuta M, Izaki S, Ide C, Izaki M (1987) Light and electron microscopic
immunohistochemistry of solar elastosis: a study with cutis rhomboidalisnuchae. J Dermatol 14:364–74Mitchell RE (1967) Chronic solar dermatosis: a light and electron microscopicstudy of the dermis. J Invest Dermatol 48:203–20Murphy G, Bretz U, Baggiolini M, Reynolds JJ (1980) The latent collagenaseand gelatinase of human polymorphonuclear neutrophil leucocytes.Biochem J 192:517–25Nathan C (2006) Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and opportunities.Nat Rev Immunol 6:173–82Niebauer G, Stockinger L (1965) On senile elastosis: histochemical andelectron microscopic studies. Arch Klin Exp Dermatol 221:122–43Novakovic L, Lee S, Orchard GE, Sheehan JM, Young AR, Walker SL (2001)Effects of solar-simulated radiation dose fractionation on CD1a+Langerhans cells and CD11b+ macrophages in human skin. Br JDermatol 145:237–44Nurnberger F, Schober E, Marsch WC, Dogliotti M (1978) Actinic elastosis inblack skin. A light- and electronmicroscopic study. Arch Dermatol Res262:7–14
262:7–14www.jidonline.org 71F Rijken and PLB BruijnzeelThe Pathogenesis of Photoaging
Oikarinen A (1990) The aging of skin: chronoaging versus photoaging.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 7:3–4Pardo A, Selman M (2005) MMP-1: the elder of the family. Int J Biochem CellBiol 37:283–8Parks WC, Wilson CL, Lopez-Boado YS (2004) Matrix metalloproteinases asmodulators of inflammation and innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol4:617–29Rijken F, Bruijnzeel PL, van Weelden H, Kiekens RC (2004) Responses ofblack and white skin to solar-simulating radiation: differences in DNAphotodamage, infiltrating neutrophils, proteolytic enzymes induced,keratinocyte activation, and IL-10 expression. J Invest Dermatol122:1448–55Rijken F, Kiekens RC, Bruijnzeel PL (2005) Skin-infiltrating neutrophilsfollowing exposure to solar-simulated radiation could play an importantrole in photoageing of human skin. Br J Dermatol 152:321–8Rijken F, Kiekens RC, van den Worm E, Lee PL, van Weelden H, Bruijnzeel PL(2006) Pathophysiology of photoaging of human skin: focus on
neutrophils. Photochem Photobiol Sci 5:184–9Samanek AJ, Croager EJ, Giesfor Skin Cancer PP, Milne E, Prince R,McMichael AJ et al. (2006) Estimates of beneficial and harmful sunexposure times during the year for major Australian population centres.Med J Aust 184:338–41Sander CS, Chang H, Salzmann S, Muller CS, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S,Elsner P et al. (2002) Photoaging is associated with protein oxidation inhuman skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 118:618–25Sauer H, Wartenberg M, Hescheler J (2001) Reactive oxygen species asintracellular messengers during cell growth and differentiation. CellPhysiol Biochem 11:173–86Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Wlaschek M, Brenneisen P, Schauen M, BlaudschunR, Wenk J (1997) UV-induced reactive oxygen species in photocarcino-genesis and photoaging. Biol Chem 378:1247–57Shapiro SD (2002) Neutrophil elastase: path clearer, pathogen killer, or justpathologic? Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 26:266–8
pathologic? Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 26:266–8Singer AJ, McClain SA (2002) Persistent wound infection delays epidermalmaturation and increases scarring in thermal burns. Wound RepairRegen 10:372–7Starcher B, Conrad M (1995) A role for neutrophil elastase in solar elastosis.Ciba Found Symp 192:338–46Taylor SC (2002) Skin of color: biology, structure, function, and implicationsfor dermatologic disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 46:S41–62Travis J (1988) Structure, function, and control of neutrophil proteinases. Am JMed 84:37–42Tsuji T (1984) The surface structural alterations of elastic fibers and elastoticmaterial in solar elastosis: a scanning electron microscopic study. J CutanPathol 11:300–8van Weelden H, de Gruijl FR, van der Putte SC, Toonstra J, van der Leun JC(1988) The carcinogenic risks of modern tanning equipment: is UV-Asafer than UV-B? Arch Dermatol Res 280:300–7Weiss SJ (1989) Tissue destruction by neutrophils. N Engl J Med 320:365–76
72 Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009), Volume 14F Rijken and PLB BruijnzeelThe Pathogenesis of Photoaging
