biomedicinesReviewTrifarotene: A Current Review and Perspectives in DermatologyTerenzio Cosio1,†, Monia Di Prete2,†, Roberta Gaziano3, Caterina Lanna1, Augusto Orlandi2,Paolo Di Francesco3, Luca Bianchi1and Elena Campione1,*/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Cosio, T.; Di Prete, M.;Gaziano, R.; Lanna, C.; Orlandi, A.;Di Francesco, P .; Bianchi, L.;Campione, E. Trifarotene: A CurrentReview and Perspectives inDermatology. Biomedicines 2021 ,9,237. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9030237Academic Editor: Ubaldo ArmatoReceived: 30 December 2020Accepted: 18 February 2021Published: 26 February 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access article
This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1Dermatology Unit, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1,00133 Rome, Italy; terenziocosio@gmail.com (T.C.); caterinalanna.cl@gmail.com (C.L.);luca.bianchi@uniroma2.it (L.B.)2Anatomic Pathology Unit, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy; diprete.monia@gmail.com (M.D.P .); orlandi@uniroma2.it (A.O.)3Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata,Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy; roberta.gaziano@uniroma2.it (R.G.); difra@uniroma2.it (P .D.F.)*Correspondence: elena.campione@uniroma2.it† Terenzio Cosio and Monia Di Prete are equal contributors and co-ﬁrst Authors.
Abstract: Retinoids have numerous applications in inﬂammatory, dyskeratotic, and oncohematologydiseases. Retinoids have now reached the fourth generation, progressively reducing toxicity whilstincreasing their efﬁcacy. Trifarotene is a new fourth-generation retinoid with a selective actionon RAR- γ. In this review, we reported the trials—both concluded and in progress—includingthe use of trifarotene in dermatological diseases. Studies were identiﬁed by searching electronicdatabases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, PubMed, Cochrane, Trials.gov) from 2012 to today and referencelists of respective articles. Only articles published in English language were included. Randomizedtrials evaluating trifarotene tolerability, safety, and efﬁcacy in congenital ichthyosis and acne havedemonstrated great results and mild side effects, leading to the approval by the FDA of trifarotenefor the treatment of lamellar ichthyosis in 2014, and of acne vulgaris in October 2019. No high-quality
randomized clinical trials have evaluated the treatment of primary cutaneous lymphomas withtrifarotene. Finally, we are hypothesizing future perspectives in the treatment of non-melanoma skincancers, fungal infections, photoaging, and hand-foot skin reactions with trifarotene.Keywords: acne; congenital ichthyosis; T cell lymphoma; RAR- γagonist; retinoid; trifarotene1. IntroductionVitamin A (or retinol, a diterpene), a cardinal micronutrient in human metabolism,is a lipophilic molecule composed by isoprene units. As an isoprenoid, it is characterizedby a hydrocarbon chain containing an ending hydroxyl. The term “retinoid” concernsboth natural and synthetic analogues of vitamin A. In synthetic analogues, such as etreti-nate, acitretin, or tazarotene, a benzene ring substitutes the cyclohexane. According tothe International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry and the International Union ofBiochemistry and Molecular Biology, retinoids are characterized by four isoprene units
with a head-to-tail structure [1].It is known that vitamin A and its synthetic analogues have a crucial role in modulating
with a head-to-tail structure [1].It is known that vitamin A and its synthetic analogues have a crucial role in modulatingsome skin functions; in particular, they regulate epidermal keratinization, differentiation,maturation, and proliferation [ 2]. Due to all these effects, retinoids are largely used indermato-oncology, both in treatment and chemo-prevention (non-melanoma skin cancers,primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas), and even in the treatment of cutaneous inﬂamma-tory diseases (acne vulgaris, rosacea, melasma, post-inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation,mycosis) and hyperproliferative conditions (ichtyosis, psoriasis, pityriasis rubra pilaris) [ 2].Moreover, they play a central role in protecting the skin from free radicals damage, asshown by their use also in photoaging. The aim of this review is to highlight the currentclinical application (Figure 1) of trifarotene and future perspectives in dermatology.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9030237 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomedicines
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 2 of 16Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 17  perpigmentation, mycosis) and hyperproliferative conditions (ichtyosis, psoriasis, pity-riasis rubra pilaris) [2]. Moreover, they play a central role in protecting the skin from free radicals damage, as shown by their use also in photoaging.  The aim of this review is to highlight the current clinical application (Fi gure 1) of trifarotene  and future perspectives in dermatology.   Figure 1. Graphic abstract representing the current applications of trifarotene in dermatological clinical trials and mo-lecular pathways. In the left section, the action of trifarotene in acne is reported. It performs both immunoregulato-ry—leading to an increase in the expression of transforming growth factor -β and interleukin -4—and keratoplastic func-tions, increasing the expression of keratins K1, K5, K10, K14, and K16. Moreover, it seems that trifarotene, like other ret-
inoids, may have a role in modulating skin microbiota. Finally, trifarotene weakens hemidesmosomes, interfering with cell adhesion. The migration of keratinocytes, caused by the drug, mediates its comedolytic property. The i mportance of trifarotene in lamellar ichthyosis has been reported in the central section. Trifarotene, by means of RAR -γ, causes an in-creased expression of transglutaminase 1, promoting keratinocyte cohesion. The rationale for the use of trifarotene in cutaneous T cell lymphomas has been reported in the right section. It seems to promote apoptosis and differentiation, upregulating caspase s 3 and 8, p21 and p27.  2. Mechanism of Action of Vitamin A and Its Analogues  Stimulated by Retinoic Acid 6 (STRA6), the cell surface receptor mediates the uptake of vitamin A from plasma [3]. Intracellular bioavailability is regulated by specific cyto-plasmic retinol and cellular retinoic acid -binding proteins, CRBPs and CRABPs, respec-
tively. CRBPs comprise four isoforms, fr om CRBP -1 to CRBP -4. The first one is the most represented in many tissues. CRABPs comprise two isoforms, CRABP -1 and CRABP -2. CRBPs and CRABPs specifically bind retinol  and retinoic acid (RA), respectively. CRABPs may regulate interactions between RA and its nuclear receptors, influencing bioavailable RA concentrations [4]. Retinoids can activate specific genes expression in-volved in keratinocytes differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, binding specific nu-clear receptors: retinoic acid receptor (RAR)  and retinoid X receptor (RXR) [5]. In hu-mans, there are three genes for each receptor (RAR -α, RAR -β, and RAR -γ and RXR -α, RXR -β, and RXR -γ), each one encoding for several isoforms [6]. RARs take steps as het-erodimers with RXRs to activate the transcriptio n of target genes, generally modulating factors, before their ligand, all -trans RA (ATRA) [5].
Upon RA binding, the RAR -RXR heterodimer recognizes specific DNA sequences, named retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) [7 ,8]. Recent data highlighted that RAR s activity can be controlled also by phosphorylation [9], and this event is essential for the regulatory potential of RARs. In fact, in the absence of its ligand, RAR -α binds RAREs, acting as a repressor on its target genes [10]. In contrast, RAR -β and RAR -γ isoforms Figure 1. Graphic abstract representing the current applications of trifarotene in dermatological clinical trials and molecularpathways. In the left section, the action of trifarotene in acne is reported. It performs both immunoregulatory—leading toan increase in the expression of transforming growth factor- βand interleukin-4—and keratoplastic functions, increasingthe expression of keratins K1, K5, K10, K14, and K16. Moreover, it seems that trifarotene, like other retinoids, may have
a role in modulating skin microbiota. Finally, trifarotene weakens hemidesmosomes, interfering with cell adhesion. The
a role in modulating skin microbiota. Finally, trifarotene weakens hemidesmosomes, interfering with cell adhesion. Themigration of keratinocytes, caused by the drug, mediates its comedolytic property. The importance of trifarotene in lamellarichthyosis has been reported in the central section. Trifarotene, by means of RAR- γ, causes an increased expression oftransglutaminase 1, promoting keratinocyte cohesion. The rationale for the use of trifarotene in cutaneous T cell lymphomashas been reported in the right section. It seems to promote apoptosis and differentiation, upregulating caspases 3 and 8, p21and p27.2. Mechanism of Action of Vitamin A and Its AnaloguesStimulated by Retinoic Acid 6 (STRA6), the cell surface receptor mediates the up-take of vitamin A from plasma [ 3]. Intracellular bioavailability is regulated by speciﬁccytoplasmic retinol and cellular retinoic acid-binding proteins, CRBPs and CRABPs, respec-
tively. CRBPs comprise four isoforms, from CRBP-1 to CRBP-4. The ﬁrst one is the mostrepresented in many tissues. CRABPs comprise two isoforms, CRABP-1 and CRABP-2.CRBPs and CRABPs speciﬁcally bind retinol and retinoic acid (RA), respectively. CRABPsmay regulate interactions between RA and its nuclear receptors, inﬂuencing bioavailableRA concentrations [ 4]. Retinoids can activate speciﬁc genes expression involved in ker-atinocytes differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, binding speciﬁc nuclear receptors:retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) [5]. In humans, there are threegenes for each receptor (RAR- α, RAR- β, and RAR- γand RXR- α, RXR- β, and RXR- γ), eachone encoding for several isoforms [ 6]. RARs take steps as heterodimers with RXRs toactivate the transcription of target genes, generally modulating factors, before their ligand,all-trans RA (ATRA) [5].Upon RA binding, the RAR-RXR heterodimer recognizes speciﬁc DNA sequences,
named retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) [ 7,8]. Recent data highlighted that RARsactivity can be controlled also by phosphorylation [ 9], and this event is essential for theregulatory potential of RARs. In fact, in the absence of its ligand, RAR- αbinds RAREs,acting as a repressor on its target genes [ 10]. In contrast, RAR- βand RAR- γisoforms poorlyinteract with corepressors, since in these receptors, the corepressor-docking site is closedeven in the absence of its ligand [ 11,12]. It is still unclear whether silencing RA target genestranscription is gene or cell speciﬁc. One possibility is the recruitment of unconventional co-regulators that inhibit RARs transcriptional activity, binding RAR itself [ 13]. On the otherhand, the ubiquitin-proteasome system could degrade RARs and RXRs determining the
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 3 of 16conclusion of the transcriptional process [ 12]. The fact that it has been observed that RARsare ubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome further supports this hypothesis [ 14,15].Retinoids can be classiﬁed into three generations, in respect of molecular structuresand properties (Figure 2):1. The ﬁrst generation is composed by natural retinoids, obtained modifying polargroups of vitamin A, which do not act selectively: retinol and its metabolites, such asretinal, tretinoin, isotretinoin, and alitretinoin;2. The second generation is constituted by monoaromatic retinoids, synthetic com-pounds where a benzene ring replaces the cyclohexene ring: etretinate, and acitretin;3. The third generation is made up by polyaromatic retinoids, resulting from cyclizationof the side chain and characterized by a selective activity towards receptor: adapalene,tazarotene, and bexarotene [16].Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 17
poorly interact with corepressors, since in these receptors , the corepressor -docking site is closed even in the absence of its ligand [11 ,12]. It is still unclear whether silencing RA target genes transcription is gene or cell specific. One pos sibility is the recruitment of unconventional co -regulators that inhibit RARs transcriptional activity, binding RAR it-self [13]. On the other hand, the ubiquitin -proteasome system could degrade RARs and RXRs determining the conclusion of the transcriptiona l process [12]. The fact that it has been observed that RARs are ubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome further supports this hypothesis [14 ,15]. Retinoids can be classified into three generations, in respect of molecular structures and properties (F igure 2):  1. The first  generation is composed by natural retinoids, obtained modifying polar groups of vitamin A, which do not act selectively: retinol and its metabolites,
such as retinal, tretinoin, isotretinoin , and alitretinoin;  2. The second generation is c onstituted by monoaromatic retinoids, synthetic compounds where a benzene ring replaces the cyclohexene ring: etretinate, and acitretin;  3. The third generation is made up by polyaromatic retinoids, resulting from cy-clization of the side chain and characteriz ed by a selective activity towards re-ceptor: adapalene, tazarotene, and bexarotene [16].   Figure 2. Molecular structure of retinoids divided per generation. The first generation is composed by natural retinoids, obtained modifying polar groups of vitamin A (retinol, tretinoin, isotretinoin, and alitretinoin). The second generation is constituted by monoa romatic compounds, in which a benzene ring replaces the cyclohexene ring (etretinate, and acitretin). The third generation is made up by polyaromatic molecules, resulting from the cyclization of a side chain (adapalene, bexaro-
tene, and tazarotene). Trifaro tene is a recently synthetized fourth -generation retinoid, highly spe-cific for skin RAR -γ receptors (References in supplementary materials ). In the skin, RAR -γ is the most represented isoform [17], sustaining the rational use of topical RAR -γ agonists. The refore, Thoreau and colleagues described the structure of RAR -γ ligand binding domain, permitting the design of a novel triaryl series of agonists, which was optimized and ul timately led to trifarotene, a new fourth -generation  topical retinoid [18]. Aubert  and colleagues have described the preclinical pharmacological fea-tures of trifarotene [19], which has been approved for the treatment of lamellar ichthyo-sis, in 2014, and acne vulgaris, in October 2019, by the FDA and is currently undergoing approval even  by the EMA [20 ,21]. Trifarotene is a strong and selective agonist of RAR -γ, with lower activity on RAR -β and RAR -α (16 - and 65 -fold, respectively), and has no ac-
tivity on RXRs [19]. The binding of trifarotene on RAR -γ results in the dimerization of the
with lower activity on RAR -β and RAR -α (16 - and 65 -fold, respectively), and has no ac-tivity on RXRs [19]. The binding of trifarotene on RAR -γ results in the dimerization of the receptor, leading to attach specific RAREs of retinoid -responsible genes. Downstream gene expression alterations are the principal way through which trifarotene exerts its anti-inflammatory, comedolytic , and depigmenting actions [21].  Trifarotene influences three different pathways, identified by a large -scale gene ex-pression analysis:  Figure 2. Molecular structure of retinoids divided per generation. The ﬁrst generation is composedby natural retinoids, obtained modifying polar groups of vitamin A (retinol, tretinoin, isotretinoin,and alitretinoin). The second generation is constituted by monoaromatic compounds, in which abenzene ring replaces the cyclohexene ring (etretinate, and acitretin). The third generation is made
up by polyaromatic molecules, resulting from the cyclization of a side chain (adapalene, bexarotene,and tazarotene). Trifarotene is a recently synthetized fourth-generation retinoid, highly speciﬁc forskin RAR- γreceptors (References in Supplementary materials).In the skin, RAR- γis the most represented isoform [ 17], sustaining the rational useof topical RAR- γagonists. Therefore, Thoreau and colleagues described the structure ofRAR- γligand binding domain, permitting the design of a novel triaryl series of agonists,which was optimized and ultimately led to trifarotene, a new fourth-generation topicalretinoid [ 18]. Aubert and colleagues have described the preclinical pharmacological fea-tures of trifarotene [ 19], which has been approved for the treatment of lamellar ichthyosis,in 2014, and acne vulgaris, in October 2019, by the FDA and is currently undergoingapproval even by the EMA [ 20,21]. Trifarotene is a strong and selective agonist of RAR-
γ, with lower activity on RAR- βand RAR- α(16- and 65-fold, respectively), and has noactivity on RXRs [ 19]. The binding of trifarotene on RAR- γresults in the dimerization ofthe receptor, leading to attach speciﬁc RAREs of retinoid-responsible genes. Downstreamgene expression alterations are the principal way through which trifarotene exerts itsanti-inﬂammatory, comedolytic, and depigmenting actions [21].Trifarotene inﬂuences three different pathways, identiﬁed by a large-scale gene ex-pression analysis:1) Skin hydration: trifarotene induces skin peptidyl arginine deiminase 1 and aquaporin-3 channels, and, therefore, inﬂuences skin barrier functions;2) Cell adhesion: trifarotene weakens hemidesmosomes, reducing intercellular adhesion.The minor cohesion among keratinocytes explains its comedolytic properties;3) Proteolysis: trifarotene downregulates matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which act
as proteolytic enzymes on elastin and collagen, thus improving skin texture [19,22].
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 4 of 16Ex-vivo pharmacokinetic models on trifarotene proved the high stability of the com-pound, with a half-life of >24 h. Despite this, it is quickly metabolized by hepatic microso-mal enzymes, with a half-life of minutes, compared to tazarotenic acid, which has a 10-foldhigher stability in hepatic microsomes. This is a predictor of a favorable safety proﬁle.The metabolism of trifarotene is catalyzed primarily by cytochrome (CY) P2C9, CYP3A4,CYP2C8, and, to a lesser extent, by CYP2B6 [18].3. Methods and Study Design3.1. Search StrategyWe performed a comprehensive search in the following databases from 2012 to 2020:Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; MEDLINE; Embase; US National Institutesof Health Ongoing Trials Register; NIHR Clinical Research Network Portfolio Database; andthe World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform. We studied
reference lists and published systematic review articles. We used the following keywords,separately and in a combination: “trifarotene”, “CD5789”, “skin”, “dermatology”. OnlyEnglish language articles were included in the searches. The search was restricted to studieson humans. Forward citation searching of the reference lists of the original studies andreview articles was also conducted.3.2. Inclusion CriteriaAll the studies investigating the use of trifarotene in skin disorders were examined.If a study included trifarotene with other drugs, only trifarotene frame was analyzed.All human studies were included with no restrictions on age, sex, ethnicity, or type ofstudy. Case reports and case series were included if they described the use of trifarotene indiseases not present in reviews or trials.3.3. Exclusion CriteriaThe target intervention excluded the analyses of other pathologies out of the dermato-logical ﬁeld, animal studies, and non-English language articles.
3.4. Search ResultsEleven trials including trifarotene were identiﬁed by this quantitative research. Fourresulted completed at the time of this Review, all regarding acne vulgaris, the othershave no results published on Trial.gov or Pubmed. Despite the FDA’s 2014 approval, oftrifarotene for the treatment of lamellar ichtyosis, no data on large-scale trial are currentlyavailable. At present, only one trial has evaluated the safety and tolerability of trifarotenein early-stage primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients, but no results have beenpublished yet.4. Trifarotene Properties and Current Applications in Dermatology4.1. RAR- γSelectivityRAR- γselective retinoid derivatives such as trifarotene, are being investigated astopical agents, which are expected to offer a more favorable clinical proﬁle compared tothe dual RAR β/γdrugs currently used in the clinical practice. Trifarotene is a potent and
selective agonist of RAR- γ, with signiﬁcantly less activity on RAR- βand RAR- α(16- and65-fold lower, respectively), and has no activity on RXRs [ 19]. Although tazarotene hashigh afﬁnity for all retinoic acid receptor isoforms, its afﬁnity is roughly 5–8 times higherfor the βisoform [ 23]. Adapalene is selective for the βandγRARs over the αisoform [ 24].Selectivity is a key feature in trifarotene, which allows the action on the keratinocytes, as aprimary target, and reduces systemic adverse effects (Table 1). We know, from the HumanProtein Atlas project, that RAR- γm-RNA has the maximum expression in the skin (meanreads per kb per million reads placed 47.135 ±3.294, compared to RAR- β0.272±0.138,count 3,210,032 for RAR- γvs. 21,114 for RAR- β; Figure S1) [ 25], sustaining the rational useof a topical RAR- γagonist.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 5 of 16Table 1. The table shows the different drugs capable of interacting with the different RAR isoforms.Of all the drugs reported, only trifarotene and palovarotene are selective for RAR- γ. Currently,palovarotene is used in the treatment of progressive ossifying ﬁbrodysplasia, while trifarotene isused in lamellar ichthyosis and acne. The importance of receptor selectivity is conﬁrmed by thereduction of adverse effects due to the action on the other receptors.Receptor RAR- α RAR-β RAR- γTissue ExpressionLung, Spleen,GallbladderPlacenta, Prostate,Urinary Bladder, Kidney,HeartSkinDrugTazarotene1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen,
Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Tretinoin1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X 
Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Trifarotene1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ
1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Adapalene1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene   
Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Alitetrinoin1
Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Alitetrinoin1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X
Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Tamibarotene1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   Palovarotene1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen,
Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   1  Recepto r RAR-α RAR-β RAR-ϒ Tissue Expression Lung, Spleen, Gallbladder Placenta, Prostate, Urinary Bladder, Kidney, Heart Skin Drug Tazarotene    Tretinoin    Trifarotene X X  Adapalene X   Alitetrinoin    Tamibarotene  X X Palovarotene X X   4.2. Trifarotene Safety and TolerabilityTrifarotene is metabolized in vitro by CYP2C9, CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and, to a lesser
extent, by CYP2B6, and excreted in the feces [ 18]. Systemic exposures in mice, followingboth topical and oral administration, were up to 1642 times higher than those seen inhumans at the maximal recommended human dose, and these systemic concentrations didnot result in observed carcinogenicity. Trifarotene does not seem to carry any risk of car-cinogenesis when used at standard doses [ 26,27]. Data regarding overdosage of trifaroteneare not available. Patients exposed to photosensitising agents may have an increased riskof a phototoxic skin reaction, especially severe sunburn, during the use of aminolevulinicacid [ 28]. Concomitant use of retinoids and keratolytic or topical astringents may result inexcessive irritation and/or drying, and patients may experience erythema, scaling, dryness,and stinging/burning [ 26,27]. Despite these local adverse effects and photosensitization,trifarotene is safer than other retinoids due to its hepatic instability and degradation. Cur-
rent studies conﬁrm that trifarotene 50 µg/g cream is systemically well tolerated and safewhen applied under maximized conditions in adults and pediatric acne patients, including
rent studies conﬁrm that trifarotene 50 µg/g cream is systemically well tolerated and safewhen applied under maximized conditions in adults and pediatric acne patients, includingpatients with severe acne [ 27]. Considering that trifarotene belongs to the class of retinoidsand is intended for use even in women in their fertile age, further studies are needed to ex-clude any potential teratogenic effect. Currently, clinical pharmacological data demonstratethat trifarotene 50 µg/g cream—the to-be-marketed formulation—generates low systemicabsorption when applied daily under maximal use conditions [ 27]. Furthermore, due toits RAR- γselectivity, it could be hypothesized that trifarotene is safer than other retinoidsin pregnancy as the placenta presents a lower expression of RAR- γ(4.739 ±0.399), withconsequent minor absorption of the drug compared to other topical retinoids [25].4.3. Current Applications in Dermatology
4.3. Current Applications in DermatologyHerein we illustrate the rational use of trifarotene in skin diseases.4.3.1. Acne VulgarisAcne vulgaris is a chronic inﬂammatory process of the pilo-sebaceous unit. Overpro-duction and abnormal cohesiveness of desquamated epithelial cells leads to their retentionwithin the hair follicle, with subsequent obstruction of the ostium [ 29]. Pro-inﬂammatorymediators, such as interleukin (IL)-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α, are produced bykeratinocytes, activated in response to epithelium disruption, caused by accumulating se-bum. The clinical course is characterized by subsequent phases of remission and recurrence.In some individuals, acne may persist for decades and leave scars. The association of acnewith depression, anxiety, and reduced quality of life is well documented [ 30]. Successful
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 6 of 16treatments may produce a signiﬁcant improvement in self-esteem [ 31]. Both the AmericanAcademy of Dermatology (AAD) and the European Dermatology Forum guidelines agreedthat retinoids play a crucial role in the treatment of acne [ 32,33]. The AAD guidelinesdeclare that “retinoids are the core of topical therapy for acne because they are comedolytic,resolve the precursor microcomedone lesion, and are anti-inﬂammatory”; additionally,they “allow for the maintenance of clearance” [33].Retinoids promote keratinocytes differentiation and diminish their proliferation, mod-ulating desquamation [ 34]. Topical retinoids block critical inﬂammatory pathways trig-gered in acne, such as leukocyte migration, Toll-like receptors activation, and the ActivatorProtein 1 pathway [35].Trifarotene is the latest new retinoid approved for the treatment of acne by the FDAin over 20 years. Topical administration is demonstrated to be safe, well-tolerated, and
more effective than vehicle in reducing both non-inﬂammatory and inﬂammatory lesionsin acne of the face and trunk [36]. We evaluated two phase III, double-blind, randomized,vehicle-controlled, 12-week studies in which trifarotene 50 µg/g cream was administeredonce-daily versus vehicle in subjects aged nine or older (Table 2). In PERFECT 1 trial,a total of 1208 patients were recruited and divided in two arms: 612 were treated withtrifarotene and 596 received placebo. In PERFECT 2 trial, 1212 patients were enrolledand randomized in two treatments: the ﬁrst group was constituted by 602 patients, whoreceived trifarotene, while the placebo group included 610 patients [ 36]. For both studies,the primary endpoints were the rate of face lesions resolution, determined by Investigator’sGlobal Assessment (IGA), and change in absolute number of face non-inﬂammatory andinﬂammatory lesions from baseline to week 12. Secondary endpoints were the rate of
trunk lesions resolution, according to Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA), and change inthe absolute number of trunk non-inﬂammatory and inﬂammatory lesions from baselineto week 12 [ 36]. The safety proﬁle was assessed in terms of adverse events (AEs), localtolerability, vital signs, and routine laboratory tests. In both studies, at week 12, primaryand secondary endpoints were reached and the results were highly signiﬁcant ( p< 0.001) infavour of trifarotene, demonstrating its safety, efﬁcacy, and tolerability in acne treatment ofboth face and trunk [ 36]. Blume-Peytavi et al. obtained comparable results in a multicentre,open-label study considering 453 patients (Table 2). They reached a global success rateof 57.9% after 52-week treatment with trifarotene 50 µg/g cream in both face and trunkacne, evaluated by IGA and PGA, as primary and secondary endpoints respectively [ 37].Adverse events were observed in 12.6% of patients, especially during the ﬁrst trimester of
treatment; they were mild-to-moderate in severity and included itching, erythema, burning,stinging, and dryness. Rare severe AEs consisted in sunburn sensation, allergic dermatitis,pain, and cutaneous erosion in the site of application, resulting in treatment discontinuationin 1.9% participants [ 37]. All subjects reported an improvement in the quality-of-life indexat week 52 from baseline [37].Table 2. Completed clinical trials with results evaluating trifarotene in acne vulgaris. Abbreviations: IGA: Investigator’sglobal assessment; PGA: Physician’s global assessment.Ofﬁcial Title on ClinicalTrials.gov or Publication Title (NCTNumber and Status)Phase; Evaluation Time; Sample Size Endpoints and ResultsA Multi-Centre, Randomized, Double-Blind, Parallel-GroupVehicle Controlled Study to Compare The Efﬁcacy And SafetyOf CD5789 (Trifarotene) 50 µg/g Cream Versus Vehicle CreamIn Subjects With Acne Vulgaris (NCT02566369; Completed) [ 36]III; 12 weeks; 1208 patients,
randomized, parallel assignmentIGA: trifarotene arm 42.6%; placebo
In Subjects With Acne Vulgaris (NCT02566369; Completed) [ 36]III; 12 weeks; 1208 patients,randomized, parallel assignmentIGA: trifarotene arm 42.6%; placeboarm 25.8%A Multi-Center, Randomized, Double-Blind, Parallel-GroupVehicle Controlled Study To Compare The Efﬁcacy And SafetyOf CD5789 (Trifarotene) 50 µg/g Cream Versus Vehicle CreamIn Subjects With Acne Vulgaris (NCT02556788; Completed) [ 36]III; 12 weeks; 1212 patients,randomized, parallel assignmentIGA: trifarotene arm 29.4%; placeboarm 19.5%A long-term safety and efﬁcacy study of cd5789 (trifarotene) 50µg/g cream in subjects with acne vulgaris (NCT02189629;Completed) [37]III; 52 weeks; 453 patients, singlegroup assignment- Primary: IGA 65.1%- Secondary: PGA 66.9%
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 7 of 16Johnson et al. reported a series of three subjects with moderate face and trunk acnetreated with trifarotene 50 µg/g cream for 12 weeks, then evaluated through questionnaires.A reduction in inﬂammatory lesions was reported. The reduction in the lesions on the faceand trunk was 90% and 47% for inﬂammatory and non-inﬂammatory lesions, respectively,in the ﬁrst subject. The second one achieved a 20% reduction in inﬂammatory lesions and22% reduction in non-inﬂammatory lesions both on the face and trunk. In the last subject,a reduction of 66% and 34% was observed in inﬂammatory and non-inﬂammatory lesions,respectively [38].Many trials are still ongoing or have not yet produced results on the use of trifarotenein acne vulgaris (Table 3).Table 3. Clinical trials evaluating trifarotene in acne vulgaris with no results reported yet. Abbreviations: IGA: Investigator’sglobal assessment.Ofﬁcial Title onClinicalTrials.gov or Publication
ClinicalTrials.gov or PublicationTitle (NCT Number and Status)Phase; Sample Size Drugs Evaluated Endpoints and ResultsA Randomized, Multi-centre,Investigator-blind, Vehicle- andActive-controlled, Phase 2 Studyto Assess the Efﬁcacy and Safetyof Different Concentrations ofCD5789 Cream Applied OnceDaily in Subjects With Moderateto Severe Acne Vulgaris(NCT01616654;Completed)II; 304 patients, randomized,parallel assignmentCD5789 25 µg/g cream; CD578950µg/g cream; CD5789 100 µg/gcream; tazarotene 0.1% gel;vehicle cream- Endpoints: (1) success rate(IGA); (2) absolute change in totallesion counts; (3) percentageghange in total lesion counts- Results: not yet reportedA Multi-Centre Study to EvaluateSubject Reported Outcomes withUse of Trifarotene 50 µg/g Creamin the Treatment of ModerateFacial and Truncal Acne Vulgaris(NCT03915860 Active,non-recruiting)III; 40 patients, single groupassignment, open labelTrifarotene 50 µg/g cream- Endpoint: success rate (IGA)
score of 1 or 0 and at least a2-grade improvement- Resuls: not yet reportedA Multi-Centre, Randomized,Double-Blind, Placebo ControlledStudy to Compare Efﬁcacy andSafety of Trifarotene (CD5789)Cream When Used with an OralAntibiotic for the Treatment ofSevere Acne Vulgaris(NCT04451330; Not recruiting)IV; 198 patients, randomized,parallel assignmentTrifarotene cream; Doxycyclinehyclate; Trifarotene Vehicle;Doxycycline Placebo- Primary endpoint: change infacial total lesion counts(inﬂammatory andnon-inﬂammatory)- Secondary endpoints: (1) changein facial inﬂammatory lesionscounts; (2) change in facialnon-inﬂammatory lesions count- Results: not yet reportedRetinoids can indirectly affect skin microbes, blocking the essential nutrients supplyand stabilizing immune system hyperreactivity [ 39,40]. In this light, the importance ofretinoid therapy in acne is due to the indirect effect on microbiota, which opens new
frontiers in terms of therapies. The suppressing role of retinoids in sebum productionby the sebaceous glands both in vitro and in vivo has also been highlighted [ 41,42]. Infact, while low levels of RA are important for sebaceous gland function, excessive RAsynthesis within the sebaceous gland could lead to atrophy of the gland, and reducedsebum production [ 43]. Finzi et al., using a speciﬁc oligonucleotide for RAR- γcDNAisoform 1 (RAR- γ1), discovered that RAR- γ1 mRNA was localized in all epidermal layers,outer root sheath of hair follicles, follicular hair bulbs, eccrine, and sebaceous glands [ 44].They suggested that the presence of RAR- γin sebaceous glands could mediate the abilityof isotretinoin to suppress sebum production in nodulocystic acne [ 44]. Trifarotene, asa selective RAR- γagonist, may be effective in acne vulgaris treatment, among the othermechanism, also inhibiting sebaceous glands function.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 8 of 164.3.2. Autosomal Recessive Congenital IchthyosisAutosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a heterogeneous family of con-genital diseases of keratinization linked to generalized hyperkeratosis, often accompaniedby erythroderma. ARCI is infrequent, with 1 in 200,000 births incidence. The most frequentphenotypic subtypes include lamellar ichthyosis, congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma,and harlequin ichthyosis. ARCI is also genetically heterogeneous—with at least nine dif-ferent genes responsible for the most common forms—but approximately 30% of casesare explained by TGM1 mutations, the gene encoding transglutaminase 1, involved inthe development of the corniﬁed envelope [ 45]. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter,family 12 (ABCA12) facilitates lipids delivery to the lamellar bodies (LB) in keratinocytes,which is critical for the barrier function permeability. Recently, ABCA12 mutations were
described in harlequin and lamellar ichthyosis. Jang et al. observed that peroxisomeproliferators-activated receptors (PPARs) and liver X receptor (LXR) activation improveepidermal barrier permeability, stimulating keratinocyte differentiation, lipid synthesis,and LB formation/secretion [ 45]. Both PPAR- γand LXR activators were reported to stim-ulate, in a dose- and time-dependent manner, ABCA12 mRNA expression in culturedhuman keratinocytes (CHKs). Increased ABCA12 mRNA levels are accompanied by anincrease in ABCA12 protein synthesis. By demonstrating that PPAR and LXR activatorsincrease ABCA12 expression, they provided an additional mechanism through which PPARand LXR activators promote epidermal barrier permeability [ 45]. In contrast, ABCA12expression is not altered by the activators of PPAR- α, RAR, or RXR.The efﬁcacy of retinoids to treat this disease has been known for some time [ 46]. Virta-
nen et al. assessed phenotypic/genotypic correlations in patients with epidermolytic hyper-keratosis and the impact of retinoid therapy on keratin expression [ 47]. Thirteen patientsfrom ten families with generalized disease and two subjects with sporadic disease withnaevoid lesions were studied. Oral acitretin (5–25 mg/d) or topical tretinoin/tazarotenewere effective in ﬁve of six patients with keratin 10 mutations, while none of those withkeratin 1 mutations showed any advantage [47,48].As topical trifarotene was demonstrated to be safe and well-tolerated, in 2014, the FDAgrated it with Orphan Drug Designation for the treatment of congenital ichthyosis [ 20]. Weevaluated a phase II, randomized, multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-controlled, 12-weektopical trifarotene treatment for moderate to severe autosomal recessive lamellar ichthyosisin adults ( ≥18 years old) and adolescents (ages 12–17 years, inclusive), followed by a
12-week open-label extension (Table 4). Adults (cohort A) and adults and adolescents(cohort B) were randomized in a double-blind fashion to active therapy or vehicle and weretreated twice weekly for 12 weeks. Patients who completed this step of the study withoutsafety issues were selected to enter a 12-week, open-label extension of the trial. All subjects,both adults and adolescents, were randomized 1:1:1 and treated twice weekly for up toa further 12 weeks. The results of the study will be available probably by the end of theyear [49].Table 4. Clinical trial evaluating trifarotene in lamellar ichtyosis with no results reported yet.Ofﬁcial Title on ClinicalTrials.gov orPublication Title (NCT Number and Status)Phase; Sample Size Endpoints and ResultsA Phase 2 Randomized, Multicenter,Doubleblind, Vehicle Controlled, 12 Week,Safety, Efﬁcacy & Systemic Exposure StudyFollowed by a 12 Week Open-label Extensionof CD5789 in Adults and Adolescents With
of CD5789 in Adults and Adolescents WithAutosomal Recessive Ichthyosis With LamellarScale (NCT03738800; Recruiting) [49]II; 120 patients, randomized, parallelassignment- Primary endpoint: successful resolution oflamellar ichtyosis
Autosomal Recessive Ichthyosis With LamellarScale (NCT03738800; Recruiting) [49]II; 120 patients, randomized, parallelassignment- Primary endpoint: successful resolution oflamellar ichtyosis- Secondary endpoints: (1) difference in meanscores using Individual score for roughness; (2)difference in mean scores using Palm SoleAssessment; (3) difference in proportion ofsubjects with ﬁssures between the active andvehicle groups; (4) Dermatology Life QualityIndex; (5) 5-point Visual Index for IchthyosisSeverity- Results: not yet reported
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 9 of 164.3.3. Primary Cutaneous T-Cell LymphomaCutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) are primary skin lymphoproliferative disorders,deriving from mature T cells. CTCLs could be indolent or aggressive processes and thisgreat heterogeneity explains the difﬁculties in clinical management. Sixty percent of allCTCL cases is represented by mycosis fungoides, while less than 5% consists of S ézarysyndrome, a more aggressive form [50–56].Retinoids display a crucial role among WHO and EORTC recommended therapiesfor CTCLs. They have been used in lymphoma of every stage for over three decades [ 55].In vitro studies demonstrated that retinoids modulate keratinocytes proliferation anddifferentiation, and regulate skin mononuclear inﬂammatory inﬁltrate, but also induceapoptosis and DNA fragmentation in T-cell lines [57].Sidell et al. observed that ATRA could increase IL-2R αexpression in human thy-
mocytes, increasing steady-state mRNA levels [ 58]. Gorgun and Foss conﬁrmed theseresults exploring the effect of ATRA, bexarotene, and alitretinoin (which binds both RARand RXR) on human T-cell and B-cell leukaemia cell lines. All three molecules inducedboth αandβsubunits of the IL-2R upregulation. Analogous discoveries were observedin the same study with S ézary cells and B-cell lymphocytic leukaemia cells [ 59]. Manystudies have focused on systemic retinoids, but also the efﬁcacy and tolerability of topicalretinoids in CTCLs have been tested. Skin directed therapies have an important role in thetreatment of early stage CTCLs, in particular MF, as well as in managing symptoms andimproving quality of life at all stages. Retinoids found a place in this scenario due to theirimmunomodulatory and pro-apoptotic actions. Topical bexarotene 1% gel is approvedby the FDA for stage IA and IB persistent or refractory CTCLs. It has been reported to
cause apoptosis in CTCL cell lines [ 60,61]. In 2016, ten patients with early stage CTCL/MFwere treated with tazarotene 0.1% cream in monotherapy on target lesions every otherday for 2 weeks, then once daily for 6 months. Six patients had clinical resolution of thetarget lesion, within a mean time of 3.8 months. The vast majority (70%) reported itching,burning, erythema, and desquamation, whilst two patients withdrew from study [ 61,62].Nowadays, no high-quality randomized clinical trials evaluating the treatment of primaryCTCL with trifarotene has been completed. At present, only one phase I trial evaluatingsafety and tolerability of trifarotene in patients with early stage CTCL has been reported inliterature, though no results are currently available (Table 5) [63].Table 5. Clinical trial evaluating trifarotene in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas with no results reported yet.Ofﬁcial Title on ClinicalTrials.gov or
Ofﬁcial Title on ClinicalTrials.gov orPublication Title (NCT Number and Status)Phase; Sample Size Endpoints and ResultsExploratory Study to Evaluate the Safety andEfﬁcacy of CD5789 in Subjects with Early StageCutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma (NCT01804335;Completed) [63]I; 11 patients, single group assignment, openlabel- Endpoint: tolerance score of CD5789 0.01%cream- Results: not yet reported5. Perspectives5.1. Non-Melanoma Skin CancerRetinoids are largely used for the prevention and treatment of non-melanoma skincancers (NMSCs). Since the 1920s, when vitamin A deﬁciency in rats paved the way toinvestigate its relationship with cancer, retinoids have played a pivotal role in the oncologyﬁeld [ 64]. Biochemical studies in the 1970s and 1980s suggested that a relative deﬁciency ofretinoids could be associated with epithelial cancers [ 65]. To date, retinoids have demon-strated anti-apoptotic and anti-proliferative properties; indeed, they are able to regulate the
differentiation and growth of keratinocytes, inhibit tumor initiation, reduce regulation ofproto-oncogenes, increase the expression of p53 and pro-apoptotic caspases, and sensitize
differentiation and growth of keratinocytes, inhibit tumor initiation, reduce regulation ofproto-oncogenes, increase the expression of p53 and pro-apoptotic caspases, and sensitizekeratinocytes to apoptosis [ 66]. In murine models of skin carcinogenesis, retinoids targetthe B-Raf/Mek/Erk signalling pathway [ 67]. Moreover, retinoids have shown antioxidantproperties, reducing the number of sunburn cells, and acting against the human papillo-
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 10 of 16mavirus, which is considered a co-carcinogen [ 68,69]. In NMSCs, retinoids have been usedto treat precancerous lesions, such as actinic keratoses (AKs), as they inhibit the develop-ment of invasive cancer [ 70]. Bollag et al., in their case series, observed a 50% reductionof AKs on arms and hands with topical application of tretinoin 0.1% and 0.3%, respec-tively [ 71]. In basal cell carcinoma (BCC), tazarotene induced a concentration-dependentincrease in RAR- βand bax, which was associated with a greater rate of apoptosis andgrowth inhibition compared to squamous cell tumors. Orlandi et al. reported convincingevidence that tazarotene induces BCC regression possibly by synergistic RAR- β-dependentanti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic pathways activation [ 72,73]. Nijsten et al. reported adecreased squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) risk using systemic retinoids in psoralen-treated
patients [ 74]. Kim et al. evaluated a cohort from 1984 to 2012 and prospectively examinedintake of vitamin A and carotenoids and SCC risk in the Nurses’ Health Study and theHealth Professionals Follow-up Study. They found a decreased risk of incident SCC relatedto high intake of dietary vitamin A [ 75]. As the other compounds from the retinoidsfamily, we may hypothesize that trifarotene could be used as a preventive local therapy incancerization and as a target therapy for overt NMSCs (Figure 3). Trifarotene can be usedalone or combined with other active compounds, working on different pathways of thecarcinogenesis, such as nicotinamide or piroxicam [ 76,77]. Further studies are needed inthis promising ﬁeld.Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 17 otene could be used as a preventive local therapy in cancerization and as a target therapy for overt NMSCs (Figure 3). Trifarotene can be used alone or combined with other active
compounds, working on different pathways of the carcinogenesis, such as nicotinamide or piroxicam [76,77]. Further studies are needed in this promising field. Figure 3. Schematic representation of the perspective applications of trifarotene with a brief ex-planation of the putative molecular pathways.  5.2. Invasive Fungal Infection (IFI) Since ATRA has been used in acute promyelocytic leukemia treatment, a lower in-cidence of total episodes of fungemia has been reported in these patients [78]. Starting from these observations, retinoids have been investigated as potential fungistatic agents [79]. In vitro ATRA 0.5 –1 mM fungistatic effect was proved on Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus by Campione et al. From this study, ATRA paved the way for its systemic use against these opportunistic agents [80]. ATRA stimulates both the adaptive and innate immune system, especially the monocyte-mediate immune response [78,81].
Klassert et al. provided evidence of ATRA immunomodulatory effect on human mono-cytes during Candida albicans infections, suppressing Candida-induced TNF- α, IL -6, and IL-12 production at both transcriptional and post-translational levels [82]. In 2020, Campione et al. performed in vitro experiments to assess ATRA efficacy, associated with classical antifungal drugs, on Aspergillus in a rat model. In silico studies, used to clarify its mechanism of action, showed the strong fungistatic activity of ATRA (0.5 and 1 mM) on Aspergillus cultures, inhibiting fungal Hsp90 expression and Hsp90-related genes and enhancing macrophagic phagocytosis of conidia [83]. From these studies, trifarotene could pave the way for fourth generation retinoids as agents in respiratory and oesophageal mycosis, due to their high selectivity for these districts, with consequent reduced adverse effects (Figure 3). Oesophagus RAR- γ mean
reads per kilobase per million of 31.959 ± 6.555 place oesophagus just after the skin for the expression of RAR- γ, as already previously reported. The lungs—another frequent target
reads per kilobase per million of 31.959 ± 6.555 place oesophagus just after the skin for the expression of RAR- γ, as already previously reported. The lungs—another frequent target of mycosis, such as aspergillosis especially in immunocompromised patients —show an expression of RAR- γ mean reads per kilobas e per million of 6.541 ± 1.311, suggesting the rationale for a selective RAR- γ-agent, such as trifarotene [25]. Supposing a formulation for systemic administration of trifarotene is out of the scope of this paper. However, it is possible to hypothesize its local application to effectively fight respiratory and esopha-geal mycosis, although further research is required. Figure 3. Schematic representation of the perspective applications of trifarotene with a brief explana-tion of the putative molecular pathways.5.2. Invasive Fungal Infection (IFI)Since ATRA has been used in acute promyelocytic leukemia treatment, a lower inci-
dence of total episodes of fungemia has been reported in these patients [ 78]. Starting fromthese observations, retinoids have been investigated as potential fungistatic agents [ 79].In vitro ATRA 0.5–1 mM fungistatic effect was proved on Candida albicans and Aspergillusfumigatus by Campione et al. From this study, ATRA paved the way for its systemic useagainst these opportunistic agents [ 80]. ATRA stimulates both the adaptive and innateimmune system, especially the monocyte-mediate immune response [ 78,81]. Klassert et al.provided evidence of ATRA immunomodulatory effect on human monocytes during Can-dida albicans infections, suppressing Candida-induced TNF- α, IL-6, and IL-12 productionat both transcriptional and post-translational levels [ 82]. In 2020, Campione et al. per-formed in vitro experiments to assess ATRA efﬁcacy, associated with classical antifungaldrugs, on Aspergillus in a rat model. In silico studies, used to clarify its mechanism of
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 11 of 16action, showed the strong fungistatic activity of ATRA (0.5 and 1 mM) on Aspergilluscultures, inhibiting fungal Hsp90 expression and Hsp90-related genes and enhancingmacrophagic phagocytosis of conidia [83].From these studies, trifarotene could pave the way for fourth generation retinoidsas agents in respiratory and oesophageal mycosis, due to their high selectivity for thesedistricts, with consequent reduced adverse effects (Figure 3). Oesophagus RAR- γmeanreads per kilobase per million of 31.959 ±6.555 place oesophagus just after the skin for theexpression of RAR- γ, as already previously reported. The lungs—another frequent targetof mycosis, such as aspergillosis especially in immunocompromised patients—show anexpression of RAR- γmean reads per kilobase per million of 6.541 ±1.311, suggesting therationale for a selective RAR- γ-agent, such as trifarotene [ 25]. Supposing a formulation
for systemic administration of trifarotene is out of the scope of this paper. However, it ispossible to hypothesize its local application to effectively ﬁght respiratory and esophagealmycosis, although further research is required.5.3. Skin and Nail MycosisOnychomycosis is a fungal infection of the ﬁngernails that may involve any componentof the nail unit, including the matrix, bed, or plate. Distal and lateral onychomycoses arethe most frequent forms of onychomycosis, causing subungual hyperkeratosis that usuallylimits local penetration of antimycotic drugs. The involved pathogens are dermatophytes,yeasts ( Candida spp.), and non-dermatophytes [ 84]. Dermatophytes, such as Trichophytonrubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes, are the most common agents of onychomycosis,accounting for 50–90% of cases. Onychomycosis is usually treated with topical or systemicantifungals [ 85]. Local treatment requires strong patient adherence as the treatment time is
generally long. Moreover, onychomycosis-related subungual hyperkeratosis is generallythick, an aspect that limits the penetration of the antimycotic drug. Consequently, long-termtreatments can discourage or induce withdrawal before healing is achieved. Campioneet al., from in vitro studies, reported that tazarotene can inhibit the growth of Trichophytonrubrum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and Candida albicans. In the same study, theydemonstrated that topical 0.1% tazarotene gel is an effective in vivo treatment for distal andlateral onychomycosis [ 79]. Since the contribution of the inﬂammatory response is quitelimited in the affected nail, the beneﬁcial effects of retinoids in this ﬁeld derive from a directfungistatic activity. From these results, trifarotene could pave the way for fourth generationretinoids as active agents against skin and nail mycosis due to their high selectivity forRAR- γ, with consequent reduced adverse effects, but also actions on the immune system
(Figure 3). As previously described, retinoids are immunomodulators, thus, given that thenail unit is an immunological niche, a balance in pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatorycytokines is paramount [86].5.4. PhotoagingIn the 1980s, Kligman et al. suggested for the ﬁrst time to use retinoids in the treatmentof photo-damaged skin [ 87]. However, the anti-photoaging mechanism of retinoids waselucidated some decades later by Li et al., who demonstrated that ATRA improves skinconditions in UV-induced damage, increasing the collagen content through the RARpathway, stimulating type I procollagen protein synthesis, and inhibiting MMP-3, MMP-13 and c-Jun protein expression [ 88]. Rusu et al. reported the efﬁcacy of adapalene inthe treatment of photoaging, apart from its utility in several dermatological diseases, asacne vulgaris [ 89]. In a recent study, Campione et al., demonstrated the clinical efﬁcacy
of retinoic acid (0.02%) in photoaging. Twelve women with moderate-severe skin aging
acne vulgaris [ 89]. In a recent study, Campione et al., demonstrated the clinical efﬁcacyof retinoic acid (0.02%) in photoaging. Twelve women with moderate-severe skin aging(Glogau score ≥3) were enrolled and evaluated after 4 weeks of treatment. At baseline,the Glogau score was 3.4 ±0.5. It then decreased signiﬁcantly at week 4 ( p= 0.0001;ANOVA test) to 2.7 ±0.6. Signiﬁcant reductions of dark spots (–40%) and severity ofwrinkles ( −12%) were observed at week 4 compared to baseline. At the end of the study,ultrastructural analyses performed by reﬂectance confocal microscopy also highlighted
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 12 of 16signiﬁcant improvements, with the recovery of the polygonal keratinocytes pattern as themain observed aspect [ 90]. Trifarotene, acting as a RAR- γagonist, could activate the samepathways induced by ATRA, eliciting antiaging activity (Figure 3). Further studies areneeded in this ﬁeld, which is currently quite unexplored.5.5. Hand-Foot Skin ReactionTargeted therapy has improved the oncological management and survival of patients.Sorafenib and sunitinib are two novel, small-molecule multikinase inhibitors that haveshown promising results in the inhibition of tumor cell angiogenesis and proliferation,both in vitro and in vivo [91]. Despite their higher speciﬁcity, when compared to standardchemotherapy, the activity of these agents is not limited to tumor cells. A variety ofadverse effects have been reported, including diarrhea, hypertension, and nausea. Among
them, the most notable, cutaneous toxic effect, known as hand-foot skin reaction (HFSR),represents 20–30%. HFSR consists in a diffused painful oedema and redness of palms andsoles due to epidermal keratinocyte apoptosis, dyskeratosis, and vacuolar degeneration.Lacouture et al. reported the efﬁcacy of tazarotene against HFSR occurring in patientstreated with sorafenib and sunitinib [ 92]. A phase II completed trial has evaluated theusage of tazarotene 0.1% cream in HFSR of patients treated with sorafenib. Tazarotene0.1% cream has been applied twice per day on the affected areas, with no adverse effects.Results demonstrated a 9.5 reduction (12.0) in Skindex-16 Total Score [ 93]. Nowadays, aphase II randomized Double-Blind Trial is going to evaluate the effectiveness of topicaltazarotene 0.1% gel to prevent regorafenib-induced HFSR [ 94]. As previously reported,trifarotene, acting as selective RAR- γagent, could play a keratoplastic role in reducing
HFSR and normalizing keratinization (Figure 3).6. ConclusionsRetinoids are largely applied in cutaneous inﬂammatory, dyskeratotic, and infectiousdiseases, besides oncohematology. In this review, we have focused our attention partic-ularly on trifarotene, a new fourth-generation retinoid with a selective action on RAR- γ.Trifarotene has been tested for the treatment of acne and congenital ichthyosis, demon-strating its safety and tolerability. No high-quality randomized clinical trials are currentlyevaluating the treatment of primary cutaneous lymphomas with trifarotene. Differentlyfrom other retinoids, trifarotene acts selectively on RAR- γreducing RAR- βadverse effects,and offer a more favorable clinical proﬁle compared to the drugs with dual action on bothRAR- βand RAR- γ, such as tretinoin and derivatives. As RAR- γis much more abundantthan the other retinoids receptors in the skin, this could be the rationale for increasing
studies on trifarotene usage in skin disorders, as already seen with previous generationretinoids.Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/9/3/237/s1, References to Figure 2 (PubChem Compound Summary, Accessed Jan. 12, 2021),and Figure S1: Graphic reports kilobase per million reads placed (PRKM) expression of RAR- βandRAR- γin skin. (modiﬁed from BioProject: PRJEB4337, Analysis date: Wed Apr 4 07:08:55 2018).Author Contributions: T.C., M.D.P ., and E.C. take responsibility for the integrity of the data and theaccuracy of the data analysis. Drafting of the manuscript: T.C., M.D.P ., and E.C. Critical revision ofthe manuscript for relevant intellectual content: M.D.P ., R.G., C.L., A.O., P .D.F., L.B., and E.C. Studysupervision: M.D.P ., and E.C. All authors had full access to all the data in the case. All authors haveread and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The article has been published with the unconditional contribution of Galderma S.p.A.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Funding: The article has been published with the unconditional contribution of Galderma S.p.A.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Acknowledgments: We thank Carlo Tedeschi for making graphic abstract and improve tables’ quality,and Denis Mariano for language editing.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 13 of 16Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Nomenclature of retinoids. Recommendations. Eur. J. Biochem. 1982 ,129, 1–5.2. Campione, E.; Cosio, T.; Lanna, C.; Mazzilli, S.; Ventura, A.; Dika, E.; Gaziano, R.; Dattola, A.; Candi, E.; Bianchi, L. Predictiverole of vitamin A serum concentration in psoriatic patients treated with IL-17 inhibitors to prevent skin and systemic fungalinfections. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 2020 ,144, 52–56. [CrossRef]3. Kawaguchi, R.; Yu, J.; Honda, J.; Hu, J.; Whitelegge, J.; Ping, P .; Wiita, P .; Bok, D.; Sun, H. A Membrane Receptor for RetinolBinding Protein Mediates Cellular Uptake of Vitamin A. Science 2007 ,315, 820–825. [CrossRef]4. Donovan, M.; Olofsson, B.; Gustafson, A.-L.; Dencker, L.; Eriksson, U. The cellular retinoic acid binding proteins. J. SteroidBiochem. Mol. Biol. 1995 ,53, 459–465. [CrossRef]
Biochem. Mol. Biol. 1995 ,53, 459–465. [CrossRef]5. Gronemeyer, H.; Gustafsson, J.-Å.; Laudet, V . Principles for modulation of the nuclear receptor superfamily. Nat. Rev. DrugDiscov. 2004 ,3, 950–964. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Allenby, G.; Bocquel, M.T.; Saunders, M.; Kazmer, S.; Speck, J.; Rosenberger, M.; Lovey, A.; Kastner, P .; Grippo, J.F.; Chambon, P .Retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X receptors: Interactions with endogenous retinoic acids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1993 ,90,30–34. [CrossRef]7. Balmer, J.; Blomhoff, R. A robust characterization of retinoic acid response elements based on a comparison of sites in threespecies. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2005 ,96, 347–354. [CrossRef]8. Chambon, P . A decade of molecular biology of retinoic acid receptors. FASEB J. 1996 ,10, 940–954. [CrossRef]9. Samarut, E.; Rochette-Egly, C. Nuclear retinoic acid receptors: Conductors of the retinoic acid symphony during development.
Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2012 ,348, 348–360. [CrossRef]10. Dilworth, F.J.; Chambon, P . Nuclear receptors coordinate the activities of chromatin remodeling complexes and coactivators tofacilitate initiation of transcription. Oncogene 2001 ,20, 3047–3054. [CrossRef]11. Farboud, B.; Hauksdottir, H.; Wu, Y.; Privalsky, M.L. Isotype-restricted corepressor recruitment: A constitutively closed helix 12conformation in retinoic acid receptors beta and gamma interferes with corepressor recruitment and prevents transcriptionalrepression. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2003 ,23, 2844–2858. [CrossRef]12. Hauksdottir, H.; Farboud, B.; Privalsky, M.L. Retinoic acid receptors beta and gamma do not repress, but instead activate targetgene transcription in both the absence and presence of hormone ligand. Mol. Endocrinol. 2003 ,17, 373–385. [CrossRef]13. Asson-Batres, M.A.; Rochette-Egly, C. (Eds.) The Biochemistry of Retinoic Acid Receptors I: Structure, Activation, and Function at the
Molecular Level ; Subcellular Biochemistry; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2014. [CrossRef]14. Ferry, C.; Gianni, M.; Lalev ée, S.; Bruck, N.; Plassat, J.-L.; Raska, I.; Garattini, E.; Rochette-Egly, C. SUG-1 Plays Proteolytic andNon-proteolytic Roles in the Control of Retinoic Acid Target Genes via Its Interaction with SRC. J. Biol. Chem. 2009 ,284, 8127–8135.[CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Giann ì, M.; Bauer, A.; Garattini, E.; Chambon, P .; Rochette-Egly, C. Phosphorylation by p38MAPK and recruitment of SUG-1 arerequired for RA-induced RAR gamma degradation and transactivation. EMBO J. 2002 ,21, 3760–3769. [CrossRef]16. Khalil, S.; Bardawil, T.; Stephan, C.; Darwiche, N.; Abbas, O.; Kibbi, A.G.; Nemer, G.; Kurban, M. Retinoids: A journey from themolecular structures and mechanisms of action to clinical uses in dermatology and adverse effects. J. Dermatol. Treat. 2017 ,28,684–696. [CrossRef]
684–696. [CrossRef]17. Redfern, C.P .; Todd, C. Retinoic acid receptor expression in human skin keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts in vitro .J. Cell Sci.1992 ,102 Pt 1 , 113–121.
684–696. [CrossRef]17. Redfern, C.P .; Todd, C. Retinoic acid receptor expression in human skin keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts in vitro .J. Cell Sci.1992 ,102 Pt 1 , 113–121.18. Thoreau, E.; Arlabosse, J.-M.; Bouix-Peter, C.; Chambon, S.; Chantalat, L.; Daver, S.; Dumais, L.; Duvert, G.; Feret, A.; Ouvry, G.;et al. Structure-based design of Trifarotene (CD5789), a potent and selective RAR γagonist for the treatment of acne. Bioorg. Med.Chem. Lett. 2018 ,28, 1736–1741. [CrossRef]19. Aubert, J.; Piwnica, D.; Bertino, B.; Blanchet-R éthoré, S.; Carlavan, I.; D éret, S.; Dreno, B.; Gamboa, B.; Jomard, A.; Luzy, A.;et al. Nonclinical and human pharmacology of the potent and selective topical retinoic acid receptor- γagonist trifarotene. Br. J.Dermatol. 2018 ,179, 442–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]20. Food and Drug Administration. Novel Drug Approvals for 2019. Available online: http://www.fda.gov (accessed on 6 August2020).
2020).21. Galderma. Aklief ®(Trifarotene): US Prescribing Information. Available online: http://www.galderma.com/ (accessed on 6August 2020).22. Chien, A. Retinoids in Acne Management: Review of Current Understanding, Future Considerations, and Focus on TopicalTreatments. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2018 ,17, s51–s55. [PubMed]23. Charton, J.; Deprez-Poulain, R.; Hennuyer, N.; Tailleux, A.; Staels, B.; Deprez, B. Novel non-carboxylic acid retinoids: 1,2,4-Oxadiazol-5-one derivatives. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2009 ,19, 489–492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Charpentier, B.; Bernardon, J.-M.; Eustache, J.; Millois, C.; Martin, B.; Michel, S.; Shroot, B. Synthesis, Structure-AfﬁnityRelationships, and Biological Activities of Ligands Binding to Retinoic Acid Receptor Subtypes. J. Med. Chem. 1995 ,38, 4993–5006.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 14 of 1625. Fagerberg, L.; Hallström, B.M.; Oksvold, P .; Kampf, C.; Djureinovic, D.; Odeberg, J.; Habuka, M.; Tahmasebpoor, S.; Danielsson,A.; Edlund, K.; et al. Analysis of the Human Tissue-speciﬁc Expression by Genome-wide Integration of Transcriptomics andAntibody-based Proteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2014 ,13, 397–406. [CrossRef]26. Maynepharma. Available online: https://www.maynepharma.com/innovation/novel-pipeline/ (accessed on 6 August 2020).27. Ms, N.W.; Benkali, K.; S áenz, A.A.; Poncet, M.; Graeber, M. Clinical Pharmacology and Safety of Trifarotene, a First-in-ClassRAR γ-Selective Topical Retinoid. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2020 ,60, 660–668. [CrossRef]28. Drugs.com. Gleolan (Aminolevulinic Acid) Drug Interactions from Drugs.com; c1996–2018 [Updated: 20 November 2018].Available online: https://www.drugs.com/mtm/gleolan.html (accessed on 6 August 2020).
29. Basak, S.A.; Zaenglein, A.L. Acne and Its Management. Pediatr. Rev. 2013 ,34, 479–497. [CrossRef]30. Lasek, R.J.; Chren, M.-M. Acne vulgaris and the quality of life of adult dermatology patients. Arch. Dermatol. 1998 ,134, 454–458.[CrossRef]31. Newton, J.N.; Mallon, E.; Klassen, A.; Ryan, T.J.; Finlay, A.Y. The effectiveness of acne treatment: An assessment by patients of theoutcome of therapy. Br. J. Dermatol. 1997 ,137, 563–567. [CrossRef]32. Nast, A.; Dr éno, B.; Bettoli, V .; Degitz, K.; Erdmann, R.; Finlay, A.Y.; Ganceviciene, R.; Haedersdal, M.; Layton, A.; L ópez-Estebaranz, J.; et al. European Evidence-based (S3) Guidelines for the Treatment of Acne. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2012 ,26(Suppl. S1), 1–29. [CrossRef]33. Zaenglein, A.L.; Pathy, A.L.; Schlosser, B.J.; Alikhan, A.; Baldwin, H.E.; Berson, D.S.; Bowe, W.P .; Graber, E.M.; Harper, J.C.;
Kang, S.; et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2016 ,74, 945–973.e33. [CrossRef][PubMed]34. Czernielewski, J.; Michel, S.; Bouclier, M.; Baker, M.; Hensby, C. Adapalene biochemistry and the evolution of a new topicalretinoid for treatment of acne. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2001 ,15(Suppl. S3), 5–12. [CrossRef]35. Michel, S.; Jomard, A.; D émarchez, M. Pharmacology of adapalene. Br. J. Dermatol. 1998 ,139(Suppl. S52), 3–7. [CrossRef]36. Tan, J.; Thiboutot, D.; Popp, G.; Gooderham, M.; Lynde, C.; Del Rosso, J.; Weiss, J.; Blume-Peytavi, U.; Weglovska, J.; Johnson, S.;et al. Randomized phase 3 evaluation of trifarotene 50 µg/g cream treatment of moderate facial and truncal acne. J. Am. Acad.Dermatol. 2020 ,80, 1691–1699. [CrossRef]37. Blume-Peytavi, U.; Fowler, J.; Kem ény, L.; Draelos, Z.; Cook-Bolden, F.; Dirschka, T.; Eichenﬁeld, L.; Graeber, M.; Ahmad, F.;
Saenz, A.A.; et al. Long-term safety and efﬁcacy of trifarotene 50 µg/g cream, a ﬁrst-in-class RAR- γselective topical retinoid, inpatients with moderate facial and truncal acne. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2019 ,34, 166–173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Johnson, S.M.; Chavda, R.; Dubois, J.C. Subject Satisfaction with Trifarotene 50 µg/g Cream in the Treatment of Facial and TruncalAcne Vulgaris: A Case Series. Dermatol. Ther. 2020 ,10, 1165–1173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]39. Lee, Y.B.; Byun, E.J.; Kim, H.S. Potential Role of the Microbiome in Acne: A Comprehensive Review. J. Clin. Med. 2019 ,8, 987.[CrossRef]40. McCoy, W.H.; Otchere, E.; Rosa, B.A.; Martin, J.; Mann, C.M.; Mitreva, M. Skin Ecology during Sebaceous Drought—How SkinMicrobes Respond to Isotretinoin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2019 ,139, 732–735. [CrossRef]41. Baron, J.M.; Heise, R.; Blaner, W.S.; Neis, M.; Joussen, S.; Dreuw, A.; Marquardt, Y.; Saurat, J.-H.; Merk, H.F.; Bickers, D.R.; et al.
Retinoic Acid and its 4-Oxo Metabolites are Functionally Active in Human Skin Cells In Vitro. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2005 ,125,143–153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Duell, E.A.; Astrom, A.; Grifﬁths, C.E.; Chambon, P .; Voorhees, J.J. Human skin levels of retinoic acid and cytochrome P-450-
143–153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Duell, E.A.; Astrom, A.; Grifﬁths, C.E.; Chambon, P .; Voorhees, J.J. Human skin levels of retinoic acid and cytochrome P-450-derived 4-hydroxyretinoic acid after topical application of retinoic acid in vivo compared to concentrations required to stimulateretinoic acid receptor-mediated transcription in vitro. J. Clin. Investig. 1992 ,4, 1269–1274. [CrossRef]43. Everts, H.B. Endogenous retinoids in the hair follicle and sebaceous gland. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2012 ,1821 , 222–229. [CrossRef][PubMed]44. Finzi, E.; Blake, M.J.; Celano, P .; Skouge, J.; Diwan, R. Cellular localization of retinoic acid receptor-gamma expression in normaland neoplastic skin. Am. J. Pathol. 1992 ,140, 1463–1471.45. Jiang, Y.J.; Lu, B.; Kim, P .; Paragh, G.; Schmitz, G.; Elias, P .M.; Feingold, K.R. PPAR and LXR Activators Regulate ABCA12Expression in Human Keratinocytes. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2008 ,128, 104–109. [CrossRef]
46. Marulli, G.C.; Campione, E.; Chimenti, M.S.; Terrinoni, A.; Melino, G.; Bianchi, L. Type I lamellar ichthyosis improved bytazarotene 0.1% gel. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2003 ,28, 391–393. [CrossRef]47. Virtanen, M.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Mörk, N.J.; Leigh, I.; Bowden, P .E.; Vahlquist, A. Phenotypic/Genotypic Correlations in Patientswith Epidermolytic Hyperkeratosis and the Effects of Retinoid Therapy on Keratin Expression. Acta Derm. Venereol. 2001 ,81,163–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Dooren-Greebe, R.; Van De Kerkhof, P .; Happle, R. Acitretin monotherapy in Darier’s disease. Br. J. Dermatol. 1989 ,121, 375–379.[CrossRef] [PubMed]49. Marukian, N.V .; Hu, R.-H.; Craiglow, B.G.; Milstone, L.M.; Zhou, J.; Theos, A.; Kaymakcalan, H.; Akkaya, D.A.; Uitto, J.J.;Vahidnezhad, H.; et al. Expanding the Genotypic Spectrum of Bathing Suit Ichthyosis. JAMA Dermatol. 2017 ,153, 537–543.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]50. Whittaker, S.J.; MacKie, R.M. Cutaneous lymphomas and lymphocytic inﬁltrates. In Rook’s Textbook of Dermatology , 7th ed.; Burns,T., Breathnach, S., Cox, N., Grifﬁths, C., Eds.; Blackwell Science Ltd.: Oxford, UK, 2004; p. 54.1.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 15 of 1651. Siegel, R.S.; Pandolﬁno, T.; Guitart, J.; Rosen, S.; Kuzel, T.M. Primary Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma: Review and Current Concepts.J. Clin. Oncol. 2000 ,18, 2908–2925. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Diamandidou, E.; Cohen, P .R.; Kurzrock, R. Mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome. Blood 1996 ,88, 2385–2409. [CrossRef]53. Vonderheid, E.C.; Bernengo, M.G.; Burg, G.; Duvic, M.; Heald, P .; Laroche, L.; Olsen, E.; Pittelkow, M.; Russell-Jones, R.; Takigawa,M.; et al. Update on erythrodermic cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: Report of the international society for cutaneous lymphomas. J.Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2002 ,46, 95–106. [CrossRef]54. Paulli, M.; Berti, E. Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (including rare subtypes). Current concepts. II. Haematologica 2004 ,89, 1372–1388.55. Jenerowicz, D.; Silny, W.; Da ´ nczak-Pazdrowska, A.; Pola ´ nska, A.; Osmola-Ma ´ nkowska, A.; Olek-Hrab, K. Environmental factors
and allergic diseases. Ann. Agric. Environ. Med. 2012 ,19, 475–481.56. Joks, M.; My´ sliwiec, K.; Lewandowski, K. Primary breast lymphoma—A review of the literature and report of three cases. Arch.Med. Sci. 2011 ,1, 27–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Cheng, A.L.; Su, I.J.; Chen, C.C.; Tien, H.F.; Lay, J.D.; Chen, B.R.; Pu, Y.S.; Hong, R.L.; Shen, M.C.; Wang, C.H. Use of retinoic acidsin the treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma: A pilot study. J. Clin. Oncol. 1994 ,12, 1185–1192. [CrossRef]58. Sidell, N.; Chang, B.; Bhatti, L. Upregulation by Retinoic Acid of Interleukin-2-Receptor mRNA in Human T Lymphocytes. Cell.Immunol. 1993 ,146, 28–37. [CrossRef]59. Gorgun, G.; Foss, F. Immunomodulatory effects of RXR rexinoids: Modulation of high-afﬁnity IL-2R expression enhancessusceptibility to denileukin diftitox. Blood 2002 ,100, 1399–1403. [CrossRef]60. Schadt, C.R. Topical and oral bexarotene. Dermatol. Ther. 2013 ,26, 400–403. [CrossRef]
61. Tarabadkar, E.S.; Shinohara, M.M. Skin Directed Therapy in Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma. Front. Oncol. 2019 ,9, 260. [CrossRef][PubMed]62. Besner Morin, C.; Roberge, D.; Turchin, I.; Petrogiannis-Haliotis, T.; Popradi, G.; Pehr, K. Tazarotene 0.1% Cream as Monotherapyfor Early-Stage Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma. J. Cutan. Med. Surg. 2016 ,20, 244–248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identiﬁer NCT03738800, A Safety, Efﬁcacy and SystemicExposure Study of CD5789 Cream in Adults and Adolescents with Lamellar Ichthyosis; 2019 May 1 [about 4 Screens]. 29 February.Available online: https://ichgcp.net/clinical-trials-registry/NCT03738800/ (accessed on 6 August 2020).64. Campbell, R.M.; DiGiovanna, J.J. Skin cancer chemoprevention with systemic retinoids: An adjunct in the management ofselected high-risk patients. Dermatol. Ther. 2006 ,19, 306–314. [CrossRef]
65. Lotan, R. Effects of vitamin A and its analogs (retinoids) on normal and neoplastic cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1980 ,605, 33–91.[CrossRef]66. Lens, M.; Medenica, L. Systemic retinoids in chemoprevention of non-melanoma skin cancer. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2008 ,9,1363–1374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Cheepala, S.B.; Yin, W.; Syed, Z.; Gill, J.N.; Mcmillian, A.; Kleiner, H.E.; Lynch, M.; Loganantharaj, R.; Trutschl, M.; Cvek, U.; et al.Identiﬁcation of the B-Raf/Mek/Erk MAP kinase pathway as a target for all-trans retinoic acid during skin cancer promotion.Mol. Cancer 2009 ,8, 27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]68. Sorg, O.; Tran, C.; Saurat, J.-H. Cutaneous Vitamins A and E in the Context of Ultraviolet- or Chemically-Induced OxidativeStress. Skin Pharmacol. Appl. Skin Physiol. 2001 ,14, 363–372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]69. Moriarty, M.; Dunn, J.; Darragh, A.; Lambe, R.; Brick, I. Etretinate in treatment of actinic keratosis. A double-blind crossover
study. Lancet 1982 ,319, 364–365. [CrossRef]70. Bavinck, J.N.; Tieben, L.M.; Van Der Woude, F.J.; Tegzess, A.M.; Hermans, J.; Ter Schegget, J.; Vermeer, B.J. Prevention of
study. Lancet 1982 ,319, 364–365. [CrossRef]70. Bavinck, J.N.; Tieben, L.M.; Van Der Woude, F.J.; Tegzess, A.M.; Hermans, J.; Ter Schegget, J.; Vermeer, B.J. Prevention ofskin cancer and reduction of keratotic skin lesions during acitretin therapy in renal transplant recipients: A double-blind,placebo-controlled study. J. Clin. Oncol. 1995 ,13, 1933–1938. [CrossRef] [PubMed]71. Bollag, W.; Ott, F. Retinoic acid: Topical treatment of senile or actinic keratoses and basal cell carcinomas. Agents Actions 1970 ,1,172–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]72. Orlandi, A.; Bianchi, L.; Costanzo, A.; Campione, E.; Spagnoli, L.G.; Chimenti, S. Evidence of Increased Apoptosis and ReducedProliferation in Basal Cell Carcinomas Treated with Tazarotene. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2004 ,122, 1037–1041. [CrossRef]73. Bianchi, L.; Orlandi, A.; Campione, E.; Angeloni, C.; Costanzo, A.; Spagnoli, L.G.; Chimenti, S. Topical treatment of basal cell
carcinoma with tazarotene: A clinicopathological study on a large series of cases. Br. J. Dermatol. 2004 ,151, 148–156. [CrossRef]74. Nijsten, T.E.C.; Stern, R.S. Oral retinoid use reduces cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma risk in patients with psoriasis treatedwith psoralen-UVA: A nested cohort study. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2003 ,49, 644–650. [CrossRef]75. Kim, J.; Park, M.K.; Li, W.-Q.; Qureshi, A.A.; Cho, E. Association of Vitamin A Intake With Cutaneous Squamous Cell CarcinomaRisk in the United States. JAMA Dermatol. 2019 ,155, 1260–1268. [CrossRef]76. Cosio, T.; Di Prete, M.; Campione, E. Arsenic Trioxide, Itraconazole, All-Trans Retinoic Acid and Nicotinamide: A Proof ofConcept for Combined Treatments with Hedgehog Inhibitors in Advanced Basal Cell Carcinoma. Biomedicines 2020 ,8, 156.[CrossRef] [PubMed]77. Babino, G.; Diluvio, L.; Bianchi, L.; Orlandi, A.; Di Prete, M.; Chimenti, S.; Milani, M.; Campione, E. Long-term use of a new
topical formulation containing piroxicam 0.8% and sunscreen: Efﬁcacy and tolerability on actinic keratosis. A proof of conceptstudy. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 2016 ,32, 1345–1349. [CrossRef]
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 237 16 of 1678. Girmenia, C.; Coco, F.L.; Breccia, M.; Latagliata, R.; Spadea, A.; D’Andrea, M.; Gentile, G.; Micozzi, A.; Alimena, G.; Martino, P .;et al. Infectious complications in patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia treated with the AIDA regimen. Leukemia 2003 ,17,925–930. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Campione, E.; Paterno, E.J.; Diluvio, L.; Costanza, G.; Bianchi, L.; Carboni, I.; Chimenti, S.; Orlandi, A.; Marino, D.; Favalli, C.Tazarotene as alternative topical treatment for onychomycosis. Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 2015 ,9, 879–886. [CrossRef]80. Campione, E.; Gaziano, R.; Marino, D.; Orlandi, A. Fungistatic activity of all-trans retinoic acid against Aspergillus fumigatusand Candida albicans. Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 2016 ,10, 1551–1555. [CrossRef] [PubMed]81. Lei, G.-S.; Zhang, C.; Shao, S.; Jung, H.-W.; Durant, P .J.; Lee, C.-H. All-Trans Retinoic Acid in Combination with Primaquine
Clears Pneumocystis Infection. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e53479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Klassert, T.E.; Hanisch, A.; Bräuer, J.; Klaile, E.; Heyl, K.A.; Mansour, M.M.; Tam, J.M.; Vyas, J.M.; Slevogt, H. Modulatory role ofvitamin A on the Candida albicans-induced immune response in human monocytes. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 2014 ,203, 415–424.[CrossRef]83. Campione, E.; Gaziano, R.; Doldo, E.; Marino, D.; Falconi, M.; Iacovelli, F.; Tagliaferri, D.; Pacello, L.; Bianchi, L.; Lanna, C.; et al.Antifungal Effect of All-trans Retinoic Acid against Aspergillus fumigatus In Vitro and in a Pulmonary Aspergillosis In VivoModel. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2020 ,65. [CrossRef]84. Lipner, S.R.; Scher, R.K. Onychomycosis: Treatment and prevention of recurrence. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2019 ,80, 853–867.[CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Elewski, B.E. Onychomycosis: Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Management. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 1998 ,11, 415–429. [CrossRef]
86. Carrat ù, M.R.; Marasco, C.; Mangialardi, G.; Vacca, A. Retinoids: Novel immunomodulators and tumour-suppressive agents? Br.J. Pharmacol. 2012 ,167, 483–492. [CrossRef]87. Kligman, A.M.; Grove, G.L.; Hirose, R.; Leyden, J.J. Topical tretinoin for photoaged skin. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 1986 ,15 (Pt 2) ,836–859. [CrossRef]88. Li, Z.; Niu, X.; Xiao, S.; Ma, H. Retinoic acid ameliorates photoaged skin through RAR-mediated pathway in mice. Mol. Med. Rep.2017 ,16, 6240–6247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Rusu, A.; Tanase, C.; Pascu, G.-A.; Todoran, N. Recent Advances Regarding the Therapeutic Potential of Adapalene. Pharmaceuti-cals2020 ,13, 217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Campione, E.; Cosio, T.; Lanna, C.; Mazzilli, S.; Dika, E.; Bianchi, L. Clinical efﬁcacy and reﬂectance confocal microscopymonitoring in moderate-severe skin aging treated with a polyvinyl gel containing retinoic and glycolic acid: An assessor-blinded
1-month study proof-of-concept trial. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,20, 310–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Grandinetti, C.A.; Goldspiel, B.R. Sorafenib and Sunitinib: Novel Targeted Therapies for Renal Cell Cancer. Pharmacotherapy 2007 ,27, 1125–1144. [CrossRef]92. Lacouture, M.E.; Reilly, L.M.; Gerami, P .; Guitart, J. Hand foot skin reaction in cancer patients treated with the multikinaseinhibitors sorafenib and sunitinib. Ann. Oncol. 2008 ,19, 1955–1961. [CrossRef]93. ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identiﬁer NCT00667589, Four-Arm Study to Evaluate Urea40% Cream, Fluocinonide 0.05% Cream, Tazarotene 0.1% Cream, and an Emollient Cream for the Treatment of Hand-Foot SkinReaction Related to the Use of Multi-Targeted Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Sorafenib. 5 June 2013; [about 4 Screens]. 29 February.Available online: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT00667589?cond=hand-foot+skin+reaction&draw=2&rank=5(accessed on 3 September 2020).
(accessed on 3 September 2020).94. ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identiﬁer NCT04071756, A Phase II Randomized Double-
(accessed on 3 September 2020).94. ClinicalTrials.gov. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Identiﬁer NCT04071756, A Phase II Randomized Double-Blind Trial of Topical Tazarotene 0.1% Gel Versus Placebo Gel for the Prevention of Regoraf-Enib-Induced Hand-Foot-SkinReaction; 12 December 2019; [about 4 Screens]. 29 February. Available online: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04071756?term=tazarotene&draw=2&rank=1 (accessed on 3 September 2020).
