biomedicinesArticleTherapeutic Potential of Luteolin on Impaired Wound Healingin Streptozotocin-Induced RatsLi-You Chen1,2, Hsin-Lin Cheng3, Yu-Hsiang Kuan4,5, Tang-Jun Liang1, Yun-Yi Chao1andHsing-Chun Lin3,6,*/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Chen, L.-Y.; Cheng, H.-L.;Kuan, Y.-H.; Liang, T.-J.; Chao, Y.-Y.;Lin, H.-C. Therapeutic Potential ofLuteolin on Impaired Wound Healingin Streptozotocin-Induced Rats.Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9070761Academic Editor:Maria Stefania SinicropiReceived: 28 May 2021Accepted: 28 June 2021Published: 30 June 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access article
This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,Taichung 40201, Taiwan; peiyu@csmu.edu.tw (L.-Y.C.); skym122951703@gmail.com (T.-J.L.);catherine2880343@gmail.com (Y.-Y.C.)2Department of Medical Education, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40201, Taiwan3Department of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 40201, Taiwan; iamsamlee@livemail.tw4Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung 40201, Taiwan;kuanyh@csmu.edu.tw5Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40201, Taiwan6Department of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40201, Taiwan*Correspondence: linhsingchun@gmail.com; Tel.: +886-4-24739595 (ext. 34301)
Abstract: Long-term hyperglycemia may lead to diabetic microvascular and macrovascular com-plications that can affect the peripheral vascular system, particularly in wound healing capacity.Impaired angiogenesis and delayed wound healing are signiﬁcant clinically. Luteolin (3′, 4′, 5,7-tetrahydroxyﬂavone) is a naturally occurring ﬂavonoid that is ubiquitously found in plants. Recentevidence has shown that luteolin is an anti-inﬂammatory and anti-oxidative agent. However, theeffect of systemic luteolin administration on diabetic wound restoration remains unclear. Herein, weexplored the effectiveness of luteolin for improving delayed and impaired healing of skin woundand further clariﬁed the underlying mechanisms. The results indicated that luteolin signiﬁcantlyattenuates blood glucose concentration, improves impaired healing and accelerates re-epithelizationof skin wound in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats. Histopathological staining and im-
munoblotting revealed an inhibitory effect of luteolin on inﬂammatory cell and cytokine production.We also observed remarkable decreases in protein expressions of inﬂammatory factors includingmatrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α, interleukin (IL-6), and IL1- βanddownregulation of nuclear factor (NF)- κB, as well as increases in anti-oxidative enzymes such assuperoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) induced by nuclear factor ery-throid 2-related factor (Nrf)-2 following luteolin supplementation. Furthermore, luteolin decreasedthe expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and increased the expression of ubiquitincarboxy-terminal hydrolase (UCH)-L1, as evidenced by angiogenesis and neuronal regenerationin completely healed wound. In conclusion, systemic administration of luteolin promotes woundrestoration by ameliorating inﬂammation and oxidative stress through the inactivation of NF- κB and
upregulation of Nrf2 in STZ-induced diabetic rats.Keywords: luteolin; diabetes; wound healing; anti-oxidation; anti-inﬂammation
upregulation of Nrf2 in STZ-induced diabetic rats.Keywords: luteolin; diabetes; wound healing; anti-oxidation; anti-inﬂammation1. IntroductionDiabetes mellitus (DM) is a group of chronic metabolic disorders that are characterizedby hyperglycemia, defective insulin secretion and/or insulin action and strong correlationwith higher risk of disease-related complications [ 1]. Long-term hyperglycemia in patientswith diabetes confers a higher risk for chronic complications due to accumulations oftoxic substances in tissues, which are irreversible and lead to microvascular (retinopa-thy, nephropathy, and neuropathy) or macrovascular (coronary heart disease, peripheralvascular disease, and stroke) diseases [ 2–4]. The signiﬁcant physiological impairmentBiomedicines 2021 ,9, 761. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9070761 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomedicines
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 2 of 13associated with hyperglycemia has been traditionally linked to impaired wound healing.Prolonged hyperglycemia causes endothelial dysfunction, leading to downregulation ofpro-angiogenic signature and induction of oxidative stress [ 5]. Wound healing is a multi-faceted dynamic repair process of skin barrier breach that involves signiﬁcant physiologicalevents such as growth factors and cytokines in response to cellular immunity. In additionto immune response activation, impaired wound healing leads to overproduction of matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs), resulting in extracellular matrix degradation and failure togenerate skin re-epithelialization [ 6–8]. Although the comprehensive knowledge of thepathological process of diabetes has been well clariﬁed, commercially available therapeuticsmainly focus on the transient hypoglycemic effect. An effective strategy for preventing dia-
betic complications has not yet been developed [ 3,9,10]. Therefore, identifying a potentialtherapeutic candidate for preventing and delaying the onset of DM and its complicationsis of great interest.Emerging studies have focused on naturally occurring phenolic substances to providea pharmaceutical strategy for treating metabolic disorders [ 11,12]. Flavonoids are a vastand ubiquitous group of phytonutrients. As a member of the ﬂavonoid group, luteolin(3′, 4′, 5, 7-tetrahydroxyﬂavone) exhibits a wide spectrum of biological beneﬁts, includ-ing anti-inﬂammatory, anti-oxidative, anti-carcinogenic, anti-allergenic, vasoprotective,and neuroprotective effects, that may be attributed to the presence of diverse chemicalentities [ 13–16]. In in vitro and in vivo models of ischemic-induced cell injury, luteolinsuppresses the secretion of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α, interleukin (IL)-6, and inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated macrophages [ 17,18]. Lu-teolin also inhibits the neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in activated human neutrophils,reduces oxidative stress, and enhances immune defense by inhibiting the production ofreactive oxygen species (ROS) [ 13]. In addition to its radical scavenging capacity, luteolinexerts great potential against multiple malignancies, activating cell-death pathways andcell cycle arrest, blocking angiogenesis and inﬂuencing tumor development by mediatinginsulin-like growth factor (IGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and ﬁbroblastgrowth factor (FGF) [ 19,20]. Interestingly, luteolin also contributes to anti-diabetic action,owing to its anti-oxidative capacity, as it targets signature cascades of AMP-activatedprotein kinase (AMPK), growth factors, cytokines, and p53-generated ROS and superoxidedismutase 1 (SOD1) [21–24].
dismutase 1 (SOD1) [21–24].Thus, luteolin is a promising candidate for ameliorating oxidative stress and inﬂam-mation. However, the capacity of luteolin to promote cutaneous wound closure and itsinteraction with crucial factors involved in delayed wound healing under hyperglycemicconditions has not been clariﬁed. In the present study, we proposed that luteolin restores thecellular redox status and suppresses the inﬂammatory cascade to exert healing-promotingeffects and further explored the detailed mechanistic pathways.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Animals and Experimental DesignEighteen 8-week-old male Wistar rats weighing 250–300 g each were purchased fromBioLASCO Taiwan Co., Ltd. (Taipei, Taiwan). Rats were housed in a controlled environ-ment (23±2°C, relative humidity 60%, 12 light/dark cycles) at the Experimental AnimalCenter of Chung Shan Medical University. The rats were acclimated for 7 days while being
fed a laboratory chow diet and receiving water ad libitum. Subsequently, the experimentalrats were randomly assigned to three groups: (a) non-DM (NDM) group, (b) DM group,and (c) DM with 100 mg/kg body weight luteolin administered intraperitoneally (DML)
rats were randomly assigned to three groups: (a) non-DM (NDM) group, (b) DM group,and (c) DM with 100 mg/kg body weight luteolin administered intraperitoneally (DML)group (Santa Cruz, sc-203119C). For induction of diabetes, rats were fasted overnight andinjected intraperitoneally with streptozotocin (STZ) (80 mg/kg) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,MO, USA) freshly dissolved in citrate buffer (pH 4.5). After the rats were fasted for 12 h(from 9 pm to 9 am), the blood collected from the tail vein was recorded to determinethe fasting blood glucose on days 1, 5, 7, 10, and 14 of the experiment. After the 14-daytreatment period, the animals were fasted overnight, then anesthetized with an overdose
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 3 of 13of inhaled carbon dioxide. The experimental procedures were approved by the Institu-tional Animal Care and Use Committee of Chung Shan Medical University on 07-Apr-2020(IACUC Approval No 2310) and performed according to the ethical guidelines for animalexperiments.2.2. Wound InductionAfter the fast overnight, the rats were injected intraperitoneally with STZ (80 mg/kg)at 9 am. Two days after the successful induction of hyperglycemia (above 250 mg/dL),wound surgery was performed. The rats were anesthetized with isoﬂuance administeredvia precision vaporizer. A 15 ×15 mm2incision was made surgically in the skin on thedorsal thorax. For the treatment every day, the uncovered wound was rinsed with normalsaline at 9 am before the rats were injected intraperitoneally with Luteolin (100 mg/kg).The wound diameter was determined with a digital caliper over 14 days. In addition,
excisional biopsies of the wound were taken for histological and immunohistochemicalexamination. For mechanistic cascade analysis, tissue samples from the wound area wereharvested on day 14 and stored at −80°Cuntil use. The rate of closure within the woundmargins was evaluated on macroscopic images using Image J software.2.3. Histological AnalysisTissue samples from wound biopsies were ﬁxed in 10% formalin buffered solution andembedded in parafﬁn, followed by staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Standardprocedures were performed to detect cellular inﬁltration, re-epithelization and extracellularmatrix (ECM) rearrangement [ 25]. The density of collagen was assessed using Masson’strichrome stain. Skin tissue samples were photographed under blind conditions using alight microscope (Axioplane 2, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Hamburg, Germany).2.4. Immunohistochemical StainingSections were immersed in 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 3%
H2O2/methanol solution for 1 h and washed with 0.01 M PBS (pH 7.4) to eliminateendogenous peroxidase activity. Following rinses in PBS, sections were incubated inblocking medium containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 3% normal goat serum and 2% bovineserum albumin (BSA) for 1 h to block nonspeciﬁc binding. The sections were reactedwith primary antibody nuclear factor (NF)- κB (p65) (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,Santa Cruz, CA, USA, sc-8008), TNF- α(1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-52746), IL-1β(1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-52012), IL-6 (1:500, Bioss Antibodies, Woburn,MA, USA, bs-0782R-TR), MMP-9 (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-13520) and vascularendothelial growth factor (VEGF) (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-7269) at 4◦C for 48 h.After washing with 0.01 M PBS (pH7.4), sections were placed in 1:200 secondary antibodyat room temperature for 2 h. Then, the sections were immersed in 1:100 concentration
of avidin-biotin complex (ABC complex, Vector) at room temperature for 1 h with 3,3′diaminobenzidine (DAB, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) as the chromogen. All reactedsections were rapidly dehydrated through a series of graded alcohols, cleared with xyleneand coverslipped with Permount.2.5. Western Blot AnalysisSkin wound tissue samples were homogenized in RIPA buffer and centrifuged at12,000×gat 4°Cfor 30 min to collect supernatants for Western blot analysis. Total proteinconcentration was quantiﬁed using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) accord-ing to the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, Western blotting was performed onSDS-PAGE with electrophoretic transfer to nitrocellulose (NC) papers (Trans-blot; BioRad).NC papers were incubated in 5% BSA at room temperature for blocking. After blocking,there was incubation with speciﬁc antibodies MMP-9 (1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
sc-13520), NF- κB (1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-8008), TNF- α(1:200, Santa CruzBiotechnology, sc-52746), IL-6 (1:500, Bioss Antibodies, bs-0782R-TR), IL-1 β(1:200, Santa
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 4 of 13Cruz Biotechnology, sc-52012), nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) (1:1000,Afﬁnity Biosciences, Cincinnati, OH, USA, AF0639), phospho-Nrf2 (1:1000, Afﬁnity Bio-sciences, Cincinnati, OH, USA, DF7519), SOD1 (1:1000, Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL,USA, PAI-30195), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) (1:1000, Abcam, Ab22604), and ubiq-uitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase (UCH)-L1 (1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-271639)at 4◦C overnight. NC papers were washed with tris-buffered saline and 0.1% Tween20 (TBST) 4 times, then incubated with anti-rabbit HRP-conjugated secondary antibody(1:5000, Sigma). Signals were visualized by chemiluminescence with a Western BlottingDetection Kit (Renaissance kit; NEN, Boston, MA, USA).2.6. ImmunoﬂuorescenceSkin wound tissue sections were placed on glass coverslips, then incubated withblocking buffer (0.1% Triton X-100, 3% normal goat serum, and 2% BSA) for 1 h. For deter-
mining UCH-L1 expressions, coverslips were incubated with UCH-L1 primary antibody(1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-271639) to localize nerve tissue. Subsequently, thecoverslips were washed with PBS and incubated with goat anti-mouse secondary antibodyconjugated with Alexa Fluor®488 (1:200, Thermo Scientiﬁc, A-11029) at room temperaturefor 1 h. Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and mounted on glass slides withProlong Antifade Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Images were examined underﬂuorescence microscope.2.7. Statistical AnalysisAll data are presented as mean ±standard error (SEM). Differences in quantitativeresults were determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc multiple comparisons using Bonferroni test. Student’s t-test was used to analyzeblood glucose levels and related protein expressions. Statistical difference was consideredsigniﬁcant when p value was less than 0.05.3. Results
3. Results3.1. Luteolin Attenuates Blood Glucose Level in STZ-Induced Diabetic RatsTo explore the in vivo anti-hyperglycemic effects of systemic luteolin administration,STZ-induced diabetic rats were supplemented with luteolin for 14 days. As shown inFigure 1, blood glucose levels were elevated, as incidence of hyperglycemia in DM andDML groups on day 1. We observed persistent hyperglycemia in the DM group, whileblood glucose level signiﬁcantly decreased in the DML group, compared to the DM group,on day 5. The results of this preliminary in vivo evaluation demonstrate the anti-diabeticactivity of luteolin in STZ-induced diabetes.Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 14   Figure 1. Luteolin ameliorated blood glucose levels in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Changes in blood glucose in STZ-induced diabetic rats supplemented with luteolin during 14-day experimental period. Values of individual  groups are presented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05,
compared with NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with DM group. NDM, non-diabetes mellitus; DM, diabetes mellitus; DML, diabetes mellitus tr eated with luteolin 100 mg/kg body weight, ip.  3.2. Luteolin Accelerates Wound Re-epithelizat ion and Inflammatory Response in STZ-Induced Diabetic Rats To explore whether systemic luteolin administration improves wound healing in di-abetic rats, a 15 × 15 mm2 wound was created and wound diameter was evaluated period-ically during the experimental period. On day 14, the wound in the NDM group had com-pletely healed. In the DM group, there remain ed a small incompletely healed wound. The wound surface significantly decreased following luteolin supplementation (DML group) in comparison with the DM group (Figure 2A). Moreover, continuous wound contraction was delayed in the DM group. Systemic lute olin administration improved delayed wound healing over 14 days (Figure 2B). On day 14, wound tissue was sampled and assessed for
histological change. Microscopic evaluation with H&E staining showed that on day 14,
healing over 14 days (Figure 2B). On day 14, wound tissue was sampled and assessed for histological change. Microscopic evaluation with H&E staining showed that on day 14, there were large numbers of fibroblasts in the wounds of the NDM and DML groups with good re-epithelialization. However, the fibers  in the DM group were in a disordered ar-rangement with poor re-epithelialization (Fig ure 3A). Masson staining showed deposition of collagen fibers at the wound site. The wo unds in the DM group showed severely dis-ordered collagen fiber arrangement and massive infiltration of inflammatory cells (black arrow). Wounds in the NDM and DML groups showed better and denser collagen fiber arrangement (Figure 3B). Compared with the DM group, NDM and DML groups showed fewer inflammatory cells (Figure 3C).  Figure 2. Effects of luteolin on wound healing rate in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Skin wound was generated with 15 mm
punch biopsies on the dorsal thorax of STZ-induced diabetic rats and non-diabetic rats. ( A) Representative images of the Figure 1. Luteolin ameliorated blood glucose levels in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Changes in bloodglucose in STZ-induced diabetic rats supplemented with luteolin during 14-day experimental period.Values of individual groups are presented as mean ±SEM. * p< 0.05, compared with NDM group.#p< 0.05, compared with DM group. NDM, non-diabetes mellitus; DM, diabetes mellitus; DML,diabetes mellitus treated with luteolin 100 mg/kg body weight, ip.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 5 of 133.2. Luteolin Accelerates Wound Re-epithelization and Inﬂammatory Response in STZ-InducedDiabetic RatsTo explore whether systemic luteolin administration improves wound healing indiabetic rats, a 15 ×15 mm2wound was created and wound diameter was evaluatedperiodically during the experimental period. On day 14, the wound in the NDM grouphad completely healed. In the DM group, there remained a small incompletely healedwound. The wound surface signiﬁcantly decreased following luteolin supplementation(DML group) in comparison with the DM group (Figure 2A). Moreover, continuous woundcontraction was delayed in the DM group. Systemic luteolin administration improveddelayed wound healing over 14 days (Figure 2B). On day 14, wound tissue was sampled andassessed for histological change. Microscopic evaluation with H&E staining showed that onday 14, there were large numbers of ﬁbroblasts in the wounds of the NDM and DML groups
with good re-epithelialization. However, the ﬁbers in the DM group were in a disorderedarrangement with poor re-epithelialization (Figure 3A). Masson staining showed depositionof collagen ﬁbers at the wound site. The wounds in the DM group showed severelydisordered collagen ﬁber arrangement and massive inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells (blackarrow). Wounds in the NDM and DML groups showed better and denser collagen ﬁberarrangement (Figure 3B). Compared with the DM group, NDM and DML groups showedfewer inﬂammatory cells (Figure 3C).Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 14   Figure 1. Luteolin ameliorated blood glucose levels in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Changes in blood glucose in STZ-induced diabetic rats supplemented with luteolin during 14-day experimental period. Values of individual  groups are presented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared with NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with DM group. NDM, non-diabetes mellitus;
DM, diabetes mellitus; DML, diabetes mellitus tr eated with luteolin 100 mg/kg body weight, ip.  3.2. Luteolin Accelerates Wound Re-epithelizat ion and Inflammatory Response in STZ-Induced Diabetic Rats To explore whether systemic luteolin administration improves wound healing in di-abetic rats, a 15 × 15 mm2 wound was created and wound diameter was evaluated period-ically during the experimental period. On day 14, the wound in the NDM group had com-pletely healed. In the DM group, there remain ed a small incompletely healed wound. The wound surface significantly decreased following luteolin supplementation (DML group) in comparison with the DM group (Figure 2A). Moreover, continuous wound contraction was delayed in the DM group. Systemic lute olin administration improved delayed wound healing over 14 days (Figure 2B). On day 14, wound tissue was sampled and assessed for histological change. Microscopic evaluation with H&E staining showed that on day 14,
there were large numbers of fibroblasts in the wounds of the NDM and DML groups with good re-epithelialization. However, the fibers  in the DM group were in a disordered ar-rangement with poor re-epithelialization (Fig ure 3A). Masson staining showed deposition of collagen fibers at the wound site. The wo unds in the DM group showed severely dis-ordered collagen fiber arrangement and massive infiltration of inflammatory cells (black arrow). Wounds in the NDM and DML groups showed better and denser collagen fiber arrangement (Figure 3B). Compared with the DM group, NDM and DML groups showed fewer inflammatory cells (Figure 3C).  Figure 2. Effects of luteolin on wound healing rate in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Skin wound was generated with 15 mm punch biopsies on the dorsal thorax of STZ-induced diabetic rats and non-diabetic rats. ( A) Representative images of the
Figure 2. Effects of luteolin on wound healing rate in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Skin wound was generated with 15 mm
Figure 2. Effects of luteolin on wound healing rate in STZ-induced diabetic rats. Skin wound was generated with 15 mmpunch biopsies on the dorsal thorax of STZ-induced diabetic rats and non-diabetic rats. ( A) Representative images of theskin wound were recorded on days 0, 5, 7, 10, and 14 during the experimental period. ( B) Quantitative images of the woundmargin were obtained by measuring the pixel size. Values of individual groups are presented as mean ±SEM. * p< 0.05,compared with NDM group. # p< 0.05, compared with DM group.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 6 of 13Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 14  skin wound were recorded on days 0, 5, 7, 10, and 14 during the experimental period. ( B) Quantitative images of the wound margin were obtained by measuring the pixel size. Valu es of individual groups are presented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared with NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with DM group.   Figure 3. Luteolin accelerates wound re-epithelialization and ameliorated inflammatory cell infiltration. ( A) Histological sections from the wound site demonstrated complete and in complete re-epithelialization and collagen deposition on day 14. Delayed re-epithelialization was observed in the DM group (black arrowheads denote re-epithelization of the wound). Scale bars: 300 μm. (B) Representative images of skin wounds (Masson trichrome staining) showed loss of infiltrating inflammatory cells in the NDM and DML groups (arrowheads). ( C) Average numbers of inflammatory cells were
determined using Image J software. Values of individual groups are presented as mean ± SEM. Difference was considered significant when p < 0.05. Scale bars: 200 μm. 3.3. Luteolin Attenuates NF- κB-Induced Inflammatory Response  and Nrf2-Mediated Oxidative Response in STZ-Induced Diabetic Rats The cells infiltration of the observed woun d is a typical sign of inflammation. There-fore, we explored whether accelerated wound he aling in diabetic rats systemically admin-istered with luteolin may be due to modulati on of the inflammatory response. As shown in Figure 4, the histological analysis of STZ-induced diabetic rats systemically adminis-trated with luteolin demonstrates a significant decrease in inflammatory cell infiltration when compared with the DM group. Compar ed with NDM group, immunoblotting re-sults revealed high levels of inflammatory markers, including TNF- α, IL-6, and IL1- β, as
well as MMPs (MMP-9), with activation of transcription factor NF- κB in the DM group which was attenuated by luteolin supplementati on (Figure 4). Similarly, histological eval-uation (Figures 3A) of skin wounds over 14 days confirmed full healing with low levels of TNF-α, IL1-β, and MMP-9 through downregulation of NF- κB in the NDM and DML groups, in contrast to the DM group (Figure 5). As impaired wound healing also induces oxidative stress, we further explored whethe r luteolin supplementation in STZ-induced diabetic rats modulates oxidative stress respon se. As shown in Figure 6, immunoblotting analysis showed that luteolin reversed the effects of reduced SOD1 and GSH-Px expres-sions, as well as Nrf2 phosph orylation in the DML group.  Figure 3. Luteolin accelerates wound re-epithelialization and ameliorated inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration. ( A) Histologicalsections from the wound site demonstrated complete and incomplete re-epithelialization and collagen deposition on
day 14. Delayed re-epithelialization was observed in the DM group (black arrowheads denote re-epithelization of thewound). Scale bars: 300 µm. ( B) Representative images of skin wounds (Masson trichrome staining) showed loss ofinﬁltrating inﬂammatory cells in the NDM and DML groups (arrowheads). ( C) Average numbers of inﬂammatory cells weredetermined using Image J software. Values of individual groups are presented as mean ±SEM. Difference was consideredsigniﬁcant when p< 0.05. Scale bars: 200 µm.3.3. Luteolin Attenuates NF- κB-Induced Inﬂammatory Response and Nrf2-Mediated OxidativeResponse in STZ-Induced Diabetic RatsThe cells inﬁltration of the observed wound is a typical sign of inﬂammation. There-fore, we explored whether accelerated wound healing in diabetic rats systemically adminis-tered with luteolin may be due to modulation of the inﬂammatory response. As shown inFigure 4, the histological analysis of STZ-induced diabetic rats systemically administrated
with luteolin demonstrates a signiﬁcant decrease in inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration when
Figure 4, the histological analysis of STZ-induced diabetic rats systemically administratedwith luteolin demonstrates a signiﬁcant decrease in inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration whencompared with the DM group. Compared with NDM group, immunoblotting resultsrevealed high levels of inﬂammatory markers, including TNF- α, IL-6, and IL1- β, as wellas MMPs (MMP-9), with activation of transcription factor NF- κB in the DM group whichwas attenuated by luteolin supplementation (Figure 4). Similarly, histological evaluation(Figure 3A) of skin wounds over 14 days conﬁrmed full healing with low levels of TNF- α,IL1-β, and MMP-9 through downregulation of NF- κB in the NDM and DML groups, incontrast to the DM group (Figure 5). As impaired wound healing also induces oxidativestress, we further explored whether luteolin supplementation in STZ-induced diabeticrats modulates oxidative stress response. As shown in Figure 6, immunoblotting analysis
showed that luteolin reversed the effects of reduced SOD1 and GSH-Px expressions, aswell as Nrf2 phosphorylation in the DML group.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 7 of 13Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 14   Figure 4. Effects of luteolin on protein expression levels of inflammato ry factors of skin wound on day 14. ( A) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer an d subjected to immunoblotting with anti-MMP-9, anti-NF- κB, anti-TNF- α, anti-IL-6, and anti-IL1- β antibodies. ( B) Quantitative results of MMP-9, NF- κB, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL1- β protein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. Values of individual groups ar e presented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared with the NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with the DM group.  Figure 5. L uteolin ameliorated inflammatory factors. To determine the inflammatory factors, tissue sections obtained from skin wound on day 14 were analyzed using immunohistochemistry for (A) MMP-9, ( B) NF-κB, (C) TNF-α, and ( D) IL1-β. Brown areas indicate positive staining (arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 μm.
(arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 μm. Figure 4. Effects of luteolin on protein expression levels of inﬂammatory factors of skin woundon day 14. ( A) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer and subjected to immunoblotting withanti-MMP-9, anti-NF- κB, anti-TNF- α, anti-IL-6, and anti-IL1- βantibodies. ( B) Quantitative results ofMMP-9, NF- κB, TNF- α, IL-6, and IL1- βprotein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. Valuesof individual groups are presented as mean ±SEM. * p< 0.05, compared with the NDM group.#p< 0.05, compared with the DM group.Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 14   Figure 4. Effects of luteolin on protein expression levels of inflammato ry factors of skin wound on day 14. ( A) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer an d subjected to immunoblotting with anti-MMP-9, anti-NF- κB, anti-TNF- α, anti-IL-6, and anti-IL1- β antibodies. ( B) Quantitative results of
MMP-9, NF- κB, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL1- β protein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. Values of individual groups ar e presented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared with the NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with the DM group.  Figure 5. L uteolin ameliorated inflammatory factors. To determine the inflammatory factors, tissue sections obtained from skin wound on day 14 were analyzed using immunohistochemistry for (A) MMP-9, ( B) NF-κB, (C) TNF-α, and ( D) IL1-β. Brown areas indicate positive staining (arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 μm. Figure 5. Luteolin ameliorated inﬂammatory factors. To determine the inﬂammatory factors, tissuesections obtained from skin wound on day 14 were analyzed using immunohistochemistry for ( A)MMP-9, ( B) NF- κB, (C) TNF- α, and ( D) IL1- β. Brown areas indicate positive staining (arrowheads).Scale bars: 100 µm.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 8 of 13Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 14   Figure 6. Effects of luteolin on protei n expression levels of oxidat ive enzymes of the skin wound on day 14. ( A) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer,  subjected to immunoblotting with anti-Nrf2, anti-phospho-Nrf2, anti-SOD 1, and anti-GSH-Px antibodies. ( B) Quantitative results of Nrf2, phospho-Nrf2, SOD1, and GSH-Px protein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. Values of individual groups are pres ented as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05, compared with the NDM group. # p < 0.05, compared with the DM group. 3.4. Luteolin Accelerates Angiogenesis and Neuronal  Regeneration in STZ-Induced Diabetic Rats To corroborate the acceleration of the healing process in diabetic rats systemically administered with luteolin, we examined an giogenesis capacity and nerve regeneration in skin wound biopsy samples. The protein expression of VEGF was considerably higher
in the DM group than in the NDM group, wh ereas systemic luteolin administration re-sulted in marked decreases in VEGF expres sion (Figure 7A). Immunofluorescence analy-sis with an antibody to the neuron cell spec ific marker UCH-L1 revealed higher UCH-L1-positive structure presenting within the section of skin wound biopsy in the DML group than in the DM group (Figure 7D). Similar effects were observed on immunoblotting anal-ysis (Figure 7B,C). Figure 6. Effects of luteolin on protein expression levels of oxidative enzymes of the skin woundon day 14. ( A) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer, subjected to immunoblotting with anti-Nrf2, anti-phospho-Nrf2, anti-SOD1, and anti-GSH-Px antibodies. ( B) Quantitative results of Nrf2,phospho-Nrf2, SOD1, and GSH-Px protein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. Valuesof individual groups are presented as mean ±SEM. * p< 0.05, compared with the NDM group.#p< 0.05, compared with the DM group.
#p< 0.05, compared with the DM group.3.4. Luteolin Accelerates Angiogenesis and Neuronal Regeneration in STZ-Induced Diabetic RatsTo corroborate the acceleration of the healing process in diabetic rats systemicallyadministered with luteolin, we examined angiogenesis capacity and nerve regeneration inskin wound biopsy samples. The protein expression of VEGF was considerably higher inthe DM group than in the NDM group, whereas systemic luteolin administration resultedin marked decreases in VEGF expression (Figure 7A). Immunoﬂuorescence analysis withan antibody to the neuron cell speciﬁc marker UCH-L1 revealed higher UCH-L1-positivestructure presenting within the section of skin wound biopsy in the DML group than inthe DM group (Figure 7D). Similar effects were observed on immunoblotting analysis(Figure 7B,C).Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 14
Figure 7. To determine the completeness of healing, tissue sections were obtained from the skin wound on day 14. ( A) immunohistochemistry for VEGF. Brown areas in dicate positive staining (arrowheads). ( B) Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer and subjected to immu noblotting with anti-UCH-L1. ( C) Quantitative results of UCH-L1 protein levels were adjusted to β-actin protein level. ( D) Tissue sections were stained for UCH-L1 by immunofluorescence. White triangle denote the locations of UCH-L1-expressing nerve bundles. White arrowheads denote the locations of UCH-L1-expressing nerve fibers. Scale bars: 100 μm. 4. Discussion The global prevalence of DM has risen dram atically over the past few decades, re-sulting in high socio-economic burden. Chronic non-healing wounds are troublesome and are most common complications of diabetes that contribute to lower extremity amputa-tions and increased morbidity and mortality rates. Multifactorial pathogenesis is related
to delayed wound healing, such as impaired glucose metabolism and both macrovascular and microvascular diseases. An STZ-induced diabetic animal model has commonly been
to delayed wound healing, such as impaired glucose metabolism and both macrovascular and microvascular diseases. An STZ-induced diabetic animal model has commonly been used to explore diabetes-related complicati ons including retinopathy, nephropathy, and foot ulcers owing to similar pathogenesis to  human type 1 diabetes. Rodent models have been well documented in the study of healing of excisional wounds in diabetic subjects, with straightforward evidence and process of re-epithelialization, angiogenesis and nerve regeneration. Luteolin is a promising natural bio-substa nce with pharmacological properties that provides significant protection against infl ammation and oxidative stress. These effects may be attributed to several mechanisms. St ructure–activity relationship studies have predicted the structural specificity of hydroxyl moieties at A and B rings of the luteolin structure and a C2-C3 double bond in conjugation with an oxo group at C4 position that
might exert free radical-scavenging, anti-inflammatory, and anti-oxidant activities [26,27]. Figure 7. To determine the completeness of healing, tissue sections were obtained from the skin wound on day 14. ( A)immunohistochemistry for VEGF. Brown areas indicate positive staining (arrowheads). ( B) Tissues were homogenized inRIPA buffer and subjected to immunoblotting with anti-UCH-L1. ( C) Quantitative results of UCH-L1 protein levels wereadjusted to β-actin protein level. ( D) Tissue sections were stained for UCH-L1 by immunoﬂuorescence. White triangledenote the locations of UCH-L1-expressing nerve bundles. White arrowheads denote the locations of UCH-L1-expressingnerve ﬁbers. Scale bars: 100 µm.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 9 of 134. DiscussionThe global prevalence of DM has risen dramatically over the past few decades, result-ing in high socio-economic burden. Chronic non-healing wounds are troublesome and aremost common complications of diabetes that contribute to lower extremity amputationsand increased morbidity and mortality rates. Multifactorial pathogenesis is related todelayed wound healing, such as impaired glucose metabolism and both macrovascularand microvascular diseases. An STZ-induced diabetic animal model has commonly beenused to explore diabetes-related complications including retinopathy, nephropathy, andfoot ulcers owing to similar pathogenesis to human type 1 diabetes. Rodent models havebeen well documented in the study of healing of excisional wounds in diabetic subjects,with straightforward evidence and process of re-epithelialization, angiogenesis and nerveregeneration.
regeneration.Luteolin is a promising natural bio-substance with pharmacological properties thatprovides signiﬁcant protection against inﬂammation and oxidative stress. These effectsmay be attributed to several mechanisms. Structure–activity relationship studies havepredicted the structural speciﬁcity of hydroxyl moieties at A and B rings of the luteolinstructure and a C2-C3 double bond in conjugation with an oxo group at C4 position thatmight exert free radical-scavenging, anti-inﬂammatory, and anti-oxidant activities [26,27].Accumulated research has shown that long-term treatment with luteolin improves pancreasβ-cell dysfunction and regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in both in vivo andin vitro diabetic models [ 28,29]. In the present study, we explored the hypoglycemiceffect of luteolin on STZ-induced diabetic rats. In the DML group, the results showedthat systemic luteolin administration signiﬁcantly reduced blood glucose levels from day
7 to 14, compared to the DM group. Consistent with the ﬁndings of previous studies,luteolin rescued pancreatic dysfunction and promoted β-cell regeneration for glucosemetabolism in the rats’ pancreatic carcinoma cell line [ 30]. As luteolin is evolving as apotential anti-inﬂammatory and anti-oxidative stress bioﬂavonoid, understanding thecomplete mechanistic action of luteolin in the promotion of wound healing is a prerequisitefor research on diabetes therapy.Wound closure is considered the sum of epithelization and proceeds from woundedge toward the migration of ﬁbroblasts at the original wound area. Impaired skin woundhealing is a key manifestation of diabetes. To illustrate wound contraction, an appropriateskin wound model should be carefully performed. A preliminary study of ﬂavonoidextracts from M.annua Linn. leaves containing luteolin demonstrated that 0.5% w/w haspotential beneﬁts in improving impaired wound healing in STZ-induced diabetic rats
on the basis of traditional folk remedies [ 31]. This is similar to our results that systemicluteolin administration improved delayed wound healing on day 5 following wound in-duction with a signiﬁcant reduction in skin wound area in the DML group compared tothe DM group. Initially, the wound healing process starts from damaged blood vessels andmicrobial pathogen invasion at the wound site, rapidly followed by acute inﬂammatoryresponse mediated by pro-inﬂammatory cells including neutrophils and macrophages andthe production of cytokines. Inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells were typically found toincrease in the DM group, while the luteolin-treated rats revealed a signiﬁcant decrease inthe DML group. Importantly, phenolic substances possess wide-ranging pharmacologicalproperties including anti-oxidative stress, anti-ﬁbrosis, anti-tumor, anti-microbial infection,and anti-inﬂammatory activities and, thus, exerted valuable medicinal applications. For
example, quercetin enhances ﬁbroblast migration and proliferation, while inhibiting ﬁbrotic
and anti-inﬂammatory activities and, thus, exerted valuable medicinal applications. Forexample, quercetin enhances ﬁbroblast migration and proliferation, while inhibiting ﬁbroticscarring, which contributes to accelerated wound closure [ 32]. Interestingly, comparativeresearch on the composition of phenolic substances in medicinal plants with abundantluteolin has shown a signiﬁcant association between total anti-oxidant activity and woundhealing in an in vitro NIH-3T3 ﬁbroblast model [ 31]. This is similar to our results, thatsystemic luteolin administration promotes wound re-epithelialization with well-organizedﬁbroblast arrangement. Furthermore, chronic inﬂammation is due to prolonged inﬂamma-tory cell migration in the wound area, thus limiting ﬁbroblast arrangement and collagen
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 10 of 13synthesis, which subsequently leads to impairment of the healing mechanism. In vivostudies on rodents with diabetes have indicated differing expression levels of VEGF whichare associated with impaired vascularization, failed wound contraction and reduced epider-mal re-epithelization and formation [ 33,34]. In the present study, immunohistochemistryand H&E staining revealed that VEGF expression and local inﬂammatory inﬁltration arereduced in the DML group when compared with the DM group. Based on these aforemen-tioned data, luteolin shows anti-inﬂammatory and anti-oxidative effects in the diabeticwound rat model.Persistent oxidative stress stimulates the activation of NF- κB-mediated inﬂammatorycytokines production, including TNF- αand ILs, which leads to chronic inﬂammationwith requirement for NF- κB during diabetic wound healing [ 35]. Consequently, in thepresent study, immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry results revealed that NF- κB,
TNF- α, IL6, and IL1- βprotein expressions dramatically increase after wound creation, withsigniﬁcant reversal after 14-day luteolin treatment in the DML group, consistent with theﬁndings that luteolin improves ﬁbroblast arrangement and inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration.In addition to reducing levels of NF- κB, TNF- α, IL-6, and IL1- βproteins, luteolin lowersMMP-9 expression, which is also implicated in the regulation of angiogenesis and tissueremodeling during diabetic wound healing. Interestingly, this result was consistent withour ﬁndings, that increased proangiogenic factor VEGF stimulates new vessels to sprout atthe wound site as evidence of delayed wound contraction, and was reversed by luteolintreatment. Moreover, it has been previously conﬁrmed that high expression levels of VEGFin early stage of wound healing promote vascular permeability, while low levels of VEGFwere found in epithelialized wound [ 36]. Accumulated evidence from in vivo ,in vitro , and
in silico studies reveals that phenolic compounds improve inﬂammation and oxidativestress via modulation of various genes and relevant signal transduction involved in woundhealing. Latha demonstrated the antidiabetic effects of beleric myrobalan phenolic extractcontaining gallic acid, including regeneration of pancreatic β-cell function and stimulationof insulin secretion in STZ-induced diabetic rat model [ 37]. We speculated that antidiabeticaction of luteolin is due to its antioxidative stress potential, which provides an appropriateenvironment for diabetic wound healing. Moreover, sustained oxidative stress mightfacilitate NF- κB activation and prolong inﬂammation. Therefore, in this regard, furtherinvestigations are necessary to clarify the molecular mechanisms by which oxidative stressis regulated by luteolin. As expected, highly signiﬁcant increases in the expression levelsof SOD1 and GHS-Px were observed in the DML group compared to the DM group.
Luteolin has been previously reported to exert cardiovascular and neuronal protection viainhibition of NF- κB-mediated inﬂammatory response and to trigger Nrf-2 activation, whichenhances transcriptional activity of antioxidant genes in rodent models [ 38,39]. Indeed, thepresent data shows that luteolin enhances SOD1 and GHS-Px expressions by promotingphosphorylation of Nrf-2.The nervous system is responsible for the innervation of skin vasculature and thedetection of tissue injury. Diabetic wound healing involves sensitization and regenerationof nociceptive neurons, modulated by UCH-L1, which are involved in ECM synthesis andre-epithelization [ 40–42]. It has been reported that UCH-L1 is exclusively found in neuronsand plays a role in neuronal regeneration within tissue repair [ 43–45]. Therefore, UCH-L1may be a biomarker of tissue damage and may indicate the recovery status in diabeticwound healing. Results of immunoﬂuorescence staining revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in
may be a biomarker of tissue damage and may indicate the recovery status in diabeticwound healing. Results of immunoﬂuorescence staining revealed a signiﬁcant decrease inUCH-L1 ﬂuorescence intensity in the DM group when compared with the NDM group,with an obvious increase after luteolin treatment in the DML group.In this study, nevertheless, there are some advantages as well as some limitations.Although it is not new for the wound healing applied with luteolin, the main study is forthe systemic effect instead of the local effects. Therefore, this study uses an intraperitonealinjection of luteolin to reduce the oxidative pressure and inﬂammation in hyperglycemicrats to improve the development of wound healing.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 11 of 135. ConclusionsThe present investigation was the ﬁrst to characterize the effect of systemic luteolinadministration in diabetes-impaired cutaneous healing in STZ-induced diabetic rats, andfurther explored the associated regulatory mechanism. The improvement in the delayedwound healing process may be related to the anti-hyperglycemic, anti-inﬂammatory, andanti-oxidative effects of luteolin in rats with diabetes. Our ﬁndings also provide a newinsight into the mechanisms of luteolin that are involved in improving wound repair.Luteolin appears to downregulate inﬂammatory mediators by inhibiting NF- κB expression,while upregulating antioxidant enzymes through activation of Nrf-2 phosphorylation(Figure 8). Moreover, we also provided biomarker of angiogenesis and neuronal regenera-tion for indicate recovery status in diabetic wound healing. Thus, luteolin is a promisingcandidate for treating diabetic wound injury.
candidate for treating diabetic wound injury.Biomedicines 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 14   Figure 8. Schematic representation of action by luteo lin on impaired wound healing in STZ-induced rats. Luteolin improves diabetic wound healing by  inhibiting inflammation and improving antiox-idative capacity, which associates with NF- κB-mediates MMP-9, IL-6, TNF- α, and IL-1 β downreg-ulation, and Nrf-2-mediates GHS-Px and SOD1 upregulation. Arrows: improve or increase. T-bar: inhibit.  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.-Y.C.; methodolo gy, Y.-H.K.; writing—original draft preparation, H.-L.C.; investigation and data curati on, T.-J.L. and Y.-Y.C.; fo rmal analysis and vali-dation, Y.-H.K.; writing—review and editing, L.-Y .C.; supervision, H.-C.L. All authors have read and agreed to the publishe d version of the manuscript.  Funding: This study is supported by the research grants CSH-2021-C-054 to H.-C.L. from the De-
partment of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medica l University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Institutional Review Board Statement: The experimental procedures were approved by the Institu-tional Animal Care and Use Committee of Chung Shan Medical University on 07-Apr-2020 (IACUC Approval No 2310).  Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Abbreviations: STZ streptozotocin MMP-9 matrix metalloproteinase-9 TNF-α tumor necrosis factor- α IL-6 interleukin-6 SOD1 superoxide dismutase GSH-Px glutathione peroxidase Nrf-2 nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor UCH-L1 ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase-1  References 1.  Chen, L.Y.; Huang, C.N.; Liao, C.K.; Chang, H.M.; Kuan, Y.H.; Tseng, T.J.; Yen, K.J.; Yang, K.L.; Lin, H.C. Effects of Rutin on  Wound Healing in Hyperglycemic Rats. Antioxidants 2020 , 9, doi:10.3390/antiox9111122.
2.  Donnelly, R.; Emslie-Smith, A.M.; Gardner, I. D.; Morris, A.D. ABC of arterial and ve nous disease: Vascular complications of diabetes. BMJ 2000 , 320, 1062–1066, doi:10.1136/bmj.320.7241.1062. Figure 8. Schematic representation of action by luteolin on impaired wound healing in STZ-inducedrats. Luteolin improves diabetic wound healing by inhibiting inﬂammation and improving antioxida-tive capacity, which associates with NF- κB-mediates MMP-9, IL-6, TNF- α, and IL-1 βdownregulation,and Nrf-2-mediates GHS-Px and SOD1 upregulation. Arrows: improve or increase. T-bar: inhibit.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.-Y.C.; methodology, Y.-H.K.; writing—original draftpreparation, H.-L.C.; investigation and data curation, T.-J.L. and Y.-Y.C.; formal analysis and valida-tion, Y.-H.K.; writing—review and editing, L.-Y.C.; supervision, H.-C.L. All authors have read andagreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study is supported by the research grants CSH-2021-C-054 to H.-C.L. from theDepartment of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
Funding: This study is supported by the research grants CSH-2021-C-054 to H.-C.L. from theDepartment of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.Institutional Review Board Statement: The experimental procedures were approved by the Institu-tional Animal Care and Use Committee of Chung Shan Medical University on 07-Apr-2020 (IACUCApproval No 2310).Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 12 of 13AbbreviationsSTZ streptozotocinMMP-9 matrix metalloproteinase-9TNF- α tumor necrosis factor- αIL-6 interleukin-6SOD1 superoxide dismutaseGSH-Px glutathione peroxidaseNrf-2 nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factorVEGF vascular endothelial growth factorUCH-L1 ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase-1References1. Chen, L.Y.; Huang, C.N.; Liao, C.K.; Chang, H.M.; Kuan, Y.H.; Tseng, T.J.; Yen, K.J.; Yang, K.L.; Lin, H.C. Effects of Rutin onWound Healing in Hyperglycemic Rats. Antioxidants 2020 ,9, 1122. [CrossRef]2. Donnelly, R.; Emslie-Smith, A.M.; Gardner, I.D.; Morris, A.D. ABC of arterial and venous disease: Vascular complications ofdiabetes. BMJ 2000 ,320, 1062–1066. [CrossRef]3. Patel, S.; Srivastava, S.; Singh, M.R.; Singh, D. Mechanistic insight into diabetic wounds: Pathogenesis, molecular targets andtreatment strategies to pace wound healing. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2019 ,112, 108615. [CrossRef]
4. Jhamb, S.; Vangaveti, V .N.; Malabu, U.H. Genetic and molecular basis of diabetic foot ulcers: Clinical review. J. Tissue Viability2016 ,25, 229–236. [CrossRef]5. Luc, K.; Schramm-Luc, A.; Guzik, T.J.; Mikolajczyk, T.P . Oxidative stress and inﬂammatory markers in prediabetes and diabetes.J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2019 ,70. [CrossRef]6. Wu, X.; Yang, L.; Zheng, Z.; Li, Z.; Shi, J.; Li, Y.; Han, S.; Gao, J.; Tang, C.; Su, L.; et al. Src promotes cutaneous wound healing byregulating MMP-2 through the ERK pathway. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2016 ,37, 639–648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]7. Farghali, H.A.; AbdElKader, N.A.; Khattab, M.S.; AbuBakr, H.O. Evaluation of subcutaneous inﬁltration of autologous platelet-rich plasma on skin-wound healing in dogs. Biosci. Rep. 2017 ,37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Tombulturk, F.K.; Soydas, T.; Sarac, E.Y.; Tuncdemir, M.; Coskunpinar, E.; Polat, E.; Sirekbasan, S.; Kanigur-Sultuybek, G.
Regulation of MMP 2 and MMP 9 expressions modulated by AP-1 (c-jun) in wound healing: Improving role of Lucilia sericata indiabetic rats. Acta Diabetol. 2019 ,56, 177–186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]9. Okonkwo, U.A.; DiPietro, L.A. Diabetes and Wound Angiogenesis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]10. Hashemnia, M.; Nikousefat, Z.; Mohammadalipour, A.; Zangeneh, M.M.; Zangeneh, A. Wound healing activity of Pimpinellaanisum methanolic extract in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. J. Wound Care 2019 ,28, S26–S36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]11. Yen, G.C.; Cheng, H.L.; Lin, L.Y.; Chen, S.C.; Hsu, C.L. The potential role of phenolic compounds on modulating gut microbiotain obesity. J. Food Drug Anal. 2020 ,28. [CrossRef]12. Ren, B.; Qin, W.; Wu, F.; Wang, S.; Pan, C.; Wang, L.; Zeng, B.; Ma, S.; Liang, J. Apigenin and naringenin regulate glucose and lipid
metabolism, and ameliorate vascular dysfunction in type 2 diabetic rats. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2016 ,773, 13–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Yang, S.C.; Chen, P .J.; Chang, S.H.; Weng, Y.T.; Chang, F.R.; Chang, K.Y.; Chen, C.Y.; Kao, T.I.; Hwang, T.L. Luteolin attenuatesneutrophilic oxidative stress and inﬂammatory arthritis by inhibiting Raf1 activity. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2018 ,154, 384–396.[CrossRef]14. Ribeiro, D.; Freitas, M.; Tome, S.M.; Silva, A.M.; Porto, G.; Fernandes, E. Modulation of human neutrophils’ oxidative burst byﬂavonoids. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2013 ,67, 280–292. [CrossRef]15. Ambasta, R.K.; Gupta, R.; Kumar, D.; Bhattacharya, S.; Sarkar, A.; Kumar, P . Can luteolin be a therapeutic molecule for both coloncancer and diabetes? Brief. Funct. Genom. 2018 ,18, 230–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Nabavi, S.F.; Braidy, N.; Gortzi, O.; Sobarzo-Sanchez, E.; Daglia, M.; Skalicka-Wozniak, K.; Nabavi, S.M. Luteolin as an anti-
inﬂammatory and neuroprotective agent: A brief review. Brain Res. Bull. 2015 ,119, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Xagorari, A.; Papapetropoulos, A.; Mauromatis, A.; Economou, M.; Fotsis, T.; Roussos, C. Luteolin inhibits an endotoxin-
17. Xagorari, A.; Papapetropoulos, A.; Mauromatis, A.; Economou, M.; Fotsis, T.; Roussos, C. Luteolin inhibits an endotoxin-stimulated phosphorylation cascade and proinﬂammatory cytokine production in macrophages. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 2001 ,296, 181–187.18. Ferrari, C.K.; Torres, E.A. Biochemical pharmacology of functional foods and prevention of chronic diseases of aging. Biomed.Pharmacother. 2003 ,57, 251–260. [CrossRef]19. Lim, D.Y.; Cho, H.J.; Kim, J.; Nho, C.W.; Lee, K.W.; Park, J.H. Luteolin decreases IGF-II production and downregulates insulin-likegrowth factor-I receptor signaling in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. BMC Gastroenterol. 2012 ,12, 9. [CrossRef]20. Kang, K.A.; Piao, M.J.; Ryu, Y.S.; Hyun, Y.J.; Park, J.E.; Shilnikova, K.; Zhen, A.X.; Kang, H.K.; Koh, Y.S.; Jeong, Y.J.; et al. Luteolininduces apoptotic cell death via antioxidant activity in human colon cancer cells. Int. J. Oncol. 2017 ,51, 1169–1178. [CrossRef]
21. El-Bassossy, H.M.; Abo-Warda, S.M.; Fahmy, A. Chrysin and luteolin attenuate diabetes-induced impairment in endothelial-dependent relaxation: Effect on lipid proﬁle, AGEs and NO generation. Phytother. Res. 2013 ,27, 1678–1684. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Biomedicines 2021 ,9, 761 13 of 1322. Gu, J.X.; Cheng, X.J.; Luo, X.; Yang, X.; Pang, Y.P .; Zhang, X.F.; Zhang, Y.Y.; Liu, Y. Luteolin Ameliorates Cognitive Impairments bySuppressing the Expression of Inﬂammatory Cytokines and Enhancing Synapse-Associated Proteins GAP-43 and SYN Levels inStreptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats. Neurochem. Res. 2018 ,43, 1905–1913. [CrossRef]23. Deqiu, Z.; Kang, L.; Jiali, Y.; Baolin, L.; Gaolin, L. Luteolin inhibits inﬂammatory response and improves insulin sensitivity in theendothelium. Biochimie 2011 ,93, 506–512. [CrossRef]24. Kim, H.J.; Lee, W.; Yun, J.M. Luteolin inhibits hyperglycemia-induced proinﬂammatory cytokine production and its epigeneticmechanism in human monocytes. Phytother. Res. 2014 ,28, 1383–1391. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Gerharz, M.; Baranowsky, A.; Siebolts, U.; Eming, S.; Nischt, R.; Krieg, T.; Wickenhauser, C. Morphometric analysis of murine
skin wound healing: Standardization of experimental procedures and impact of an advanced multitissue array technique. WoundRepair Regen. 2007 ,15, 105–112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Birt, D.F.; Hendrich, S.; Wang, W. Dietary agents in cancer prevention: Flavonoids and isoﬂavonoids. Pharmacol. Ther. 2001 ,90,157–177. [CrossRef]27. Moiseev Iu, B.; Korzhen’iants, V .A.; Biriukov, A.A. Effects of preliminary loading on dynamic strength of the spine. Aviakosm Ekol.Med. 1996 ,30, 31–34.28. Casimir, M.; Chaffard, G.; Maechler, P . Resveratrol long-term treatment differentiates INS-1E beta-cell towards improved glucoseresponse and insulin secretion. Pﬂugers Arch. 2019 ,471, 337–345. [CrossRef]29. Rouse, M.; Younes, A.; Egan, J.M. Resveratrol and curcumin enhance pancreatic beta-cell function by inhibiting phosphodiesteraseactivity. J. Endocrinol. 2014 ,223, 107–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Wu, W.; He, S.; Shen, Y.; Zhang, J.; Wan, Y.; Tang, X.; Liu, S.; Yao, X. Natural Product Luteolin Rescues THAP-Induced Pancreaticbeta-Cell Dysfunction through HNF4alpha Pathway. Am. J. Chin. Med. 2020 ,48, 1435–1454. [CrossRef]31. Lodhi, S.; Singhai, A.K. Wound healing effect of ﬂavonoid rich fraction and luteolin isolated from Martynia annua Linn. onstreptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Asian Pac. J. Trop Med. 2013 ,6, 253–259. [CrossRef]32. Jangde, R.; Srivastava, S.; Singh, M.R.; Singh, D. In vitro and In vivo characterization of quercetin loaded multiphase hydrogelfor wound healing application. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2018 ,115, 1211–1217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Ponrasu, T.; Jamuna, S.; Mathew, A.; Madhukumar, K.N.; Ganeshkumar, M.; Iyappan, K.; Suguna, L. Efﬁcacy of L-prolineadministration on the early responses during cutaneous wound healing in rats. Amino Acids 2013 ,45, 179–189. [CrossRef]
34. Fikru, A.; Makonnen, E.; Eguale, T.; Debella, A.; Abie Mekonnen, G. Evaluation of in vivo wound healing activity of methanolextract of Achyranthes aspera L.J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012 ,143, 469–474. [CrossRef]35. Barnes, P .J.; Karin, M. Nuclear factor-kappaB: A pivotal transcription factor in chronic inﬂammatory diseases. N. Engl. J. Med.1997 ,336, 1066–1071. [CrossRef]36. Johnson, K.E.; Wilgus, T.A. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor and Angiogenesis in the Regulation of Cutaneous Wound Repair.Adv. Wound Care 2014 ,3, 647–661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Latha, R.C.; Daisy, P . Insulin-secretagogue, antihyperlipidemic and other protective effects of gallic acid isolated from Terminaliabellerica Roxb. in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Chem. Biol. Interact. 2011 ,189, 112–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Li, L.; Luo, W.; Qian, Y.; Zhu, W.; Qian, J.; Li, J.; Jin, Y.; Xu, X.; Liang, G. Luteolin protects against diabetic cardiomyopathy by
inhibiting NF-kappaB-mediated inﬂammation and activating the Nrf2-mediated antioxidant responses. Phytomedicine 2019 ,59,152774. [CrossRef]39. Tan, X.; Yang, Y.; Xu, J.; Zhang, P .; Deng, R.; Mao, Y.; He, J.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, J.; et al. Luteolin Exerts Neuroprotection via
152774. [CrossRef]39. Tan, X.; Yang, Y.; Xu, J.; Zhang, P .; Deng, R.; Mao, Y.; He, J.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, J.; et al. Luteolin Exerts Neuroprotection viaModulation of the p62/Keap1/Nrf2 Pathway in Intracerebral Hemorrhage. Front. Pharmacol. 2019 ,10, 1551. [CrossRef]40. Andres, C.; Hasenauer, J.; Ahn, H.S.; Joseph, E.K.; Isensee, J.; Theis, F.J.; Allgower, F.; Levine, J.D.; Dib-Hajj, S.D.; Waxman, S.G.;et al. Wound-healing growth factor, basic FGF, induces Erk1/2-dependent mechanical hyperalgesia. Pain 2013 ,154, 2216–2226.[CrossRef]41. Julius, D.; Basbaum, A.I. Molecular mechanisms of nociception. Nature 2001 ,413, 203–210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Nicol, G.D.; Vasko, M.R. Unraveling the story of NGF-mediated sensitization of nociceptive sensory neurons: ON or OFF theTrks? Mol. Interv. 2007 ,7, 26–41. [CrossRef]43. Kabuta, T.; Wada, K. Insights into links between familial and sporadic Parkinson’s disease: Physical relationship between UCH-L1
variants and chaperone-mediated autophagy. Autophagy 2008 ,4, 827–829. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Chen, F.; Sugiura, Y.; Myers, K.G.; Liu, Y.; Lin, W. Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 is required for maintaining thestructure and function of the neuromuscular junction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010 ,107, 1636–1641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Liu, Y.; Fallon, L.; Lashuel, H.A.; Liu, Z.; Lansbury, P .T., Jr. The UCH-L1 gene encodes two opposing enzymatic activities thataffect alpha-synuclein degradation and Parkinson’s disease susceptibility. Cell2002 ,111, 209–218. [CrossRef]
