antioxidants ReviewMechanistic Basis and Clinical Evidence for the Applications ofNicotinamide (Niacinamide) to Control Skin Agingand PigmentationYong Chool Boo/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Boo, Y.C. Mechanistic Basisand Clinical Evidence for theApplications of Nicotinamide(Niacinamide) to Control Skin Agingand Pigmentation. Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10081315Academic Editors: Laurian Vlase,Marius Emil Rusu, Ionel Fizesan andDaniela-Saveta PopaReceived: 28 July 2021Accepted: 20 August 2021Published: 21 August 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the author.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms and
distributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, BK21 Plus KNU Biomedical Convergence Program,Cell and Matrix Research Institute, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41944, Korea; ycboo@knu.ac.kr;Tel.: +82-53-420-4946Abstract: Vitamin B3 (nicotinic acid, niacin) deﬁciency causes the systemic disease pellagra, whichleads to dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia, and possibly death depending on its severity and duration.Vitamin B3 is used in the synthesis of the NAD+family of coenzymes, contributing to cellularenergy metabolism and defense systems. Although nicotinamide (niacinamide) is primarily usedas a nutritional supplement for vitamin B3, its pharmaceutical and cosmeceutical uses have beenextensively explored. In this review, we discuss the biological activities and cosmeceutical properties
of nicotinamide in consideration of its metabolic pathways. Supplementation of nicotinamide restorescellular NAD+pool and mitochondrial energetics, attenuates oxidative stress and inﬂammatoryresponse, enhances extracellular matrix and skin barrier, and inhibits the pigmentation process in theskin. Topical treatment of nicotinamide, alone or in combination with other active ingredients, reducesthe progression of skin aging and hyperpigmentation in clinical trials. Topically applied nicotinamideis well tolerated by the skin. Currently, there is no convincing evidence that nicotinamide hasspeciﬁc molecular targets for controlling skin aging and pigmentation. This substance is presumedto contribute to maintaining skin homeostasis by regulating the redox status of cells along withvarious metabolites produced from it. Thus, it is suggested that nicotinamide will be useful as acosmeceutical ingredient to attenuate skin aging and hyperpigmentation, especially in the elderly or
patients with reduced NAD+pool in the skin due to internal or external stressors.Keywords: nicotinamide; niacinamide; vitamin B3; skin aging; pigmentation; cosmetic; cosmeceutical;metabolism; antioxidant; senescence; inﬂammation1. IntroductionThe primary characteristic of the skin is that it surrounds our body and is directlyexposed to the external environment. Skin serves the barrier function to protect the bodyfrom external harmful factors and to prevent water loss from the body, as well as thethermoregulation function to keep body temperature constant despite changes in externaltemperature [ 1]. However, when the skin is subjected to pathological conditions due tointernal and external factors, such as malnutrition, infection, wounds, and exposure topollutants, abnormalities in the immune system and excessive inﬂammatory responsethroughout the body can be induced. Even if the symptoms are limited to the skin, various
skin diseases, aging, and cancer can occur, and these are the main research subjects indermatology.
throughout the body can be induced. Even if the symptoms are limited to the skin, variousskin diseases, aging, and cancer can occur, and these are the main research subjects indermatology.Another characteristic of the skin is that it is an externally visible organ, and therefore,its health is important from an aesthetic point of view, as well as a medical point of view.The aging of the skin involves both the decline of various biological functions and changesin morphological beauty. In the cosmetic ﬁeld, skin aging is being studied by dividingit into natural aging, which is a chronological skin change caused by internal factors ofthe body, and photoaging, which is a skin change caused by exposure to ultraviolet (UV)Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10081315 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/antioxidants
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 2 of 24rays from the sun [ 2]. Natural aging and photoaging are not mutually exclusive but partlyoverlap. Clinical observations show that naturally aged skin is thin, dry, and has manyﬁne wrinkles, whereas photoaged skin usually has a leathery and saggy appearance withreduced elasticity, uneven pigmentation, coarse and deep wrinkles, and telangiectasia(appearance of blood vessels) [ 3]. Changes due to natural aging or photoaging occur inboth epidermal and dermal compartments. A decrease in the extracellular matrix (ECM) ofthe dermis, such as collagen and elastin, is consistently observed in either natural aging orphotoaging [4].Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and free radicals generated over the antioxidant capac-ity of cells due to external factors, such as UV radiation and pollution, or internal metabolicdysfunction can cause oxidative damage to cells [ 5]. ROS also induces senescence of cells
and degradation of ECM involved in premature skin aging [ 6,7]. Indeed, ROS plays apathological role in the development of various skin diseases and cancer [ 8–10]. There-fore, ingredients that directly remove ROS or enhance the antioxidant capacity of cells areexpected to help maintain skin homeostasis [11,12].Nicotinamide (niacinamide) is the amide form of water-soluble vitamin B3 (nicotinicacid, niacin). Vitamin B3 deﬁciency causes pellagra [ 13,14]. Nicotinamide is a component ofcoenzymes, such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), reduced nicotinamide ade-nine dinucleotide (NADH), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+), andreduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) [ 14,15]. Nicotinamidehas the same vitamin activity as nicotinic acid, but other pharmacological actions and sideeffects are different [ 16]. Unlike nicotinic acid, nicotinamide does not reduce cholesterol
or cause ﬂushing [ 17]. Supplementation of nicotinamide as an essential nutrient will bebeneﬁcial to the health of the whole body and the skin.In the ﬁeld of dermatology, many studies on nicotinamide and its analogs have beenreported concerning the prevention and treatment of cancer, blistering disorders, acnevulgaris, psoriasis, wound healing, and pigmentation disorders [ 18–21]. Nicotinamide hasalso been used in the cosmetic ﬁeld for decades to prevent skin aging and brighten skintone [ 22–25]. However, its mechanism of action in alleviating skin diseases or controllingskin aging and pigmentation is not well understood. In addition, it is unclear whether theefﬁcacy of nicotinamide is its direct effect or its indirect effect acting as a precursor of otheractive metabolites.The purpose of this review is to understand the mechanistic basis for the cosmeceuticalapplication of nicotinamide. The pharmaceutical application of nicotinamide is excluded
from the scope of this review. First, we brieﬂy review the metabolic process of nicotinamide.Secondly, we examine the antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory effects of nicotinamide andits effects on cell senescence and epidermal differentiation. Next, we discuss the effectsof nicotinamide on the ECM and skin barrier, which is closely related to skin aging,and on the synthesis and distribution of melanin related to skin pigmentation. Finally,we review the results of clinical trials on the efﬁcacy of cosmetic formulations containingnicotinamide alone or in combination with other active ingredients to control skin aging andpigmentation. It is hoped that this study will help us understand the mechanism of actionof nicotinamide and correctly evaluate the potential of nicotinamide as a cosmeceutical.2. Metabolism of Nicotinamide2.1. Synthesis and Function of NAD(H) and NADP(H)The roles of NAD+coenzyme in the life system are signiﬁcant and broad [ 15,26]. In
this section, we brieﬂy review the metabolic pathways of NAD+with special attention tonicotinamide (Figure 1).
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 3 of 24Figure 1. Metabolic pathways related to nicotinamide: ADP , adenosine diphosphate; AMP , adenosine monophosphate; ATP ,adenosine triphosphate; cADPR, cyclic ADP-ribose; CYP , cytochrome P450; NaAD+, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide;NaADP+, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH, reducednicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADP+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH, reduced nicotinamideadenine dinucleotide phosphate; NaMN, nicotinic acid mononucleotide; NAMPT, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltrans-ferase; NMN, nicotinamide mononucleotide; NNT, nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase; PARP , poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase; PPi, inorganic pyrophosphate; PRPP , phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate.
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 4 of 24De novo synthesis of NAD+starts with oxidation of L-tryptophan to N-formyl-L-kynurenine by tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase or indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase [ 27,28]. N-formyl-L-kynurenine is converted to quinolinic acid via multiple enzymatic and non-enzymatic reactions. Nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NaMN) is synthesized from quinolinicacid and phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) by quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase,and inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) and carbon dioxide are released as by-products.As tryptophan is one of the essential amino acids that cannot be synthesized well byhumans, the salvage pathway using nicotinamide or nicotinic acid from dietary sourcesis important for the synthesis of NAD+[29]. NaMN is synthesized from nicotinic acidand PRPP by nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase, and PPi is released as a by-product.Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide (NaAD+) is synthesized from NaMN and adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) by NaMN adenylyltransferase, releasing PPi as a by-product and isthen used in the synthesis of NAD+by NAD synthetase, which uses glutamine as anamine group donor and energy from ATP hydrolysis to adenosine monophosphate (AMP)and PPi. NAD+is also synthesized by NMN adenylyltransferase using nicotinamidemononucleotide (NMN) and ATP . Nicotinamide and PRPP are used in the synthesis ofNMN by nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), which releases PPi as a by-product. NMN is also synthesized from nicotinamide riboside and ATP by nicotinamideriboside kinase, which releases adenosine diphosphate (ADP) as a by-product.Conversion of NAD+to NADP+is catalyzed by NAD+kinase consuming ATPmolecules for needed free energy [30]. Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (NNT)catalyzes a reversible reaction, NADH + NADP+⇌NAD++ NADPH [ 31]. NAD(H) andNADP(H) play as cofactors or coenzymes in a myriad of oxidation-reduction reactions
in biological systems [ 32]. NAD+serves as an electron acceptor in many enzyme reac-tions in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and β-oxidation of fatty acids, producing NADH.NADH serves as an electron donor in many enzyme reactions, such as NADH dehydro-genase in complex I of mitochondrial electron transport and lactate dehydrogenase inthe cytosol. NADP+serves as an electron acceptor in many enzyme reactions, such asglucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase in the pentose phosphate pathway and isocitratedehydrogenase outside the context of the citric acid cycle. NADPH serves as an electrondonor in many enzyme reactions, such as NADPH oxidase, cytochrome P450 (CYP), nitricoxide synthase, and glutathione reductase. Glutathione reductase catalyzes a reaction,glutathione disulﬁde (GSSG) + NADPH →2×glutathione (GSH) + NADP+.2.2. Metabolisms of NAD+and NicotinamidePoly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) family consists of 18 genes, which encode
17 enzymes with either mono-ADP ribosyltransferase or PARP activity [ 33]. NAD+isused as a substrate for mono-ADP-ribosylation of target proteins catalyzed by mono-ADPribosyltransferase activity, and for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerization catalyzed by PARPactivity [ 34,35]. Nicotinamide is released as a by-product. Hydrolysis of mono- and poly-ADP-ribosylated proteins by mono-ADP-ribose hydrolase and poly(ADP-ribose) hydrolaseresults in the production of ADP-ribose. These reversible processes are involved in DNArepair, apoptosis, and many other biological processes to maintain cellular homeostasis [ 36].Sirtuins are a family of signaling proteins that have a mono-ADP-ribosyltransferaseactivity or a protein deacylase activity (deacetylase, desuccinylase, demalonylase, demyris-toylase, or depalmitoylase activity) and have been hypothesized to play a role in the agingprocess [ 37]. Histone deacetylation by sirtuins yields the deacetylated protein, O-acetyl
ADP-ribose, and nicotinamide [ 38]. Sirtuins epigenetically regulate target gene expression
process [ 37]. Histone deacetylation by sirtuins yields the deacetylated protein, O-acetylADP-ribose, and nicotinamide [ 38]. Sirtuins epigenetically regulate target gene expressioninvolved in stress resistance and energy alertness and directly link cell physiology to theenergy status of the cell [39].CD38 functions as a receptor and a multifunctional enzyme, catalyzing the cleavageof NAD+into cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR) and nicotinamide, the hydrolysis of cADPRto ADP-ribose, and the direct hydrolysis of NAD+to ADP-ribose and nicotinamide [ 40].CD38 also catalyzes a base exchange reaction that couples the conversion of NADP+to
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 5 of 24NaADP with the conversion of nicotinic acid to nicotinamide [ 41], or that of NaAD+toNAD+[42]. Both cADPR and NaADP+play essential roles for the regulation of intracellularCa2+[43,44]. CD38 is considered to play a critical role in keeping a harmonized balancebetween various NAD+metabolites.Nicotinamide is metabolized to 1-methylnicotinamide by nicotinamideN-methyltransferase, which uses S-adenosyl methionine as a methyl group donor [ 45].1-Methylnicotinamide is further oxidized to 1-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide or 1-methyl-4-pyridone-3-carboxamide by aldehyde oxidase [ 46]. Nicotinamide is also directlyoxidized to nicotinamide N-oxide by CYP 2E1 in human liver microsomes [ 47]. Theseenzyme reactions mainly occur in the liver and are considered a clearance mechanisminvolved in the urinary excretion of nicotinamide.3. Antioxidant and Anti-Inﬂammatory Effects of Nicotinamide3.1. Antioxidant Properties of Nicotinamide
3.1. Antioxidant Properties of NicotinamideLngestion of nicotinamide, prevents lipid peroxidation and normalizes the reducedantioxidants and antioxidant enzymes in experimental animal models [48–50].Kamat et al. showed that nicotinamide scavenged singlet oxygen at the rate constantof 1.8×108M−1s−1and inhibited lipid peroxidation of rat liver microsomes induced bythe photosensitized reaction of methylene blue irradiated with visible light in the presenceof oxygen [ 51]. They also showed that nicotinamide inhibited lipid peroxidation induced byNADPH/ADP-Fe3+in rat liver microsomes [ 51]. Nicotinamide inhibited lipid peroxidationand protein oxidation (carbonylation) induced by the ascorbate–Fe2+system in the ratbrain mitochondria, whereas such action was not observed for nicotinic acid [52].3.2. Protective Effect of Nicotinamide in Cells Exposed to Environmental StressorsNicotinamide rescued the viability of a Chinese hamster ovary cell line (CHO AA8)
irradiated with UV radiation and prevented apoptosis through mechanisms related to thestabilization of the cytoskeleton proteins, such as F-actin, vimentin, and β-tubulin [ 53].Nicotinamide exhibited a protective effect against UVA- and/or UVB-induced DNA dam-age in normal human epidermal melanocytes, as indicated by decreased levels of cyclobu-tane pyrimidine dimers and 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine [ 54]. This effect was associatedwith the enhanced expression of nucleotide excision repair genes, such as sirtuin 1 (SIRT1),tumor suppressor protein P53, damage-speciﬁc DNA binding protein (DDB) 1 and 2, 8-oxoguanine glycosylase (OGG) 1, excision repair cross-complementation group (ERCC)1 and 2, and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 7, and the activation of the nuclear factorerythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF 2) signaling pathway.Nicotinamide inhibited the generation of ROS, the oxidation of lipids, proteins, and
DNA, cell membrane depolarization, and the apoptosis in human HaCaT keratinocytescells exposed to particulate matter (PM) 2.5 [ 55]. Mi et al. examined the protective effectof nicotinamide and 12-hydroxystearic acid in reconstructed human skin equivalentsexposed to benzo(a)pyrene as a representative airborne particle-bound organic compound,or to squalene monohydroperoxide as a representative sebum peroxidation product [ 56].Individual treatment and co-treatment of the skin equivalents with nicotinamide (5 mM)and 12-hydroxystearic acid (20 µM) ameliorated viability loss, inﬂammatory response, andpigmentation induced by benzo(a)pyrene or squalene monohydroperoxide.These studies suggest that the topical application of nicotinamide may alleviateoxidative stress and reduce cytotoxicity, inﬂammation, and pigmentation in the skin that isexposed to UV or PM.3.3. Anti-Inﬂammatory Effects of NicotinamideNicotinamide suppressed interleukin (IL)-8 production at the mRNA and protein
levels through modulation of the nuclear factor (NF)- κB and mitogen-activated pro-tein kinase (MAPK) pathways in HaCaT cells and primary keratinocytes stimulated
levels through modulation of the nuclear factor (NF)- κB and mitogen-activated pro-tein kinase (MAPK) pathways in HaCaT cells and primary keratinocytes stimulatedbyPropionibacterium acnes , the etiological agent causing inﬂammatory acne vulgaris [ 57].
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 6 of 24Nicotinamide downregulated the expression of IL-6, IL-10, monocyte chemoattractantprotein-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- αin UV-irradiated keratinocytes [58].Nicotinamide attenuated the synthesis of inflammatory mediators, such as prostaglandin(PG) E 2, IL-6, and IL-8 in human epidermal keratinocytes and in full-thickness three-dimensional skin organotypic models that were stimulated by UV radiation [ 59]. In aclinical trial, pretreatment with 5% nicotinamide reduced erythema that was induced byUV radiation [ 59]. Analysis of IL-1 αand its receptor antagonist (IL-1 αRA) ratios showedthat nicotinamide signiﬁcantly reduced the UV-induced inﬂammatory response, comparedto the control sites.3.4. Anti-Inﬂammatory Effects of N-Methylnicotinamide and NMNNicotinamide and l-methylnicotinamide exhibit anti-inﬂammatory effects in severalexperimental models although the relative activity of these two substances is not consistent.
The contact hypersensitivity reaction of CBA/J inbred mice to oxazolone was reducedwhen the mice were fed with 1-methylnicotinamide or nicotinamide added to the drink,the former being relatively more effective [ 60]. In an in vitro experiment using CBA/Jmouse peritoneal macrophages activated with lipopolysaccharide, nicotinamide inhibitedthe production of a variety of pro-inﬂammatory factors, such as TNF- α, IL-6, nitric oxide,and PGE 2, and 1-methylnicotinamide was less effective, although both substances similarlyattenuated the generation of ROS [ 61]. It is considered that the anti-inﬂammatory activity ofthese two substances is affected by bioavailability, such as absorption through the digestivetract and cell membrane.In clinical trials, topical application of a gel containing 0.25% 1-methylnicotinamidetwice a day for 4 weeks alleviated rosacea, a chronic facial dermatosis [ 62]. Intradermal
injection of 1-methylnicotinamide or nicotinamide increased skin vascular permeabilityin rats, the former being more effective [ 63]. The changes in skin vascular permeabilitywere attenuated by indomethacin and N ω-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester, indicating theinvolvement of PGs and nitric oxide (NO). Although the molecular mechanism linking skinvascular permeability and rosacea is unclear, it is considered that 1-methylnicotinamide ornicotinamide directly or indirectly affects vascular endothelial function [64,65].In a rat model, oral administration of NMN alone or in combination with Lactobacil-lus fermentum TKSN041 reduced UV-induced skin oxidative damage and inﬂammatoryresponse and restored small molecular antioxidants and antioxidant enzymes in blood andskin tissues [66].4. Modulation of Cell Senescence and Epidermal Differentiation by Nicotinamide4.1. Differential Effects of Nicotinamide on Lifespans of Yeast and Mammalian Cells
Nicotinamide is known as an inhibitor of silent information regulator-2 (sir2) deacety-lase that mediates lifespan extension by calorie restriction in yeasts ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ),and nicotinamide depletion or overexpression of nicotinamidase 1 (pyrazinamidase 1) pro-longs the lifespan of yeast cells [67].On the contrary, nicotinamide supplementation to human cells rather prolongs thereplicative lifespan and retards the senescence [ 68,69]. Matuoka et al. observed thatnicotinamide reverses the aging phenotypes in human diploid ﬁbroblasts as evaluatedby cell morphology, senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity, and cell replicationpotential, and tentatively attributed this action of nicotinamide to the enhancement ofhistone acetyltransferase activity and subsequently altered gene expression [ 68]. Lim et al.demonstrated that that nicotinamide extends the lifespan of primary human diploid
somatic ﬁbroblasts (82-6 and IMR-90) via a mechanism largely independent of SIRT1,a close human homolog of yeast sir2 [69].The discrepancy regarding the effects of nicotinamide on the lifespans of yeast cells
a close human homolog of yeast sir2 [69].The discrepancy regarding the effects of nicotinamide on the lifespans of yeast cellsvs. mammalian cells could be attributed to differences in intracellular nicotinamide con-centrations in situ [ 70,71]. The 50% inhibitory concentration of nicotinamide on Sir2 isabout 50 µM, and this level of nicotinamide concentration can be reached in yeasts [ 70]. On
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 7 of 24the other hand, it is difﬁcult to reach this nicotinamide concentration in mammalian cellsbecause the supplied nicotinamide is rapidly metabolized by NAMPT in a mammalianNAD+salvage pathway [71].4.2. Antisenescence Effects of NicotinamideCellular NAD+pool is low in aged skin [ 72]. Thus, external supplementation ofnicotinamide as a primary precursor of NAD+and related coenzymes may improve theepidermal homeostasis and cellular bioenergetics in aged and stressed cells [ 73]. Kang et al.proposed that the extension of the lifespan of normal human ﬁbroblasts by nicotinamidemight be associated with the reduction in mitochondrial ROS production [ 74]. The antioxi-dant activity of nicotinamide reducing ROS production and lipofuscin accumulation corre-lates with antisenescence activity suppressing the increases in cell size, granule content, andsenescence-associated β-galactosidase activity as observed in both rapidly senescing cells
(human breast cancer MCF-7 cell line treated with Adriamycin) and already senescent cells(old passage human ﬁbroblasts) [ 75]. Gene expression of subunits of complexes I to V ofmitochondrial electron transport chain was reduced in ﬁbroblasts from older aged donors,and treatment of the cells with nicotinamide restored gene expression and mitochondrialfunction to younger cell levels [76].Ectopic expression of NAMPT in human aortic endothelial cells extended replicativelifespan, delayed markers of senescence, and limited ROS accumulation under high glucoseconditions [ 77]. Nicotinamide protected glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation activitiesin dermal ﬁbroblasts exposed to oxidative stress through a mechanism partially dependenton NAMPT [ 78]. NAMPT and NAD+contents have been shown to decline in primarymouse embryonic ﬁbroblast cells undergoing replicative senescence, whereas constitutiveover-expression of NAMPT increases NAD+content and delays cell senescence, which is
associated with increases in the activity of SIRT1 and the expression levels of superoxidedismutase 2 and catalase [ 79]. FK866, a NAMPT inhibitor, induced premature differentia-tion and senescence of human primary keratinocytes in multi-dimensional culture, and thiseffect was competitively attenuated by nicotinamide [ 80]. Therefore, NAMPT is consideredto mediate the antisenescence effects of nicotinamide at least partly.4.3. Epidermal Stem CellsAdult stem cells are present in the bulge region of the hair follicles and the basal layerof the interfollicular epidermis and play a critical role in maintaining the structural andfunctional integrity of the skin through self-renewal and generation of daughter cells thatundergo terminal differentiation [ 81]. Skin aging is more associated with the reductionof healthy stem cells able to respond to proliferative signals rather than the reduction of
the total number of stem cells [ 82]. Liu et al. have proposed a mechanistic model for skinaging based on the competition between epidermal stem cells expressing different levelsof hemidesmosome component collagen 17A1 [ 83]. In this model, the stressed stem cellsexpressing a low level of collagen 17A1 are delaminated from the basal epidermis, whereashealthy stem cells expressing a high level of collagen 17A1 survive in the aging skin.Regardless of who the ﬁnal winner is, this competition leads to an eventual loss of collagen17A1 due to exhaustion of epidermal stem cells and results in skin aging represented by athin epidermal structure.Epidermal stem cells can also undergo senescence, accelerating premature aging ofthe skin [ 84]. It is hypothesized that the skin aging process may be slowed down bymaintaining a young stem cell phenotype [ 85]. In this regard, sirtuins are viewed as apromising target in slowing down the aging process [ 86]. Various natural compounds
are known to modulate the activity of sirtuins and will be potentially useful for thispurpose [87].
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 8 of 244.4. Modulation of Epidermal Differentiation by NicotinamideNicotinamide affects the proliferation and differentiation of various stem cells includ-ing human embryonic stem cells [ 88]. In a study by Tan et al. [ 80], high concentrationsof nicotinamide inhibited the differentiation of the upper epidermal layers and main-tained proliferation in the basal layer of a three-dimensional organotypic skin model.Nicotinamide increased the proliferative capacity of human primary keratinocytes andthe proportion of human primary keratinocyte stem cells (holoclones), which were re-duced by FK866. By contrast, FK866 induced the premature senescence of human primarykeratinocyte, which was rescued by nicotinamide. These observations suggest that nicoti-namide metabolism through NAMPT can modulate epidermal differentiation and stemcell biology.5. Enhancement of ECM and Skin Barrier by Nicotinamide5.1. Changes of ECM by Skin Aging
5.1. Changes of ECM by Skin AgingThe main component of ECM is collagen and elastin, and these ﬁbrous componentsprovide the skin’s tensile strength, elasticity, and resiliency [ 89]. In human skin, type I,type III, and type V collagen constitute 80–90%, 8–12%, and less than 5% of total collagen,respectively [ 90]. Alteration in the amount and structures of collagen and elastin is acommon feature of natural aging and photoaging of the skin [ 4]. The activities of matrixmetalloproteinase (MMP) and elastase are increased in aged skin while transforminggrowth factor (TGF)- βsignaling that leads to the synthesis of collagen is reduced [91,92].ROS increased by internal and external factors stimulates activator protein (AP)-1and NF- κB through cell signaling systems involving several MAPKs, and increases theexpression of MMPs in epidermal keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts, resulting in colla-
gen degradation [ 7,89,92,93]. Stratiﬁn, also called 14-3-3 σprotein, plays an important rolein communication between keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts, especially for the degradationof dermal collagen associated with premature skin aging [ 93,94]. Stratiﬁn from the ker-atinocytes exposed to UV radiation stimulates the ﬁbroblasts in close vicinity to increaseMMP 1 expression [95,96].Other components of the ECM include different types of glycosaminoglycans, suchas heparan sulfate/heparin, chondroitin sulfate/dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate, andhyaluronan and proteoglycans made of glycosaminoglycans (other than hyaluronan) andprotein cores [ 97]. These extremely hydrophilic components reside in the space between thecell and the collagen/elastin ﬁbrils in the dermis and adopt highly extended conformationsthat enable matrices to hold a high amount of water and to withstand high compressiveforces dermis [ 98]. The levels of different types of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans
change differently by natural aging and photoaging of the skin [99].5.2. Effects of Nicotinamide on Collagen and Other ECMsNicotinamide and its derivatives have been shown to increase the expression of colla-gen (type I, III, and V), elastin, and ﬁbrillin (1 and 2), and reduce MMP (1, 3, and 9) andelastase activity in non-irradiated and UVA-irradiated dermal ﬁbroblasts [ 100,101]. Nicoti-namide alone or in combination with other substances, such as L-carnosine, hesperidin,enhanced ﬁbroblast collagen synthesis and cellular proliferation, thereby augmentingwound healing in vitro [102]. Topical nicotinamide improved tissue regeneration by in-creasing ﬁbroblast proliferation, collagen synthesis, and vascularization in skin woundsof Sprague Dawley rats [ 103]. These studies provide evidence from various aspects thatnicotinamide has the action of promoting the synthesis of dermal collagen and inhibitingits degradation.5.3. Enhancement of Skin Barrier by Nicotinamide
5.3. Enhancement of Skin Barrier by NicotinamideDuring aging, the structural and functional integrity of the skin barrier is changed
its degradation.5.3. Enhancement of Skin Barrier by NicotinamideDuring aging, the structural and functional integrity of the skin barrier is changedor disturbed [ 104]. Tanno et al. showed that in cultured human epidermal keratinocytes,nicotinamide could upregulate the synthesis of major components of skin barriers, such as
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 9 of 24ceramide, other sphingolipid fractions (glucosylceramide and sphingomyelin), free fattyacid, and cholesterol [ 105]. Supplementation of nicotinamide to cultured normal humanepidermal keratinocytes increased the synthesis of involucrin and ﬁlaggrin, which areessential proteins for fully integral keratinized corneocytes [106].A facial moisturizer containing 2% nicotinamide improved skin barriers in patientswith rosacea [ 107]. Myristyl nicotinate enhanced the NAD+pool, epidermal differentiation,and barrier function in the photoaged skin [ 108]. Thus, nicotinamide and its metabolismcould enhance the structural and functional integrity of the skin barriers.6. Regulation of Pigmentary Process by Nicotinamide6.1. Effects of Nicotinamide on Melanogenesis vs. Melanosome TransferNicotinamide has a variable effect on melanin synthesis in melanocyte monoculture.There are reports that nicotinamide increased, decreased, or had no signiﬁcant effect on
tyrosinase activity and melanin synthesis [ 109,110]. On the other hand, in melanocyte-keratinocyte co-culture, reconstituted skin tissue model, or live skin, nicotinamide con-sistently decreased melanin content or pigmentation [ 22,111]. Furthermore, nicotinamideslowed the melanosome transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes [ 22,111]. This sug-gests that the interaction between melanocytes and keratinocytes is important in skinpigmentation and that nicotinamide may affect melanocytes indirectly by primarily affect-ing keratinocytes.6.2. Mechanisms for Melanosome TransferThe transfer of melanosomes from melanocytes to keratinocytes has become a veryimportant and interesting research topic in dermatology [ 112–115]. Melanosome trans-fer, the process of transferring a package of organelles from a donor cell to a recipientcell, is a very unique biological process, and various mechanisms, such as cytophago-
cytosis, membrane fusion, shedding–phagocytosis, and exocytosis–endocytosis, havebeen proposed to describe this process [ 115]. The membrane fusion mechanism wassupported by Scott et al. [ 116]. Shedding–phagocytosis mechanisms were supported byAndo et al. [ 117] and Wu et al. [ 118]. The exocytosis–endocytosis mechanism was sup-ported by Tarafder et al. [ 119]. Regardless of the mechanism, the precise nature of the“donate-it” signal that keratinocytes send to melanocytes and the “receive-it” signal thatmelanocytes send to keratinocytes is not yet clear.6.3. Modulation of Melanosome TransferProtease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2) is expressed in the skin and plays an importantrole in the regulation of growth and differentiation of keratinocytes [ 120,121]. In 2000,Seiberg et al. showed that PAR-2 expressed in keratinocytes could regulate skin pigmenta-tion, although this receptor is not expressed in melanocytes [ 122]. They further showed that
activation of PAR-2 by SLIGRL peptide (a peptide agonist derived from the N-terminus ofPAR-2) could enhance melanosome transfer and inhibition of this receptor by RWJ-503530(a serine protease inhibitor) could reduce melanosome transfer [123].UV rays increased PAR-2 expression in the upper epidermis of human skin, and thechange was more rapid and bigger in dark-skinned people [ 124]. Optimized concentrationof hydrogen peroxide (0.3 mM) increased melanin content and melanosome transfer inmelanocyte–keratinocyte co-cultures through upregulating expression levels of PAR-2and Rab-27A [ 125]. Activation of keratinocyte PAR-2 stimulated the release of PGE 2andPGF 2α, the paracrine factors act on EP1, EP3, and FP receptors on melanocytes, increasingthe number and length of melanocyte dendrites [ 126]. PGE 2, as well as α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), stimulated melanosome transfer in melanocyte–keratinocyte
co-cultures [ 127]. These studies suggest a possible relationship between oxidative stress
stimulating hormone (MSH), stimulated melanosome transfer in melanocyte–keratinocyteco-cultures [ 127]. These studies suggest a possible relationship between oxidative stressand PAR-2 activation, and thus, there is a possibility that melanosome transfer may bemodulated by certain antioxidants or anti-inﬂammatory agents. Interestingly, macelignan,a natural product derived from Myristica fragrans , attenuated the expression of PAR-2 at
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 10 of 24the mRNA and protein levels, calcium mobilization, and phagocytic activity of HaCaTkeratinocyte cells stimulated with SLIGRL peptide [ 128]. Macelignan also reduced PGE 2secretion from HaCaT keratinocytes and dendrite formation of B16F10 melanoma cellsin a co-culture model with SLIGRL stimulation [ 128]. However, it is not known whethernicotinamide affects the expression of PAR-2 and related signaling pathways.Melanosome transfer is also regulated by other receptors, such as keratinocyte growthfactor receptors expressed in keratinocytes [ 114], N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors [ 129], tran-sient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 1 (TRPM1, melastatin-1 ) [130],and Toll-like receptors 2/3 [ 131] expressed in melanocytes. The direct and indirect effects ofnicotinamide on cellular signaling related to melanosome transfer involving these receptorsremain to be explored [132].
remain to be explored [132].7. Clinical Evidence for Skin Antiaging Efﬁcacy of NicotinamideClinical studies on the skin antiaging efﬁcacy of nicotinamide alone or in combina-tion with other active ingredients are summarized in Table 1. In double-blind, placebo-controlled, split-face, left–right, randomized clinical studies, Bissett et al. assessed the effectof nicotinamide on the appearance of aging facial skin [ 23,24]. Moisturizer product with orwithout containing 5% nicotinamide was applied on the facial skin for 12 weeks. Nicoti-namide at 5% was evaluated to be well tolerated by the skin and to improve a broad arrayof skin appearance (ﬁne lines/wrinkles, texture, hyperpigmentation spots, red blotchiness,and skin sallowness), and elasticity.Table 1. Skin antiaging efﬁcacy of cosmeceuticals containing nicotinamide alone or with other active ingredients.Literature Study Format No. of SubjectsComparedFormulationsTreatment Key Findings[23]A double-blind,
[23]A double-blind,placebo-controlled, split-face,left–right randomized clinicalstudy50An oil-in-watermoisturizer (placebocontrolTo each side of the facewas applied eachproduct, twice daily for12 weeks.Improved ﬁne lines/wrinkles,hyperpigmentation spots, texture, redblotchiness, and skin yellowing(sallowness) compared to the controlin endpoints. 5% nicotinamide[24]A double-blind, placeboformulation–controlled, split-facestudy with left–rightrandomization50An oil-in-watermoisturizer (placebocontrolTo each side of the facewas applied eachproduct, twice daily for12 weeks.Reduced ﬁne lines, wrinkles,hyperpigmented spots, redblotchiness, and skin sallowness(yellowing), and increased elasticity(as measured via cutometry).5% nicotinamide[133]A randomized, double-blind,placebo-controlled, split-facecomparative study27An aqueous serumTest serum was appliedevenly to one side of theface and vehicle to theother side twice daily
face and vehicle to theother side twice dailyfor 12 weeks.Combination of kinetin andnicotinamide reduced pore, wrinkle,unevenness, erythema, and spot atweeks 8 and 12 and increased cornealmoisture at week 12. Nicotinamidealone reduced pore and unevenness atweek 8 and wrinkle at week 12.0.03% kinetin + 4%nicotinamide25An aqueous serum4% nicotinamide[134]A randomized,placebo-controlled, split-facestudy30A vehicle lotionThe test product wasapplied on wrinkles ofone side and a controlproduct on the otherside for 8 weeks.Test product reduced wrinkle gradesand average roughness of skin surface(Ra value) in the tested skin area tolower levels compared topre-application ( p< 0.001) and thevehicle control ( p< 0.001) inendpoints.4% nicotinamide[135]A randomized, parallel-groupfacial appearance study99A daytime lotion (SPF30) containing 5%nicotinamide andpeptides; a night creamcontaining nicotinamideand peptides; a wrinkletreatment containing
and peptides; a wrinkletreatment containingnicotinamide, peptides,and 0.3% retinylpropionate.Subjects applied awrinkle treatment twicedaily, a daytime lotion,and the night creamdaily.The cosmetic regimen signiﬁcantlyimproved wrinkle appearance after 8
and 0.3% retinylpropionate.Subjects applied awrinkle treatment twicedaily, a daytime lotion,and the night creamdaily.The cosmetic regimen signiﬁcantlyimproved wrinkle appearance after 8weeks relative to tretinoin in the totalpopulation, with comparable beneﬁtsin subject cohorts ( n= 25) whocontinued treatment for an additional16 weeks.970.02% tretinoin in anemollient base; asunscreen (SPF 30)
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 11 of 24Table 1. Cont.Literature Study Format No. of SubjectsComparedFormulationsTreatment Key Findings[136]A randomized, double-blinded,vehicle-controlled, split-facestudy40A simple oil-in-wateremulsionSubjects applied theproducts twice daily toeither the left- orright-hand side of theirface at 2 mg cm−2.Test product improved stratumcorneum hydration, barrier function,elasticity, and surface topographycompared with the vehicle control inendpoints.2% gold silk sericin,5% nicotinamide, 0.1%signalineTM(diacylglycerol and fattyalcohols)[137]An open-label, single-centerstudy250.5% retinol, 4.4%nicotinamide, 1%resveratrol, and 1.1%hexylresorcinolTreatment at night for10 weeks.The formulation improvedhyperpigmentation, overall skinclarity, evenness of skin tone, andwrinkles compared to baseline atweek 4 and through week 10.[138]A double-blind, randomized,split-face, vehicle-controlledstudy242% humanadipocyte-derived
study242% humanadipocyte-derivedmesenchymal stemcell-conditionedmedium and 2%nicotinamideApplied twice daily for3 weeks after fractionalablative CO 2lasertreatment.The formulation reduced the wrinkleindex ( p= 0.036) and melanin index ( p= 0.043) compared to the controlgroup.A vehicle creamIn a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, split-face comparative study byChiu et al. [ 133], 4% nicotinamide alone reduced pores and skin unevenness after 8 weeksand improved wrinkles after 12 weeks. In contrast, the formulation containing 0.03%kinetin + 4% nicotinamide signiﬁcantly reduced erythema and hyperpigmented spots inaddition to pores, roughness, and wrinkles after 8 weeks.The anti-wrinkle effect of nicotinamide was further examined by Kawada et al. in arandomized, placebo-controlled, split-face study [ 134]. A cosmetic containing 4% nicoti-namide was applied on the wrinkles of one side and a control cosmetic on the other side
of the face for 8 weeks. The wrinkle grades in the test area, evaluated by doctors’ visualobservation, were signiﬁcantly lower than those before application ( p< 0.001) or in thecontrol area ( p< 0.001) at the endpoints. The average surface roughness (Ra value) onthe test area, determined using skin replica, was signiﬁcantly lower, compared to thepre-application values ( p< 0.01) or those in the control site ( p< 0.05).Fu et al. reported signiﬁcant results in a clinical trial comparing the antiaging effectof the cosmetic regimen using a series of products containing nicotinamide/other activeingredients plus a sunscreen with the sun protection factor (SPF) 30, vs. the use of controlproducts containing 0.02% Tretinoin plus a sunscreen with SPF 30 [ 135]. However, it isdifﬁcult to estimate the relative contribution of nicotinamide to the observed antiagingeffects of the cosmetic regimen.Several other clinical trials have evaluated the efﬁcacy of cosmetics containing nicoti-
namide and several other active ingredients (silk sericin, diacylglycerol, fatty alcohols,retinol, resveratrol, hexylresorcinol, and/or stem cell culture medium) [ 136–138]. Theseproducts showed a wrinkle improvement effect in common, and certain products wereevaluated to have improvement effects on skin moisture, skin barrier, elasticity, surfacemorphology, skin clarity, and/or pigmentation [ 136–138]. Again, it is difﬁcult to estimatethe contribution of nicotinamide to the clinical trial results obtained using the combina-tion formulation.8. Clinical Evidence for Skin-Lightening Efﬁcacy of Nicotinamide8.1. Skin-Lightening Efﬁcacy of NicotinamideClinical studies on the skin-lightening efﬁcacy of nicotinamide as an active ingredientare summarized in Table 2. Hakozaki et al. examined the skin depigmenting efﬁcacy ofnicotinamide in humans [ 22]. In a randomized, split-face, double-blind, paired clinical
study involving eighteen Japanese women with multiple types of brown hyperpigmen-
nicotinamide in humans [ 22]. In a randomized, split-face, double-blind, paired clinicalstudy involving eighteen Japanese women with multiple types of brown hyperpigmen-tation, subjects applied a test moisturizer containing 5% nicotinamide and the controlmoisturizer without nicotinamide to each side of the face twice daily for 8 weeks. The
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 12 of 24side of the face receiving the test moisturizer showed a signiﬁcant decrease in the totalhyperpigmented area measured by image analysis and a reduction in visually assessedhyperpigmentation degree, compared to the side receiving the control moisturizer after4 weeks or 8 weeks of treatment.Table 2. Skin-lightening efﬁcacy of cosmeceuticals containing nicotinamide.Literature Study Format No. of SubjectsComparedFormulationsTreatment Key Findings[22]A randomized,split-face, double-blind,paired clinical study185% nicotinamideSubjects applied a testor a control moisturizerto each side of the facetwice daily for 8 weeks.The side of the face receiving the testmoisturizer showed a signiﬁcant decrease inthe total hyperpigmented area measured byimage analysis and a reduction in visuallyassessed hyperpigmentation degree comparedto the side receiving the control moisturizerafter 4 weeks or 8 weeks of treatment.A control moisturizer
A randomized,split-face, double-blind,round-robin design120A vehicle moisturizerApplied two of threedifferent products, eachproduct to each side oftheir face twice daily for8 weeks.After 4 weeks, L* value of the treated sides washighest with a test sunscreen moisturizer,followed by a control sunscreen moisturizer,and a vehicle moisturizer.A control sunscreenmoisturizer (SPF 15)A test sunscreenmoisturizer containing2% nicotinamide[111]A double-blinded,randomized,vehicle-controlled,split-face design humanclinical trial395% nicotinamideSubjects applied eithertest or control productto the assigned sides oftheir faces twice a dayfor 8 weeks.5% Nicotinamide-containing moisturizerdemonstrated a higher reduction inhyperpigmented spot than the vehiclemoisturizer, after 4 and 8 weeks of treatment.2% Nicotinamide did not show a statisticallysigniﬁcant effect compared to the vehiclemoisturizer.A vehicle moisturizer402% nicotinamideA vehicle moisturizer
402% nicotinamideA vehicle moisturizer[139]A double-blind,randomized, clinicaltrial274% nicotinamideMelasma patientsapplied a product onthe left side of the faceand the other on theright side for 8 weeks.After 8 weeks of treatment, MASI score wasdecreased, L* value was increased and a* valuewas unchanged by both treatments comparedto the baseline values. Good to excellentimprovement was observed in 44% of patientsreceiving nicotinamide and 55% of patientsreceiving hydroquinone.4% hydroquinone[140]A randomized,double-blind, left–rightaxilla,placebo-controlled trial244% nicotinamide(n= 16 axillae)Treatment at night for9 weeks.At 9 weeks, L* values in the nicotinamide anddesonide groups were increased morecompared with the placebo group. Desonidewas more effective than nicotinamide(p= 0.002).0.05% desonide(n= 16 axillae)A placebo cream(n= 16 axillae)Nicotinamide has been incorporated into a sunscreen product for added performance.
In total, 120 Japanese women with moderate-to-deep facial tan were enrolled in anotherrandomized, split-face, double-blind, round-robin design and were assigned to apply anytwo of three different products, each product to each side of their face twice daily foreight weeks [ 22]. Three tested products are a vehicle moisturizer, a control sunscreenmoisturizer with SPF 15, and a test sunscreen moisturizer containing 2% nicotinamide. Theskin color is expressed with the Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage Lab color spacecomposed of L* value (lightness), a* value (redness), and b* value (blueness) [ 141]. After4 weeks of treatment, L* values of the treated sides were the highest for a test sunscreenmoisturizer, followed by a control sunscreen moisturizer and a vehicle moisturizer, withstatistical signiﬁcances between test groups. After 4 weeks of treatment, the side of the facereceiving a test sunscreen moisturizer showed a signiﬁcant increase in visually assessed
skin lightness, compared to the side receiving a vehicle moisturizer, whereas the side
receiving a test sunscreen moisturizer showed a signiﬁcant increase in visually assessedskin lightness, compared to the side receiving a vehicle moisturizer, whereas the sideof the face receiving a control sunscreen moisturizer was not lighter than the vehiclemoisturizer-treated side.Dose-dependent efﬁcacy of nicotinamide was examined in a double-blinded, random-ized, vehicle-controlled, split-face design human clinical trial that involved 79 Japanesewomen with multiple types of brown hyperpigmentation on both sides of the face [ 111].Group 1 subjects applied a 5% nicotinamide-containing moisturizer and the vehicle mois-turizer, and group 2 subjects applied a 2% nicotinamide-containing moisturizer and thevehicle moisturizer to the assigned sides of their faces twice a day for 8 weeks. After
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 13 of 244 or 8 weeks of treatment, the side of the face receiving a 5% nicotinamide-containingmoisturizer demonstrated a higher hyperpigmented spot-reduction than the site receivingthe vehicle moisturizer, while a 2% nicotinamide-containing moisturizer efﬁcacy did notshow a statistically signiﬁcant effect, compared to the vehicle moisturizer. During theregression period, the spot-reduction efﬁcacy of a 5% nicotinamide-containing moisturizerwas gradually reduced to a level not statistically different from the vehicle moisturizerafter 42 weeks. Therefore, topical nicotinamide can have dose-dependent and reversibleskin depigmenting effects in humans.Depigmenting efﬁcacy of nicotinamide was compared with other active ingredients.Navarrete-Sol ís et al. performed a double-blind, randomized clinical trial to comparethe efﬁcacy and safety of 4% nicotinamide vs. 4% hydroquinone in the treatment of
melisma [ 139]. For the study, 27 melasma patients applied a product on the left side ofthe face, and the other on the right side for 8 weeks. After 8 weeks of treatment, melasmaarea and severity index (MASI) was decreased, L* value was increased and a* valuewas unchanged by both treatments compared to the baseline values. Good-to-excellentimprovement was observed in 44% of patients receiving nicotinamide and 55% of patientsreceiving hydroquinone. Side effects were noted in 18% of patients receiving nicotinamideand 29% of patients receiving hydroquinone. Therefore, nicotinamide and hydroquinonewere considered to have comparable skin depigmenting activity.Castanedo-Cazares et al. compared the efﬁcacy of nicotinamide and desonide againstaxillary hyperpigmentation, which is a variant of inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation [ 140].In a clinical trial involving 24 women with hyperpigmented axillae, the emulsions con-
taining 4% nicotinamide or 0.05% desonide (a low potency corticosteroid used againstskin inﬂammation) were applied to the hyperpigmented axillary region for 9 weeks. Bothnicotinamide and desonide improved skin lightness, compared with placebo, and theformer was slightly less effective than the latter.8.2. Skin-Lightening Efﬁcacy of Combined Formulations of Nicotinamide and OtherActive IngredientsAn improved whitening efﬁcacy can be expected when nicotinamide is used in combi-nation with other active ingredients than when used alone. In addition, it will be possibleto enhance the whitening efﬁcacy by increasing the absorption of active ingredients intothe skin in a special way rather than simply applying the formulation to the skin. Table 3introduces several clinical studies that have been conducted based on this reasoning. Thecomposite formulations additionally contain various active ingredients such as arbutin,
kojic acid, ascorbic acid, ascorbyl glucoside, tranexamic acid, N-undecylenoyl phenylala-nine, N-acetyl glucosamine, trans -4-(amino methyl) cyclohexanecarboxylic acid, potas-sium azeloyl diglycinate, hydroxyethylpiperazineethane sulfonic acid, and/or epidermalgrowth factor.Table 3. Skin-lightening efﬁcacy of cosmeceuticals containing nicotinamide in combination with other active ingredients.Literature Study Format No. of Subjects Compared Formulations Treatment Key Findings[142]A randomized,split-face design30No treatmentSubjects used theultrasound device for 10min with or without agel every night for4 weeks.Use of ultrasound treatment witha gel reduced hyperpigmentationcompared with no treatment ortreatment of a gel alone after4 weeks.Ultrasound treatment30A gel containing 2% ascorbylglucoside, and 3.5% nicotinamideUltrasound treatment with a gel[143]Double-blind, left–right,randomized, split-faceclinical studies40A vehicle emulsionTreatment in the
Treatment in themorning and eveningbefore bedtime for 8weeks.Combination formulation andnicotinamide alone reduced theappearance ofhyperpigmentation after 8 weeks.The combination was more
Treatment in themorning and eveningbefore bedtime for 8weeks.Combination formulation andnicotinamide alone reduced theappearance ofhyperpigmentation after 8 weeks.The combination was moreeffective than nicotinamide alone(p= 0.0003).5% nicotinamide405% nicotinamide5% nicotinamide plus 1%n-undecylenoyl phenylalanine
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 14 of 24Table 3. Cont.Literature Study Format No. of Subjects Compared Formulations Treatment Key Findings[144]A double-blind,vehicle-controlled,full-face, parallel-groupclinical study1014% nicotinamide plus 2%N-acetyl glucosamineTreatment of asunscreen lotion in themorning and testcreams in the eveningfor 8 weeks.The formulation reduced the areaof facial spots and the appearanceof irregular pigmentation atweeks 6 ( p= 0.0270 and weeks 8(p= 0.037).101 A vehicle cream[145]A single-center,randomized,double-blind, controlledstudy30trans -4-(amino methyl)cyclohexanecarboxylic acid,potassium azeloyl diglycinate,and nicotinamideTreatment in themorning and beforebedtime for 8 weeks.The formulation reduced therelative melanin value at week 6(p= 0.006); Reduced MASI scoresat week 4 ( p= 0.005). 30 Emulsion-based control[146]A prospective,randomized,double-blind,vehicle-controlledclinical study212% nicotinamide plus 2%tranexamic acid
tranexamic acidTreatment in themorning and eveningfor 8 weeks.The formulation reduced melaninindex from baseline at weeks 4(p< 0.001) and 8 ( p< 0.001). Itreduced the mean pigmentintensity score compared withthe vehicle control formulation(p= 0.015).21 A vehicle cream[147] A clinical study 553% tranexamic acid, 1% kojicacid, 5% nicotinamide, and 5%hydroxyethylpiperazineethanesulfonic acidTreatment in themorning and eveningfor 12 weeks.The formulation reduced melaninindex and improved theappearance ofhyperpigmentation compared toboth pre-treatment baselines.[148]A prospective,randomized, controlledsplit-face study18SKNB19 formulation containingepidermal growth factor,tranexamic acid, vitamin C,arbutin, nicotinamide, and otheringredientsTreatment in themorning and night for 8weeks. Hydroquinoneapplication only nightly.SKNB19 improved theappearance ofhyperpigmentation whencompared with 4% hydroquinone.Standard formulation containing4% hydroquinone
4% hydroquinoneIn the study of Bissett et al. [ 143], the whitening efﬁcacies of 5% nicotinamide aloneand combined formulation of 5% nicotinamide plus 1% N-undecylenoyl phenylalaninewere compared. Signiﬁcant differences were found after 8 weeks of using these products,the latter being signiﬁcantly more efﬁcacious. In several other clinical studies, the combinedformulation was compared with the vehicle formulation; thus, it is difﬁcult to distinguishthe contribution of individual components. In addition, in some studies, the contentof active ingredients is not disclosed, and therefore, caution is needed in interpretingthe results.Signiﬁcantly superior results were observed when the composite formulation (Agel containing 2% ascorbyl glucoside, and 3.5% nicotinamide) was applied with ultra-sonic treatment, compared to either conventional application only or ultrasonic treatmentonly [ 142]. This study suggests that active ingredients, as well as techniques to increase
skin absorption, are important for better clinical beneﬁt.9. Discussion9.1. Cosmetic Beneﬁts and Side Effects of Topical NicotinamideIn cosmetics, nicotinamide is mainly formulated at a concentration of 4 to 5% andis used to control skin aging and pigmentation. Several clinical trials have shown thatthe formulation containing nicotinamide has the effect of relieving skin aging such aswrinkles, elasticity, and skin color, compared to the control formulation that does notcontain nicotine [ 23,134,135]. When nicotinamide-containing cosmetics are used in a well-planned regimen, you can expect a skin-aging-relieving effect comparable to that of retinolproducts [ 135]. To be sure, you can expect a good effect with a combination of nicotinamideand retinol [ 137]. When products containing nicotinamide are applied to hyperpigmentedareas, skin-lightening effects can be expected [ 22,111]. The facial skin-lightening efﬁcacy of
4% nicotinamide is almost comparable to that of 4% hydroquinone [ 139]. The underarm
areas, skin-lightening effects can be expected [ 22,111]. The facial skin-lightening efﬁcacy of4% nicotinamide is almost comparable to that of 4% hydroquinone [ 139]. The underarmskin-lightening efﬁcacy of 4% nicotinamide is slightly weaker than 0.5% desonide [140].Nicotinamide-containing products can be used together with sunscreen productsto attenuate sun-induced skin aging and pigmentation [ 135,143]. The skin-lightening
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 15 of 24efﬁcacy of nicotinamide can be expected to increase with the use of a device that helpstransdermal absorption of the active ingredient [ 142]. Nicotinamide can be combined withother active ingredients for added skin-lightening efﬁcacy [ 143]. If nicotinamide plays arole in inhibiting melanosome transfer in preventing skin pigmentation, combining it withother active ingredients that play a different role would maximize the effect. Potentialcandidates for combination with nicotinamide for this purpose may include substances thatinhibit the expression of enzymes involved in melanin synthesis [ 149,150], that inhibit thecatalytic activity of an enzyme [ 151–153], and/or that reduce the relative ratio of eumelaninto pheomelanin [154,155].Although nicotinamide is considered a very safe nutrient, its long-term use at veryhigh doses may cause side effects to the liver or other organs [ 156]. Serious metabolic and
epigenetic changes were observed in rats fed with high doses of nicotinamide over a longperiod [ 157]. When 10% nicotinamide was applied to the skin, human subjects did notfeel stinging sensation or ﬂushing, and irritation did not appear in a single-use primaryirritation test or a cumulative irritation test for 21 days with 5% product [ 158]. Thus,nicotinamide is well tolerated by the skin at the normally used concentrations (<5%) [ 159].Nevertheless, the skin reaction to nicotinamide can vary depending on the skin conditionof each individual; thus, it is necessary to consult a doctor if severe side effects exist.9.2. Mechanisms of Skin Antiaging Action of NicotinamideThis review highlights the fact that nicotinamide can have a wide range of effects oncellular metabolism; therefore, it is not easy to identify the mechanism of this substance incontrolling skin aging. Although nicotinamide, a reaction product of sirtuins or PARPs, can
inhibit these enzymes at several tens of micromolar concentrations [ 160,161], it is unclearwhether its intracellular concentrations can reach that high. Nicotinamide is known to beabsorbed into cells to some extent, but its transporter has not been identiﬁed yet, whereastransporters of nicotinic acid and 1-methylnicotinamide are relatively well known [ 162].The different effects of nicotinamide on the lifespans of yeast and mammalian cells [ 67–69]suggest that in the latter case, the intracellular concentration is lower, and thus, the sirtuinsinhibitory concentration cannot be reached. A possible cause is that nicotinamide is rapidlyconverted to NMN by NAMPT outside the cell. In agreement with this assumption, asecreted form of NAMPT exists outside the cell [ 163], and a transporter responsible forthe intracellular uptake of NMN produced by this enzyme was recently discovered [ 164].Accordingly, it is emphasized that the biological effects of nicotinamide can be dependent
on the activity of NAMPT, which plays an important role in aging [165].Natural aging and photoaging commonly accompany cellular senescence, chronicinﬂammation, and changes in the ECM and skin barrier along with external appear-ance changes. In senescent cells, NAMPT, NAD+pool, and mitochondrial electron trans-port activity decrease, while ROS production increases [ 71,73,75]. The supply of nicoti-namide helps to normalize these changes, delaying cell senescence and extending itslifespan [ 72,74,75,77]. Nicotinamide inhibits the production of inﬂammatory cytokinesand PGs in keratinocytes or in three-dimensional skin models that are exposed to UVradiation [ 58,59]. Nicotinamide decreases ECM-degrading enzymes and increases collagensynthesis in dermal ﬁbroblasts [100–102]. Nicotinamide enhances the structural and func-tional integrity of the skin barrier by increasing the synthesis of lipid components [ 105].
Although nicotinamide exhibits various biological activities, the evidence for the existence
tional integrity of the skin barrier by increasing the synthesis of lipid components [ 105].Although nicotinamide exhibits various biological activities, the evidence for the existenceof a speciﬁc molecular target is not clear. For now, it is believed that nicotinamide con-tributes to skin homeostasis by regulating the redox status of cells along with variousmetabolites produced from it.9.3. Mechanisms of Skin Depigmenting Action of NicotinamideThe effects of nicotinamide on melanin synthesis in mono-cultured melanocytes arediverse [ 109,110]. It is presumed that nicotinamide can help restore intrinsic melaninsynthesis in melanocytes when it is impaired for some reason, whereas it can prevent
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 16 of 24excessive melanin synthesis stimulated by external signals. In the keratinocyte–melanocyteco-culture system, nicotinamide appears to consistently decrease the amount of melanindelivered to keratinocytes [ 22,111]. This ﬁnding has been conﬁrmed in other independentstudies [ 166,167]. Therefore, the interaction between these two cell types can be modulatedby nicotinamide, but the underlying molecular mechanism remains to be explored.It is worth noting PAR-2 as the main director of melanosome transfer from melanocytesto keratinocytes [ 122]. The receptor is expressed in keratinocytes, is activated by stimuli,such as UV radiation or hydrogen peroxide, and releases PGE 2, which warns surroundingcells including melanocytes [ 124,125]. The melanocytes are then activated by this signalto initiate the synthesis of melanin and biogenesis of melanosomes and deliver mature
melanosomes to keratinocytes via dendrites [ 126,127]. In this scenario, if a substancecould affect either or both of these two steps, it would exert an inhibitory effect on skinhyperpigmentation. Studying whether nicotinamide affects the PAR-2 mediated signaltransduction process will be important in elucidating the mechanism of the pigmentationinhibitory action of this substance.A recent study showed that NNT could regulate melanin synthesis in the skin [ 168].In human melanoma cells, depletion of NNT increased melanin synthesis, which wasinhibited by N-acetyl cysteine. Overexpression of NNT decreased eumelanin synthesis,which was attributed to increases in the NADPH/NADP+ratio and the GSH/GSSG ratio.NNT expression levels were low in post-inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation or age spots ofhuman skin. It would be interesting to examine the effects of nicotinamide on pigmentationin the skin with altered NNT activity.9.4. Questions to Be Answered in Future Studies
9.4. Questions to Be Answered in Future StudiesAs discussed above, important and interesting questions about the mechanism ofaction and biological activity of nicotinamide remain unclear, with the following questionsto list a few:• Is there any speciﬁc molecular target of nicotinamide for the control of skin aging orpigmentation?• Is the antiaging effect of nicotinamide is due to its intrinsic property or its metabolites?• How does nicotinamide modulate the cell-to-cell interactions in the skin?• Whether and how does nicotinamide regulate PAR-2 or NNT involved in skinpigmentation?• Does nicotinamide supplementation affect the NADPH/NADP+ratio and the GSH/GSSG ratio in the skin?• Would it be more effective if the dose of nicotinamide is adjusted according to theNAD+pool level, which varies depending on the individual skin condition?• How does nicotinamide affect the self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation, senes-
cence, and eventual exhaustion of epidermal stem cells?10. ConclusionsThe action of nicotinamide in controlling skin aging and pigmentation may be dueto the intrinsic properties of nicotinamide, or the properties of other metabolites derivedfrom nicotinamide, or both. Nicotinamide mitigates oxidative stress of cells via a directROS/free radical-scavenging action or an indirect action that enhances the antioxidantcapacity of cells. Nicotinamide is metabolized by NAMPT to restore the NAD+pooland delay the senescence of cells. Both nicotinamide and its metabolites, such as NMNand 1-methylnicotinamide exert anti-inﬂammatory properties in various experimentalmodels. Therefore, for cosmetic applications of nicotinamide, it is important to considerthe biological activities of its metabolites as well as nicotinamide itself.External stimuli, such as UV light and PM, internal stimuli, and chronological time
cause skin aging and hyperpigmentation through direct and indirect paths. When epidermalkeratinocytes are activated through ROS-mediated signaling, the expressions of inflamma-tory cytokines, PGs, and other signaling molecules are induced. Signaling molecules, such
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 17 of 24as stratifin, secreted from keratinocytes activate dermal fibroblasts to release MMPs forECM remodeling. PGs secreted from keratinocytes activate epidermal melanocytes to in-crease melanin synthesis and melanosome biogenesis, and promote intercellular melanosometransfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes. These overall processes can be alleviated bysupplementation of nicotinamide, resulting in reduced skin aging and pigmentation.Therefore, nutritional and pharmacological actions of nicotinamide may be mediatedby a complex mechanism including several metabolic pathways and multiple signalingprocesses. Aside from the identity of the mechanism of action, the results of many clinicaltrials suggest that nicotinamide is a beneﬁcial cosmetic ingredient that helps skin healthand beauty without any severe side effects.Funding: This research was supported by a grant of the Korea Health Technology R&D Project
through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Healthand Welfare, Republic of Korea (Grant Number: HP20C0004).Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.AbbreviationsADP adenosine diphosphateAMP adenosine monophosphateATP adenosine triphosphatecADPR cyclic ADP riboseCYP cytochrome P450ECM extracellular matrixGSH glutathioneGSSG glutathione disulﬁdeIL interleukinMAPK mitogen-activated protein kinaseMASI melasma area and severity indexMMP matrix metalloproteinaseNaAD+nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotideNaADP+nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphateNAD+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotideNADH reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotideNADP+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphateNADPH reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphateNaMN nicotinic acid mononucleotideNAMPT nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferaseNF-κB nuclear factor- κBNMN nicotinamide mononucleotide
NMN nicotinamide mononucleotideNNT nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenasePAR-2 protease-activated receptor-2PARP poly(ADP-ribose) polymerasePG prostaglandinPM particulate matterPPi inorganic pyrophosphatePRPP phosphoribosyl pyrophosphateROS reactive oxygen speciessir2 silent information regulator-2SIRT1 sirtruin1SPF sun protection factorTGF- β transforming growth factor- βTNF- α tumor necrosis factor- αUV ultraviolet
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 18 of 24References1. Chambers, E.S.; Vukmanovic-Stejic, M. Skin barrier immunity and ageing. Immunology 2020 ,160, 116–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Fisher, G.J.; Kang, S.; Varani, J.; Bata-Csorgo, Z.; Wan, Y.; Datta, S.; Voorhees, J.J. Mechanisms of photoaging and chronologicalskin aging. Arch. Dermatol. 2002 ,138, 1462–1470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Rittie, L.; Fisher, G.J. Natural and sun-induced aging of human skin. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2015 ,5, a015370. [CrossRef][PubMed]4. Tzaphlidou, M. The role of collagen and elastin in aged skin: An image processing approach. Micron 2004 ,35, 173–177. [CrossRef]5. Pizzino, G.; Irrera, N.; Cucinotta, M.; Pallio, G.; Mannino, F.; Arcoraci, V .; Squadrito, F.; Altavilla, D.; Bitto, A. Oxidative Stress:Harms and Beneﬁts for Human Health. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017 ,2017 , 8416763. [CrossRef]
6. Gu, Y.; Han, J.; Jiang, C.; Zhang, Y. Biomarkers, oxidative stress and autophagy in skin aging. Ageing Res. Rev. 2020 ,59, 101036.[CrossRef] [PubMed]7. Kammeyer, A.; Luiten, R.M. Oxidation events and skin aging. Ageing Res. Rev. 2015 ,21, 16–29. [CrossRef]8. Shah, A.A.; Sinha, A.A. Oxidative stress and autoimmune skin disease. Eur. J. Dermatol. 2013 ,23, 5–13. [CrossRef]9. Bickers, D.R.; Athar, M. Oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of skin disease. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2006 ,126, 2565–2575. [CrossRef]10. Awad, F.; Assrawi, E.; Louvrier, C.; Jumeau, C.; Giurgea, I.; Amselem, S.; Karabina, S.A. Photoaging and skin cancer: Is theinﬂammasome the missing link? Mech. Ageing Dev. 2018 ,172, 131–137. [CrossRef]11. Boo, Y.C. Natural Nrf2 Modulators for Skin Protection. Antioxidants 2020 ,9, 812. [CrossRef]12. Baek, J.; Lee, M.G. Oxidative stress and antioxidant strategies in dermatology. Redox Rep. 2016 ,21, 164–169. [CrossRef]
13. Hegyi, J.; Schwartz, R.A.; Hegyi, V . Pellagra: Dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea. Int. J. Dermatol. 2004 ,43, 1–5. [CrossRef]14. Kirkland, J.B. Niacin Status, NAD Distribution and ADP-Ribose Metabolism. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2009 ,15, 3–11. [CrossRef][PubMed]15. De Figueiredo, L.F.; Gossmann, T.I.; Ziegler, M.; Schuster, S. Pathway analysis of NAD+metabolism. Biochem. J. 2011 ,439, 341–348.[CrossRef]16. Mattiussi, A.J.; Blais, D. Niacin Versus Niacinamide. Can. Med Assoc. J. 1992 ,147, 990–991.17. MacKay, D.; Hathcock, J.; Guarneri, E. Niacin: Chemical forms, bioavailability, and health effects. Nutr. Rev. 2012 ,70, 357–366.[CrossRef]18. Surjana, D.; Damian, D.L. Nicotinamide in dermatology and photoprotection. Skinmed 2011 ,9, 360–365. [PubMed]19. Forbat, E.; Al-Niaimi, F.; Ali, F.R. Use of nicotinamide in dermatology. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2017 ,42, 137–144. [CrossRef]
20. Ballotti, R.; Healy, E.; Bertolotto, C. Nicotinamide as a chemopreventive therapy of skin cancers. Too much of good thing? Pigment.Cell Melanoma Res. 2019 ,32, 601–602. [CrossRef]21. Snaidr, V .A.; Damian, D.L.; Halliday, G.M. Nicotinamide for photoprotection and skin cancer chemoprevention: A review ofefﬁcacy and safety. Exp. Dermatol. 2019 ,28(Suppl. S1), 15–22. [CrossRef]22. Hakozaki, T.; Minwalla, L.; Zhuang, J.; Chhoa, M.; Matsubara, A.; Miyamoto, K.; Greatens, A.; Hillebrand, G.G.; Bissett, D.L.;Boissy, R.E. The effect of niacinamide on reducing cutaneous pigmentation and suppression of melanosome transfer. Br. J.Dermatol. 2002 ,147, 20–31. [CrossRef]23. Bissett, D.L.; Miyamoto, K.; Sun, P .; Li, J.; Berge, C.A. Topical niacinamide reduces yellowing, wrinkling, red blotchiness, andhyperpigmented spots in aging facial skin. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2004 ,26, 231–238. [CrossRef]
24. Bissett, D.L.; Oblong, J.E.; Berge, C.A. Niacinamide: A B vitamin that improves aging facial skin appearance. Dermatol. Surg.2005 ,31, 860–865; discussion 865. [CrossRef]25. Otte, N.; Borelli, C.; Korting, H.C. Nicotinamide—Biologic actions of an emerging cosmetic ingredient. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2005 ,27,255–261. [CrossRef]
25. Otte, N.; Borelli, C.; Korting, H.C. Nicotinamide—Biologic actions of an emerging cosmetic ingredient. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2005 ,27,255–261. [CrossRef]26. Braidy, N.; Berg, J.; Clement, J.; Khorshidi, F.; Poljak, A.; Jayasena, T.; Grant, R.; Sachdev, P . Role of Nicotinamide AdenineDinucleotide and Related Precursors as Therapeutic Targets for Age-Related Degenerative Diseases: Rationale, Biochemistry,Pharmacokinetics, and Outcomes. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2019 ,30, 251–294. [CrossRef]27. Fukuwatari, T.; Shibata, K. Nutritional aspect of tryptophan metabolism. Int. J. Tryptophan Res. 2013 ,6, 3–8. [CrossRef]28. Shibata, K. Organ Co-Relationship in Tryptophan Metabolism and Factors That Govern the Biosynthesis of Nicotinamide fromTryptophan. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 2018 ,64, 90–98. [CrossRef]29. Kennedy, B.E.; Sharif, T.; Martell, E.; Dai, C.; Kim, Y.; Lee, P .W.K.; Gujar, S.A. NAD+salvage pathway in cancer metabolism and
therapy. Pharmacol. Res. 2016 ,114, 274–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]30. Tedeschi, P .M.; Bansal, N.; Kerrigan, J.E.; Abali, E.E.; Scotto, K.W.; Bertino, J.R. NAD+Kinase as a Therapeutic Target in Cancer.Clin. Cancer Res. 2016 ,22, 5189–5195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]31. Zhang, Q.; Padayatti, P .S.; Leung, J.H. Proton-Translocating Nicotinamide Nucleotide Transhydrogenase: A Structural Perspective.Front. Physiol. 2017 ,8, 1089. [CrossRef]32. Chini, C.C.S.; Zeidler, J.D.; Kashyap, S.; Warner, G.; Chini, E.N. Evolving concepts in NAD+metabolism. Cell Metab. 2021 ,33,1076–1087. [CrossRef]33. Schweiker, S.S.; Tauber, A.L.; Sherry, M.E.; Levonis, S.M. Structure, Function and Inhibition of Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase,Member 14 (PARP14). Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2018 ,18, 1659–1669. [CrossRef]34. Palazzo, L.; Mikolcevic, P .; Mikoc, A.; Ahel, I. ADP-ribosylation signalling and human disease. Open Biol. 2019 ,9, 190041.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 19 of 2435. Hassa, P .O.; Haenni, S.S.; Elser, M.; Hottiger, M.O. Nuclear ADP-ribosylation reactions in mammalian cells: Where are we todayand where are we going? Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 2006 ,70, 789-+. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Morales, J.C.; Li, L.S.; Fattah, F.J.; Dong, Y.; Bey, E.A.; Patel, M.; Geo, J.M.; Boothman, D.A. Review of Poly (ADP-ribose)Polymerase (PARP) Mechanisms of Action and Rationale for Targeting in Cancer and Other Diseases. Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. GeneExpr. 2014 ,24, 15–28. [CrossRef]37. Watroba, M.; Dudek, I.; Skoda, M.; Stangret, A.; Rzodkiewicz, P .; Szukiewicz, D. Sirtuins, epigenetics and longevity. Ageing Res.Rev. 2017 ,40, 11–19. [CrossRef]38. Klein, M.A.; Denu, J.M. Biological and catalytic functions of sirtuin 6 as targets for small-molecule modulators. J. Biol. Chem. 2020 ,295, 11021–11041. [CrossRef]
295, 11021–11041. [CrossRef]39. Chang, H.C.; Guarente, L. SIRT1 and other sirtuins in metabolism. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2014 ,25, 138–145. [CrossRef][PubMed]40. Kar, A.; Mehrotra, S.; Chatterjee, S. CD38: T Cell Immuno-Metabolic Modulator. Cells 2020 ,9, 1716. [CrossRef]41. Aarhus, R.; Graeff, R.M.; Dickey, D.M.; Walseth, T.F.; Lee, H.C. ADP-ribosyl cyclase and CD38 catalyze the synthesis of acalcium-mobilizing metabolite from NADP+.J. Biol. Chem. 1995 ,270, 30327–30333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Nam, T.S.; Park, D.R.; Rah, S.Y.; Woo, T.G.; Chung, H.T.; Brenner, C.; Kim, U.H. Interleukin-8 drives CD38 to form NAADP fromNADP+and NAAD in the endolysosomes to mobilize Ca2+and effect cell migration. FASEB J. 2020 ,34, 12565–12576. [CrossRef]43. Yu, P .L.; Cai, X.B.; Liang, Y.; Wang, M.X.; Yang, W. Roles of NAD+and Its Metabolites Regulated Calcium Channels in Cancer.Molecules 2020 ,25, 4826. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 4826. [CrossRef]44. Gul, R.; Park, D.R.; Shawl, A.I.; Im, S.Y.; Nam, T.S.; Lee, S.H.; Ko, J.K.; Jang, K.Y.; Kim, D.; Kim, U.H. Nicotinic Acid AdenineDinucleotide Phosphate (NAADP) and Cyclic ADP-Ribose (cADPR) Mediate Ca2+Signaling in Cardiac Hypertrophy Induced bybeta-Adrenergic Stimulation. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0149125. [CrossRef]45. Pissios, P . Nicotinamide N-Methyltransferase: More Than a Vitamin B3 Clearance Enzyme. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2017 ,28,340–353. [CrossRef]46. Felsted, R.L.; Chaykin, S. N1-methylnicotinamide oxidation in a number of mammals. J. Biol. Chem. 1967 ,242, 1274–1279.[CrossRef]47. Real, A.M.; Hong, S.Y.; Pissios, P . Nicotinamide N-Oxidation by CYP2E1 in Human Liver Microsomes. Drug Metab. Dispos. 2013 ,41, 550–553. [CrossRef]48. Nadzhimutdinov, K.N.; Mavlianov, I.R.; Umarov, E.F.; Mutalov, N.K. The effect of alpha-tocopherol and nicotinamide on lipid
peroxidation and the activity of the antioxidant system in the lung tissue of premature rat pups. Eksp. Klin. Farmakol. 1993 ,56,28–30.49. Legon’kova, L.F.; Bushma, M.I.; Zverinskii, I.V .; Abakumov, G.Z.; Zavodnik, L.V . The effect of nicotinamide, methionine andalpha-tocopherol on the liver conjugating and mono-oxygenase systems and on lipid peroxidation in hepatosis-hepatitis in rats.Eksp. Klin. Farmakol. 1997 ,60, 68–71.50. Velykyi, M.M.; Burda, V .A.; Biront, N.V .; Oliiarnyk, O.D.; Velykyi, A.M. The effect of nicotinamide on the enzymatic activity ofthe antioxidant defense in experimental diabetes. Ukr. Biokhimicheskii Zhurnal (1978) 1996 ,68, 109–114.51. Kamat, J.P .; Devasagayam, T.P . Methylene blue plus light-induced lipid peroxidation in rat liver microsomes: Inhibition bynicotinamide (vitamin B3) and other antioxidants. Chem. Biol. Interact. 1996 ,99, 1–16. [CrossRef]
52. Kamat, J.P .; Devasagayam, T.P .A. Nicotinamide (vitamin B-3) as an effective antioxidant against oxidative damage in rat brainmitochondria. Redox Rep. 1999 ,4, 179–184. [CrossRef]53. Izdebska, M.; Halas-Wisniewska, M.; Adamczyk, I.; Lewandowska, I.; Kwiatkowska, I.; Gagat, M.; Grzanka, A. The protective
mitochondria. Redox Rep. 1999 ,4, 179–184. [CrossRef]53. Izdebska, M.; Halas-Wisniewska, M.; Adamczyk, I.; Lewandowska, I.; Kwiatkowska, I.; Gagat, M.; Grzanka, A. The protectiveeffect of niacinamide on CHO AA8 cell line against ultraviolet radiation in the context of main cytoskeletal proteins. Adv. Clin.Exp. Med. 2018 ,27, 367–378. [CrossRef]54. Chhabra, G.; Garvey, D.R.; Singh, C.K.; Mintie, C.A.; Ahmad, N. Effects and Mechanism of Nicotinamide Against UVA- and/orUVB-mediated DNA Damages in Normal Melanocytes. Photochem. Photobiol. 2019 ,95, 331–337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Zhen, A.X.; Piao, M.J.; Kang, K.A.; Fernando, P .D.S.M.; Kang, H.K.; Koh, Y.S.; Yi, J.M.; Hyun, J.W. Niacinamide Protects Skin Cellsfrom Oxidative Stress Induced by Particulate Matter. Biomol. Ther. 2019 ,27, 562–569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Mi, T.Y.; Dong, Y.Y.; Santhanam, U.; Huang, N. Niacinamide and 12-hydroxystearic acid prevented benzo(a)pyrene and squalene
peroxides induced hyperpigmentation in skin equivalent. Exp. Dermatol. 2019 ,28, 742–746. [CrossRef]57. Grange, P .A.; Raingeaud, J.; Calvez, V .; Dupin, N. Nicotinamide inhibits Propionibacterium acnes-induced IL-8 production inkeratinocytes through the NF-kappaB and MAPK pathways. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2009 ,56, 106–112. [CrossRef]58. Monfrecola, G.; Gaudiello, F.; Cirillo, T.; Fabbrocini, G.; Balato, A.; Lembo, S. Nicotinamide downregulates gene expression ofinterleukin-6, interleukin-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and tumour necrosis factor-alpha gene expression in HaCaTkeratinocytes after ultraviolet B irradiation. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2013 ,38, 185–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]59. Bierman, J.C.; Laughlin, T.; Tamura, M.; Hulette, B.; Mack, C.E.; Sherrill, J.D.; Tan, C.Y.R.; Morenc, M.; Bellanger, S.; Oblong, J.E.Niacinamide mitigates SASP-related inﬂammation induced by environmental stressors in human epidermal keratinocytes and
skin. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2020 ,42, 501–511. [CrossRef]60. Bryniarski, K.; Biedron, R.; Jakubowski, A.; Chlopicki, S.; Marcinkiewicz, J. Anti-inﬂammatory effect of 1-methylnicotinamide incontact hypersensitivity to oxazolone in mice; involvement of prostacyclin. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2008 ,578, 332–338. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 20 of 2461. Biedron, R.; Ciszek, M.; Tokarczyk, M.; Bobek, M.; Kurnyta, M.; Slominska, E.M.; Smolenski, R.T.; Marcinkiewicz, J. 1-Methylnicotinamide and nicotinamide: Two related anti-inﬂammatory agents that differentially affect the functions of activatedmacrophages. Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp. 2008 ,56, 127–134. [CrossRef]62. Wozniacka, A.; Wieczorkowska, M.; Gebicki, J.; Sysa-Jedrzejowska, A. Topical application of 1-methylnicotinamide in thetreatment of rosacea: A pilot study. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2005 ,30, 632–635. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Pietrzak, L.; Mogielnicki, A.; Buczko, W. Nicotinamide and its metabolite N-methylnicotinamide increase skin vascular perme-ability in rats. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2009 ,34, 380–384. [CrossRef]64. Jiang, N.; Wang, M.; Song, J.Y.; Liu, Y.G.; Chen, H.; Mu, D.; Xia, M. N-methylnicotinamide protects against endothelial dysfunction
and attenuates atherogenesis in apolipoprotein E-deﬁcient mice. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2016 ,60, 1625–1636. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Huynh, P .K.; Wilder, J.; Hiller, S.; Hagaman, J.; Takahashi, N.; Maeda-Smithies, N.; Li, F. Beneﬁcial effects of nicotinamide onhypertensive mice with impaired endothelial nitric oxide function. J. Exp. Nephrol. 2020 ,1, 1–8. [PubMed]66. Zhou, X.R.; Du, H.H.; Ni, L.Y.; Ran, J.; Hu, J.; Yu, J.J.; Zhao, X. Nicotinamide Mononucleotide Combined with Lactobacillusfermentum TKSN041 Reduces the Photoaging Damage in Murine Skin by Activating AMPK Signaling Pathway. Front. Pharmacol.2021 ,12, 643089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Anderson, R.M.; Bitterman, K.J.; Wood, J.G.; Medvedik, O.; Sinclair, D.A. Nicotinamide and PNC1 govern lifespan extension bycalorie restriction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2003 ,423, 181–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Matuoka, K.; Chen, K.Y.; Takenawa, T. Rapid reversion of aging phenotypes by nicotinamide through possible modulation ofhistone acetylation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2001 ,58, 2108–2116. [CrossRef]69. Lim, C.S.; Potts, M.; Helm, R.E. Nicotinamide extends the replicative life span of primary human cells. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2006 ,127, 511–514. [CrossRef]70. Porcu, M.; Chiarugi, A. The emerging therapeutic potential of sirtuin-interacting drugs: From cell death to lifespan extension.Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2005 ,26, 94–103. [CrossRef]71. Adams, J.D.; Klaidman, L.K. Sirtuins, nicotinamide and aging: A critical review. Lett. Drug Des. Discov. 2007 ,4, 44–48. [CrossRef]72. Massudi, H.; Grant, R.; Braidy, N.; Guest, J.; Farnsworth, B.; Guillemin, G.J. Age-Associated Changes In Oxidative Stress andNAD+Metabolism In Human Tissue. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e42357. [CrossRef]
73. Oblong, J.E. The evolving role of the NAD plus/nicotinamide metabolome in skin homeostasis, cellular bioenergetics, and aging.DNA Repair 2014 ,23, 59–63. [CrossRef]74. Kang, H.T.; Il Lee, H.; Hwang, E.S. Nicotinamide extends replicative lifespan of human cells. Aging Cell 2006 ,5, 423–436.[CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Kwak, J.Y.; Ham, H.J.; Kim, C.M.; Hwang, E.S. Nicotinamide exerts antioxidative effects on senescent cells. Mol. Cells 2015 ,38,229–235. [CrossRef]76. Oblong, J.E.; Bowman, A.; Rovito, H.A.; Jarrold, B.B.; Sherrill, J.D.; Black, M.R.; Nelson, G.; Kimball, A.B.; Birch-Machin, M.A.Metabolic dysfunction in human skin: Restoration of mitochondrial integrity and metabolic output by nicotinamide (niacinamide)in primary dermal ﬁbroblasts from older aged donors. Aging Cell 2020 ,19, e13248. [CrossRef]77. Borradaile, N.M.; Pickering, J.G. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase imparts human endothelial cells with extended
replicative lifespan and enhanced angiogenic capacity in a high glucose environment. Aging Cell 2009 ,8, 100–112. [CrossRef][PubMed]78. Rovito, H.A.; Oblong, J.E. Nicotinamide preferentially protects glycolysis in dermal ﬁbroblasts under oxidative stress conditions.Br. J. Dermatol. 2013 ,169, 15–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
[PubMed]78. Rovito, H.A.; Oblong, J.E. Nicotinamide preferentially protects glycolysis in dermal ﬁbroblasts under oxidative stress conditions.Br. J. Dermatol. 2013 ,169, 15–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Khaidizar, F.D.; Nakahata, Y.; Kume, A.; Sumizawa, K.; Kohno, K.; Matsui, T.; Bessho, Y. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferasedelays cellular senescence by upregulating SIRT1 activity and antioxidant gene expression in mouse cells. Genes Cells 2017 ,22,982–992. [CrossRef]80. Tan, C.L.; Chin, T.; Tan, C.Y.R.; Rovito, H.A.; Quek, L.S.; Oblong, J.E.; Bellanger, S. Nicotinamide Metabolism Modulatesthe Proliferation/Differentiation Balance and Senescence of Human Primary Keratinocytes. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2019 ,139,1638–1647.e3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]81. Taub, A.F.; Pham, K. Stem Cells in Dermatology and Anti-aging Care of the Skin. Facial Plast. Surg. Clin. N. Am. 2018 ,26, 425–437.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Zouboulis, C.C.; Adjaye, J.; Akamatsu, H.; Moe-Behrens, G.; Niemann, C. Human skin stem cells and the ageing process. Exp.Gerontol. 2008 ,43, 986–997. [CrossRef] [PubMed]83. Liu, N.; Matsumura, H.; Kato, T.; Ichinose, S.; Takada, A.; Namiki, T.; Asakawa, K.; Morinaga, H.; Mohri, Y.; De Arcangelis, A.;et al. Stem cell competition orchestrates skin homeostasis and ageing. Nature 2019 ,568, 344–350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Gannon, H.S.; Donehower, L.A.; Lyle, S.; Jones, S.N. Mdm2-p53 signaling regulates epidermal stem cell senescence and prematureaging phenotypes in mouse skin. Dev. Biol. 2011 ,353, 1–9. [CrossRef]85. Chu, G.Y.; Chen, Y.F.; Chen, H.Y.; Chan, M.H.; Gau, C.S.; Weng, S.M. Stem cell therapy on skin: Mechanisms, recent advances anddrug reviewing issues. J. Food Drug Anal. 2018 ,26, 14–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]86. Grabowska, W.; Sikora, E.; Bielak-Zmijewska, A. Sirtuins, a promising target in slowing down the ageing process. Biogerontology
2017 ,18, 447–476. [CrossRef]87. Mayack, B.K.; Sippl, W.; Ntie-Kang, F. Natural Products as Modulators of Sirtuins. Molecules 2020 ,25, 3287. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 21 of 2488. Meng, Y.; Ren, Z.; Xu, F.; Zhou, X.; Song, C.; Wang, V .Y.; Liu, W.; Lu, L.; Thomson, J.A.; Chen, G. Nicotinamide Promotes CellSurvival and Differentiation as Kinase Inhibitor in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells. Stem Cell Rep. 2018 ,11, 1347–1356. [CrossRef]89. Cole, M.A.; Quan, T.; Voorhees, J.J.; Fisher, G.J. Extracellular matrix regulation of ﬁbroblast function: Redeﬁning our perspectiveon skin aging. J. Cell Commun. Signal. 2018 ,12, 35–43. [CrossRef]90. Shin, J.W.; Kwon, S.H.; Choi, J.Y.; Na, J.I.; Huh, C.H.; Choi, H.R.; Park, K.C. Molecular Mechanisms of Dermal Aging andAntiaging Approaches. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 2126. [CrossRef]91. Quan, T.H.; Fisher, G.J. Role of Age-Associated Alterations of the Dermal Extracellular Matrix Microenvironment in Human SkinAging: A Mini-Review. Gerontology 2015 ,61, 427–434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Imokawa, G.; Ishida, K. Biological mechanisms underlying the ultraviolet radiation-induced formation of skin wrinkling andsagging I: Reduced skin elasticity, highly associated with enhanced dermal elastase activity, triggers wrinkling and sagging. Int. J.Mol. Sci. 2015 ,16, 7753–7775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]93. Ghahary, A.; Marcoux, Y.; Karimi-Busheri, F.; Li, Y.; Tredget, E.E.; Kilani, R.T.; Lam, E.; Weinfeld, M. Differentiated keratinocyte-releasable stratiﬁn (14-3-3 sigma) stimulates MMP-1 expression in dermal ﬁbroblasts. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2005 ,124, 170–177.[CrossRef]94. Lam, E.; Kilani, R.T.; Li, Y.; Tredget, E.E.; Ghahary, A. Stratiﬁn-induced matrix metalloproteinase-1 in ﬁbroblast is mediated byc-fos and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2005 ,125, 230–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]95. Adachi, H.; Murakami, Y.; Tanaka, H.; Nakata, S. Increase of stratiﬁn triggered by ultraviolet irradiation is possibly related to
premature aging of human skin. Exp. Dermatol. 2014 ,23(Suppl. S1), 32–36. [CrossRef]96. Seok, J.K.; Boo, Y.C. p-Coumaric Acid Attenuates UVB-Induced Release of Stratiﬁn from Keratinocytes and Indirectly RegulatesMatrix Metalloproteinase 1 Release from Fibroblasts. Korean J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2015 ,19, 241–247. [CrossRef]97. Taylor, K.R.; Gallo, R.L. Glycosaminoglycans and their proteoglycans: Host-associated molecular patterns for initiation andmodulation of inﬂammation. FASEB J. 2006 ,20, 9–22. [CrossRef]98. Frantz, C.; Stewart, K.M.; Weaver, V .M. The extracellular matrix at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 2010 ,123, 4195–4200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]99. Lee, D.H.; Oh, J.H.; Chung, J.H. Glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan in skin aging. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2016 ,83, 174–181. [CrossRef]100. Ratcliffe, D.R.; Iqbal, J.; Hussain, M.M.; Cramer, E.B. Fibrillar collagen type I stimulation of apolipoprotein B secretion in Caco-2
cells is mediated by beta1 integrin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2009 ,1791 , 1144–1154. [CrossRef]101. Philips, N.; Chalensouk-Khaosaat, J.; Gonzalez, S. Simulation of the Elastin and Fibrillin in Non-Irradiated or UVA RadiatedFibroblasts, and Direct Inhibition of Elastase or Matrix Metalloptoteinases Activity by Nicotinamide or Its Derivatives. J. Cosmet.Sci.2018 ,69, 47–56.102. Wessels, Q.; Pretorius, E.; Smith, C.M.; Nel, H. The potential of a niacinamide dominated cosmeceutical formulation on ﬁbroblastactivity and wound healing in vitro. Int. Wound J. 2014 ,11, 152–158. [CrossRef]103. Ashkani Esfahani, S.; Khoshneviszadeh, M.; Namazi, M.R.; Noorafshan, A.; Geramizadeh, B.; Nadimi, E.; Razavipour, S.T. TopicalNicotinamide Improves Tissue Regeneration in Excisional Full-Thickness Skin Wounds: A Stereological and Pathological Study.Trauma Mon. 2015 ,20, e18193. [CrossRef]104. Choi, E.H. Aging of the skin barrier. Clin. Dermatol. 2019 ,37, 336–345. [CrossRef]
105. Tanno, O.; Ota, Y.; Kitamura, N.; Katsube, T.; Inoue, S. Nicotinamide increases biosynthesis of ceramides as well as other stratum
105. Tanno, O.; Ota, Y.; Kitamura, N.; Katsube, T.; Inoue, S. Nicotinamide increases biosynthesis of ceramides as well as other stratumcorneum lipids to improve the epidermal permeability barrier. Br. J. Dermatol. 2000 ,143, 524–531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Bissett, D. Topical niacinamide and barrier enhancement. Cutis 2002 ,70, 8–12; discussion 21–23. [PubMed]107. Draelos, Z.D.; Ertel, K.; Berge, C. Niacinamide-containing facial moisturizer improves skin barrier and beneﬁts subjects withrosacea. Cutis 2005 ,76, 135–141.108. Jacobson, E.L.; Kim, H.; Kim, M.; Williams, J.D.; Coyle, D.L.; Coyle, W.R.; Grove, G.; Rizer, R.L.; Stratton, M.S.; Jacobson, M.K. Atopical lipophilic niacin derivative increases NAD, epidermal differentiation and barrier function in photodamaged skin. Exp.Dermatol. 2007 ,16, 490–499. [CrossRef]109. Virador, V .M.; Kobayashi, N.; Matsunaga, J.; Hearing, V .J. A standardized protocol for assessing regulators of pigmentation. Anal.
Biochem. 1999 ,270, 207–219. [CrossRef]110. Lei, T.C.; Virador, V .M.; Vieira, W.D.; Hearing, V .J. A melanocyte-keratinocyte coculture model to assess regulators of pigmentationin vitro. Anal. Biochem. 2002 ,305, 260–268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]111. Greatens, A.; Hakozaki, T.; Koshoffer, A.; Epstein, H.; Schwemberger, S.; Babcock, G.; Bissett, D.; Takiwaki, H.; Arase, S.; Wickett,R.R.; et al. Effective inhibition of melanosome transfer to keratinocytes by lectins and niacinamide is reversible. Exp. Dermatol.2005 ,14, 498–508. [CrossRef] [PubMed]112. Seiberg, M. Keratinocyte-melanocyte interactions during melanosome transfer. Pigment Cell Res. 2001 ,14, 236–242. [CrossRef]113. Boissy, R.E. Melanosome transfer to and translocation in the keratinocyte. Exp. Dermatol. 2003 ,12, 5–12. [CrossRef]114. Hearing, V .J. Regulating melanosome transfer: Who’s driving the bus? Pigment Cell Res. 2007 ,20, 334–335. [CrossRef]
115. Wu, X.F.; Hammer, J.A. Melanosome transfer: It is best to give and receive. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2014 ,29, 1–7. [CrossRef]116. Scott, G.; Leopardi, S.; Printup, S.; Madden, B.C. Filopodia are conduits for melanosome transfer to keratinocytes. J. Cell Sci. 2002 ,115, 1441–1451. [CrossRef]117. Ando, H.; Niki, Y.; Ito, M.; Akiyama, K.; Matsui, M.S.; Yarosh, D.B.; Ichihashi, M. Melanosomes Are Transferred from Melanocytesto Keratinocytes through the Processes of Packaging, Release, Uptake, and Dispersion. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2012 ,132, 1222–1229.[CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 22 of 24118. Wu, X.F.S.; Masedunskas, A.; Weigert, R.; Copeland, N.G.; Jenkins, N.A.; Hammer, J.A. Melanoregulin regulates a sheddingmechanism that drives melanosome transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012 ,109, E2101–E2109.[CrossRef]119. Tarafder, A.K.; Bolasco, G.; Correia, M.S.; Pereira, F.J.C.; Iannone, L.; Hume, A.N.; Kirkpatrick, N.; Picardo, M.; Torrisi, M.R.;Rodrigues, I.P .; et al. Rab11b Mediates Melanin Transfer between Donor Melanocytes and Acceptor Keratinocytes via CoupledExo/Endocytosis. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2014 ,134, 1056–1066. [CrossRef]120. Santulli, R.J.; Derian, C.K.; Darrow, A.L.; Tomko, K.A.; Eckardt, A.J.; Seiberg, M.; Scarborough, R.M.; Andradegordon, P . Evidencefor the Presence of a Protease-Activated Receptor Distinct from the Thrombin Receptor in Human Keratinocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 1995 ,92, 9151–9155. [CrossRef]
Sci. USA 1995 ,92, 9151–9155. [CrossRef]121. Derian, C.K.; Eckardt, A.J.; Andrade-Gordon, P . Differential regulation of human keratinocyte growth and differentiation by anovel family of protease-activated receptors. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 ,8, 743–749.122. Seiberg, M.; Paine, C.; Sharlow, E.; Andrade-Gordon, P .; Costanzo, M.; Eisinger, M.; Shapiro, S.S. The protease-activated receptor 2regulates pigmentation via keratinocyte-melanocyte interactions. Exp. Cell Res. 2000 ,254, 25–32. [CrossRef]123. Seiberg, M.; Paine, C.; Sharlow, E.; Andrade-Gordon, P .; Costanzo, M.; Eisinger, M.; Shapiro, S.S. Inhibition of melanosometransfer results in skin lightening. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2000 ,115, 162–167. [CrossRef]124. Scott, G.; Deng, A.; Rodriguez-Burford, C.; Seiberg, M.; Han, R.J.; Babiarz, L.; Grizzle, W.; Bell, W.; Pentland, A. Protease-activatedreceptor 2, a receptor involved in melanosome transfer, is upregulated in human skin by ultraviolet irradiation. J. Investig.
Dermatol. 2001 ,117, 1412–1420. [CrossRef]125. Tang, L.Y.; Li, J.; Lin, X.; Wu, W.Y.; Kang, K.F.; Fu, W.W. Oxidation Levels Differentially Impact Melanocytes: Low versus HighConcentration of Hydrogen Peroxide Promotes Melanin Synthesis and Melanosome Transfer. Dermatology 2012 ,224, 145–153.[CrossRef]126. Scott, G.; Leopardi, S.; Printup, S.; Malhi, N.; Seiberg, M.; Lapoint, R. Proteinase-activated receptor-2 stimulates prostaglandinproduction in keratinocytes: Analysis of prostaglandin receptors on human melanocytes and effects of PGE2 and PGF2alpha onmelanocyte dendricity. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2004 ,122, 1214–1224. [CrossRef]127. Ma, H.J.; Ma, H.Y.; Yang, Y.; Li, P .C.; Zi, S.X.; Jia, C.Y.; Chen, R. alpha-Melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) and prostaglandinE2 (PGE2) drive melanosome transfer by promoting ﬁlopodia delivery and shedding spheroid granules: Evidences from atomicforce microscopy observation. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2014 ,76, 222–230. [CrossRef]
128. Choi, E.J.; Kang, Y.G.; Kim, J.; Hwang, J.K. Macelignan Inhibits Melanosome Transfer Mediated by Protease-Activated Receptor-2in Keratinocytes. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2011 ,34, 748–754. [CrossRef]129. Ni, J.; Wang, N.; Gao, L.L.; Li, L.L.; Zheng, S.W.; Liu, Y.J.; Ozukum, M.; Nikiforova, A.; Zhao, G.M.; Song, Z.Q. The effect of theNMDA receptor-dependent signaling pathway on cell morphology and melanosome transfer in melanocytes. J. Dermatol. Sci.2016 ,84, 296–304. [CrossRef]130. Hu, Q.M.; Yi, W.J.; Su, M.Y.; Jiang, S.; Xu, S.Z.; Lei, T.C. Induction of retinal-dependent calcium inﬂux in human melanocytes byUVA or UVB radiation contributes to the stimulation of melanosome transfer. Cell Prolif. 2017 ,50, e12372. [CrossRef]131. Koike, S.; Yamasaki, K.; Yamauchi, T.; Inoue, M.; Shimada-Ohmori, R.; Tsuchiyama, K.; Aiba, S. Toll-like receptors 2 and 3 enhancemelanogenesis and melanosome transport in human melanocytes. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2018 ,31, 570–584. [CrossRef]
132. Pillaiyar, T.; Manickam, M.; Jung, S.H. Recent development of signaling pathways inhibitors of melanogenesis. Cell. Signal. 2017 ,
132. Pillaiyar, T.; Manickam, M.; Jung, S.H. Recent development of signaling pathways inhibitors of melanogenesis. Cell. Signal. 2017 ,40, 99–115. [CrossRef]133. Chiu, P .C.; Chan, C.C.; Lin, H.M.; Chiu, H.C. The clinical anti-aging effects of topical kinetin and niacinamide in Asians: Arandomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, split-face comparative trial. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2007 ,6, 243–249. [CrossRef]134. Kawada, A.; Konishi, N.; Oiso, N.; Kawara, S.; Date, A. Evaluation of anti-wrinkle effects of a novel cosmetic containingniacinamide. J. Dermatol. 2008 ,35, 637–642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]135. Fu, J.J.J.; Hillebrand, G.G.; Raleigh, P .; Li, J.; Marmor, M.J.; Bertucci, V .; Grimes, P .E.; Mandy, S.H.; Perez, M.I.; Weinkle, S.H.; et al.A randomized, controlled comparative study of the wrinkle reduction beneﬁts of a cosmetic niacinamide/peptide/retinyl
propionate product regimen vs. a prescription 0.02% tretinoin product regimen. Br. J. Dermatol. 2010 ,162, 647–654. [CrossRef][PubMed]136. Berardesca, E.; Ardigo, M.; Cameli, N.; Mariano, M.; Agozzino, M.; Matts, P .J. Randomized, double-blinded, vehicle-controlled,split-face study to evaluate the effects of topical application of a Gold Silk Sericin/Niacinamide/Signaline complex on biophysicalparameters related to skin ageing. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2015 ,37, 606–612. [CrossRef]137. Farris, P .; Zeichner, J.; Berson, D. Efﬁcacy and Tolerability of a Skin Brightening/Anti-Aging Cosmeceutical Containing Retinol0.5%, Niacinamide, Hexylresorcinol, and Resveratrol. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2016 ,15, 863–868. [PubMed]138. Lee, Y.I.; Kim, S.; Kim, J.; Kim, J.; Chung, K.B.; Lee, J.H. Randomized controlled study for the anti-aging effect of humanadipocyte-derived mesenchymal stem cell media combined with niacinamide after laser therapy. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2021 ,20,
1774–1781. [CrossRef] [PubMed]139. Navarrete-Solis, J.; Castanedo-Cazares, J.P .; Torres-Alvarez, B.; Oros-Ovalle, C.; Fuentes-Ahumada, C.; Gonzalez, F.J.;Martinez-Ramirez , J.D.; Moncada, B. A Double-Blind, Randomized Clinical Trial of Niacinamide 4% versus Hydroquinone 4% inthe Treatment of Melasma. Dermatol. Res. Pract. 2011 ,2011 , 379173. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 23 of 24140. Castanedo-Cazares, J.P .; Larraga-Pinones, G.; Ehnis-Perez, A.; Fuentes-Ahumada, C.; Oros-Ovalle, C.; Smoller, B.R.;Torres-Alvarez , B. Topical niacinamide 4% and desonide 0.05% for treatment of axillary hyperpigmentation: A randomized,double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2013 ,6, 29–36. [CrossRef]141. Pierard, G.E. EEMCO guidance for the assessment of skin colour. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 1998 ,10, 1–11. [CrossRef]142. Hakozaki, T.; Takiwaki, H.; Miyamoto, K.; Sato, Y.; Arase, S. Ultrasound enhanced skin-lightening effect of vitamin C andniacinamide. Skin Res. Technol. 2006 ,12, 105–113. [CrossRef]143. Bissett, D.L.; Robinson, L.R.; Raleigh, P .S.; Miyamoto, K.; Hakozaki, T.; Li, J.; Kelm, G.R. Reduction in the appearance of facialhyperpigmentation by topical N-undecyl-10-enoyl-L-phenylalanine and its combination with niacinamide. J. Cosmet. Dermatol.2009 ,8, 260–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2009 ,8, 260–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]144. Kimball, A.B.; Kaczvinsky, J.R.; Li, J.; Robinson, L.R.; Matts, P .J.; Berge, C.A.; Miyamoto, K.; Bissett, D.L. Reduction in theappearance of facial hyperpigmentation after use of moisturizers with a combination of topical niacinamide and N-acetylglucosamine: Results of a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled trial. Br. J. Dermatol. 2010 ,162, 435–441. [CrossRef][PubMed]145. Viyoch, J.; Tengamnuay, I.; Phetdee, K.; Tuntijarukorn, P .; Waranuch, N. Effects of Trans-4-(Aminomethyl) CyclohexanecarboxylicAcid/Potassium Azeloyl Diglycinate/Niacinamide Topical Emulsion in Thai Adults With Melasma: A Single-Center, Randomized,Double-Blind, Controlled Study. Curr. Ther. Res. Clin. Exp. 2010 ,71, 345–359. [CrossRef]146. Lee, D.H.; Oh, I.Y.; Koo, K.T.; Suk, J.M.; Jung, S.W.; Park, J.O.; Kim, B.J.; Choi, Y.M. Reduction in facial hyperpigmentation after
treatment with a combination of topical niacinamide and tranexamic acid: A randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled trial.Skin Res. Technol. 2014 ,20, 208–212. [CrossRef]147. Desai, S.; Ayres, E.; Bak, H.; Manco, M.; Lynch, S.; Raab, S.; Du, A.; Green, D.; Skobowiat, C.; Wangari-Talbot, J.; et al. Effect of aTranexamic Acid, Kojic Acid, and Niacinamide Containing Serum on Facial Dyschromia: A Clinical Evaluation. J. Drugs Dermatol.2019 ,18, 454–459.148. Kalasho, B.D.; Minokadeh, A.; Zhang-Nunes, S.; Zoumalan, R.A.; Shemirani, N.L.; Waldman, A.R.; Pletzer, V .; Zoumalan, C.I.Evaluating the Safety and Efﬁcacy of a Topical Formulation Containing Epidermal Growth Factor, Tranexamic Acid, Vitamin C,Arbutin, Niacinamide and Other Ingredients as Hydroquinone 4% Alternatives to Improve Hyperpigmentation: A Prospective,Randomized, Controlled Split Face Study. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2020 ,71, 263–290.
149. Kim, J.H.; Seok, J.K.; Kim, Y.M.; Boo, Y.C. Identiﬁcation of small peptides and glycinamide that inhibit melanin synthesis using apositional scanning synthetic peptide combinatorial library. Br. J. Dermatol. 2019 ,181, 128–137. [CrossRef]150. Boo, Y.C. Up- or Downregulation of Melanin Synthesis Using Amino Acids, Peptides, and Their Analogs. Biomedicines 2020 ,8, 322.[CrossRef]151. Boo, Y.C. p-Coumaric Acid as An Active Ingredient in Cosmetics: A Review Focusing on its Antimelanogenic Effects. Antioxidants2019 ,8, 275. [CrossRef]152. Boo, Y.C. Human Skin Lightening Efﬁcacy of Resveratrol and Its Analogs: From in Vitro Studies to Cosmetic Applications.Antioxidants 2019 ,8, 332. [CrossRef]153. Boo, Y.C. Arbutin as a Skin Depigmenting Agent with Antimelanogenic and Antioxidant Properties. Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1129.[CrossRef] [PubMed]154. Chung, B.Y.; Choi, S.R.; Moon, I.J.; Park, C.W.; Kim, Y.H.; Chang, S.E. The Glutathione Derivative, GSH Monoethyl Ester, May
Effectively Whiten Skin but GSH Does Not. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 629. [CrossRef]155. Lee, H.K.; Ha, J.W.; Hwang, Y.J.; Boo, Y.C. Identiﬁcation of L-Cysteinamide as a Potent Inhibitor of Tyrosinase-Mediated
155. Lee, H.K.; Ha, J.W.; Hwang, Y.J.; Boo, Y.C. Identiﬁcation of L-Cysteinamide as a Potent Inhibitor of Tyrosinase-MediatedDopachrome Formation and Eumelanin Synthesis. Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1202. [CrossRef]156. Hwang, E.S.; Song, S.B. Possible Adverse Effects of High-Dose Nicotinamide: Mechanisms and Safety Assessment. Biomolecules2020 ,10, 687. [CrossRef] [PubMed]157. Li, D.; Tian, Y.J.; Guo, J.; Sun, W.P .; Lun, Y.Z.; Guo, M.; Luo, N.; Cao, Y.; Cao, J.M.; Gong, X.J.; et al. Nicotinamide supplementationinduces detrimental metabolic and epigenetic changes in developing rats. Br. J. Nutr. 2013 ,110, 2156–2164. [CrossRef] [PubMed]158. Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel. Final report of the safety assessment of niacinamide and niacin. Int. J. Toxicol. 2005 ,24(Suppl. 5), 1–31.159. Wohlrab, J.; Kreft, D. Niacinamide—Mechanisms of Action and Its Topical Use in Dermatology. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2014 ,27,311–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
311–315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]160. Guan, X.Y.; Lin, P .; Knoll, E.; Chakrabarti, R. Mechanism of Inhibition of the Human Sirtuin Enzyme SIRT3 by Nicotinamide:Computational and Experimental Studies. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, e107729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]161. Banasik, M.; Stedeford, T.; Strosznajder, R.P . Natural Inhibitors of Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase-1. Mol. Neurobiol. 2012 ,46, 55–63.[CrossRef] [PubMed]162. Mathialagan, S.; Bi, Y.A.; Costales, C.; Kalgutkar, A.S.; Rodrigues, A.D.; Varma, M.V .S. Nicotinic acid transport into human liverinvolves organic anion transporter 2 (SLC22A7). Biochem. Pharmacol. 2020 ,174, 113829. [CrossRef] [PubMed]163. Grolla, A.A.; Torretta, S.; Gnemmi, I.; Amoruso, A.; Orsomando, G.; Gatti, M.; Caldarelli, A.; Lim, D.; Penengo, L.; Brunelleschi,S.; et al. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT/PBEF/visfatin) is a tumoural cytokine released from melanoma.Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 ,28, 718–729. [CrossRef]
164. Grozio, A.; Mills, K.F.; Yoshino, J.; Bruzzone, S.; Sociali, G.; Tokizane, K.; Lei, H.C.; Cunningham, R.; Sasaki, Y.; Migaud, M.E.; et al.Slc12a8 is a nicotinamide mononucleotide transporter. Nat. Metab. 2019 ,1, 47–57. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 1315 24 of 24165. Khaidizar, F.D.; Bessho, Y.; Nakahata, Y. Nicotinamide Phosphoribosyltransferase as a Key Molecule of the Aging/SenescenceProcess. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 3709. [CrossRef]166. Kim, H.J.; Kazi, J.U.; Lee, Y.R.; Nguyen, D.H.; Lee, H.B.; Shin, J.H.; Soh, J.W.; Kim, E.K. Visualization of the melanosometransfer-inhibition in a mouse epidermal cell co-culture model. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2010 ,25, 249–253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]167. Kim, B.; Hwang, J.S.; Kim, H.S. N-Nicotinoyl dopamine inhibits skin pigmentation by suppressing of melanosome transfer. Eur. J.Pharmacol. 2015 ,769, 250–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]168. Allouche, J.; Rachmin, I.; Adhikari, K.; Pardo, L.M.; Lee, J.H.; McConnell, A.M.; Kato, S.; Fan, S.; Kawakami, A.; Suita, Y.; et al.NNT mediates redox-dependent pigmentation via a UVB- and MITF-independent mechanism. Cell2021 ,184, 4268–4283.e4220.[CrossRef]
