antioxidants ReviewRedox Active Antimicrobial Peptides in Controlling Growth ofMicroorganisms at Body BarriersPiotr Brzoza1, Urszula Godlewska1,†, Arkadiusz Borek2, Agnieszka Morytko1, Aneta Zegar1,Patrycja Kwiecinska1, Brian A. Zabel3, Artur Osyczka2, Mateusz Kwitniewski1and Joanna Cichy1,*/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Brzoza, P .; Godlewska, U.;Borek, A.; Morytko, A.; Zegar, A.;Kwiecinska, P .; Zabel, B.A.; Osyczka,A.; Kwitniewski, M.; Cichy, J. RedoxActive Antimicrobial Peptides inControlling Growth ofMicroorganisms at Body Barriers.Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10030446Academic Editor: Luis M. Mateos andMichal LetekReceived: 12 February 2021Accepted: 9 March 2021Published: 13 March 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims in
with regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1Department of Immunology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University,30-387 Krak ów, Poland; piotr.brzoza@doctoral.uj.edu.pl (P .B.); urszula.godlewska@interia.pl (U.G.);auzarowska@wp.pl (A.M.); annette.zegar@gmail.com (A.Z.); patrycja.kwiecinska@uj.edu.pl (P .K.);mateusz.kwitniewski@uj.edu.pl (M.K.)2Department of Molecular Biophysics, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology,Jagiellonian University, 30-387 Krak ów, Poland; arkadiusz.borek@uj.edu.pl (A.B.);artur.osyczka@uj.edu.pl (A.O.)3Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA;
bazabel@stanford.edu*Correspondence: Joanna.Cichy@uj.edu.pl†Present address: Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Physiotherapy, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy ofPhysical Education, 40-065 Katowice, Poland.Abstract: Epithelia in the skin, gut and other environmentally exposed organs display a variety ofmechanisms to control microbial communities and limit potential pathogenic microbial invasion.Naturally occurring antimicrobial proteins/peptides and their synthetic derivatives (here collectivelyreferred to as AMPs) reinforce the antimicrobial barrier function of epithelial cells. Understandinghow these AMPs are functionally regulated may be important for new therapeutic approaches tocombat microbial infections. Some AMPs are subject to redox-dependent regulation. This reviewaims to: (i) explore cysteine-based redox active AMPs in skin and intestine; (ii) discuss casual linksbetween various redox environments of these barrier tissues and the ability of AMPs to control
cutaneous and intestinal microbes; (iii) highlight how bacteria, through intrinsic mechanisms, caninﬂuence the bactericidal potential of redox-sensitive AMPs.Keywords: antimicrobial peptides; defensin; chemerin; skin; gut; bacteria1. IntroductionTo execute a well-controlled response to microbial threats, body barriers largely relyon preformed and de novo synthesized molecules such as antimicrobial protein/peptides(AMPs), which can be functionally modiﬁed by microenvironmental cues. While thedeﬁning function of structurally diverse AMPs is to inhibit microbial growth, they oftenplay a secondary role in host defense, for example as chemotactic and/or pro-inﬂammatoryfactors [ 1]. AMPs are variously distributed at epithelial surfaces and can be regulatedpost-translationally via several, often niche-speciﬁc mechanisms, including proteolysisand/or redox pathways. Whereas proteolytic modiﬁcations of AMPs are relatively well-
explored, much less is known regarding how the diverse redox conditions present in
and/or redox pathways. Whereas proteolytic modiﬁcations of AMPs are relatively well-explored, much less is known regarding how the diverse redox conditions present indifferent epithelial milieus can affect the ability of AMPs to shape microbial communitiesand prevent potential infection. Cysteine-based, redox active AMPs encompass manybactericidal factors that are crucial for skin and gut defense [ 2–4]. Here we focus on theseredox-regulated AMPs and their role in protection against cutaneous and enteric microbes.We also discuss mechanisms underlying both host- and microbe-driven processes directedat modiﬁcation of redox status and concomitantly the bactericidal potential of AMPsagainst bacteria and/or fungi.Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10030446 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/antioxidants
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 2 of 162. Redox Sensitive AMPs in Skin and Intestine and Mechanisms of TheirRedox-Regulated Activities against MicrobesAMPs are oligopeptides consisting of ﬁve to over one hundred amino acids thatare commonly classiﬁed based on their signature secondary structures: α-helix, β-sheet,extended, and loop. Among these groups, α-helix and β-sheet structures are the mostcommon [ 5]. Notably, peptide structures may change depending on environmental con-ditions. Peptides classiﬁed as α-helical are often unstructured in aqueous solutions andundergo conformational shifts in non-polar environments [ 6,7]. This ability is attributedto an abundance of cationic and hydrophobic amino acids that comprise AMPs as well assequence-intrinsic properties that permit formation of an amphipathic helical structure ina hydrophobic microenvironment [ 5]. Conformational change has been proposed to be
critical for interactions with biological membranes. Certain larger AMPs, including de-fensins, display mixed structural components in their 3D structures [ 8,9], and are generallystabilized by intra-molecular disulﬁde bonds that restrict their conformations [10].Direct interaction with the bacterial membrane is critical for the antimicrobial activitiesof most AMPs [ 11]. Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial cell membranes arerich in phospholipids like cardiolipin, phosphatidylserine and phosphatidyl glycerol,resulting in a net-negative charge. Likewise, lipopolysaccharide in the outer membraneof Gram-negative bacteria and teichoic acids in Gram-positive bacteria contribute to theoverall negative charge of the bacterial cell surface [ 12]. Perhaps not surprisingly, mostAMPs are positively charged, largely due to a high content of lysine and arginine residues,enabling electrostatic interactions of AMPs with microbial cell surfaces [ 13]. Besides
absolute charge, the distribution of basic amino acids in AMPs is important for theirbiochemical and functional properties [ 14]. High hydrophobicity together with localizedcharge creates a tendency for peptide aggregation. However, when charged amino acidsare distributed at both ends of the molecule, aggregation is less likely and peptide stabilityis increased [ 14]. Less commonly, AMPs are enriched in acidic amino residues, resulting ina net-negative charge. These peptides utilize different mechanisms, like binding metal ions,to interact with microbial membranes via salt bridges [ 15]. For most acidic AMPs, theirspeciﬁc mechanism of antimicrobial action remains unknown.Several amino acids can be modiﬁed in a redox-dependent manner. Residues thatmainly undergo oxidation in proteins and peptides are phenol and indole rings of tyrosineand tryptophan; sulfur-containing methionine; and cysteine residues [ 16]. However, even
branched-chain amino-acids like valine undergo oxidation reactions [17].We will focus ﬁrst on the most well-characterized redox-dependent regulator ofAMP activity: cysteine modiﬁcations. The end products of cysteine oxidation, asidefrom formation of disulﬁde bonds, are sulfenic (SOH) and sulﬁnic acids (SO 2H) or S-nitrosylations [ 18,19]. Cysteine modiﬁcations that are fast and reversible are likely to affectantimicrobial properties of bactericidal molecules in epithelial barriers, including skinand gut-associated AMPs (Table 1). Indeed, several AMPs have been reported to exist insitu both in cysteine-bridged and reduced forms, resulting in major conformational andfunctional changes affecting their antimicrobial functions [3,4,20].At least three different antimicrobial mechanisms of redox-sensitive AMPs havebeen identiﬁed: (i) direct permeabilization of bacterial cell membrane, (ii) formation of
oligomeric structures that can entangle bacteria, and (iii) ion sequestration that can leadto microbial cell death. The state of cysteine residues may deﬁne whether an AMP can
oligomeric structures that can entangle bacteria, and (iii) ion sequestration that can leadto microbial cell death. The state of cysteine residues may deﬁne whether an AMP caneffectively interact with a bacterial membrane. Certain AMPs show strong dependenceon their ox-red form for microbial membrane interactions and cell entry. These includesome skin- and gut-associated defensins, peptides characterized by six conserved cysteineresidues that form three intramolecular disulﬁde bridges (Figure 1). Defensins come in twotypes, termed alpha ( α)- and beta ( β), based on the arrangement of their disulﬁde-bonds.
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 3 of 16Table 1. Skin- and gut-associated AMPs that are functionally modiﬁed by cysteine-dependent redox cues.AMP GeneExpressionSitesKillingMechanismOxidized Form Reduced Form RefhBD1 DEFB1Keratinocytes;enterocytes,colonocytes(constitutive)membrane lysis,formsoligomericstructure inreduced formHigh activityagainst E. coli lowagainstB. adolescentis ,B. breve ,L. acidophilusHigh activityagainstC. albicans ,B. adolescentis ,B.breve ,L. acidophilus;[3,4,10]hBD2 DEFB4AKeratinocytes;enterocytes,colonocytesSkin;respiratory tract(all induced)membrane lysisNo knownoligomerization-relatedactivityHigh activity,Gram-negative bacteria(i.e.,A. baumannii ,P . aeruginosa ,E. coli ,K. pneumoniae ,P .mirabilis )Gram-positive bacteria(i.e.,E. faecalis ,E. faecium ,S. aureus )Low activity [21]hBD3DEFB103BKeratinocytes;enterocytes,colonocytes(all induced)membrane lysis,inhibition ofcell wallsynthesis
inhibition ofcell wallsynthesis(target: lipid II)High activity(B. breve );No signiﬁcantchange inantimicrobialactivity, diminishedchemotacticactivity[8,10,22]HD6 DEFA6Paneth cells(small intestine)(constitutive)reduced form:changes inbacterial cellenvelope anddisintegrationof cytoplasmicstructures,formsoligomericstructuresLow/no activity(against E.coli ,L. acidophilus )High activity ( B.adolescentis ,B. breve ,L. acidophilus ,S. thermophilus )[3,23]HNP1-3DEFA1-DEFA3Neutrophils,primarygranules,(constitutive)HNP1:membrane lysis,inhibition ofcell wallsynthesis(target: lipid II)HNP2:membranedisruption,aggregationand fusion ofvesiclesHNP3:membranedisruption,pore formationHigh activity(E. coli ,S. salivarius )Low activity(E. coli ,S. salivarius )[23,24]HNP4 DEFA4Neutrophils,primarygranules,constitutivealtersmembrane per-meabilizationLow activity(B. adolescentis, L.acidophilus )High activity ( B.adolescentis ,L. acidophilus )[24,25]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 4 of 16Table 1. Cont.AMP GeneExpressionSitesKillingMechanismOxidized Form Reduced Form RefS100calciumbindingprotein A7(Psoriasin)S100A7Keratinocytes(constitutive atlowlevel);proximaldigestive tract(constitutiveand induced)membrane per-meabilization(pHdependent),Zn2+sequestrationHigh activity againstE.coli ; lower activityagainstP . aeruginosa ,S. aureus ,S. epidermidis and fungi(T. rubrum )Broad spectrumantifungal activity(i.e.,T. rubrum ,A. fumigatus ,T.mentagrophytes ).High activityagainst E.coli[2,20,26–28]Chemerin(p4)RARRES2Keratinocytes(constitutive);liver; adiposetissue(constitutive)rapid damageanddegradation ofcell membrane;targets bacterialelectrontransport chainHigh activity(homodimers)(E. coli, S. aureus )Low activity(monomer)(E. coli ,S. aureus )[29,30]Figure 1. Redox-active AMPs with the indicated cysteine residues (black) and disulﬁde bridges.
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 5 of 16Alpha-defensins are mainly produced by neutrophils and Paneth cells in the smallintestine at the base of intestinal glands, whereas β-defensins are produced by a variety ofepithelial cells (Table 1).Human β-defensin 2 (hBD2) or neutrophil-expressed α-defensins (HNP1-3) havebeen reported to be functionally modiﬁed by redox processes. HNPs show diminishedantimicrobial potential in reduced form when compared to their native structures withintact cysteine bridges [ 23]. hBD2 is even more strongly dependent on redox modiﬁcation,displaying a several-fold decrease in antimicrobial activity under reducing conditions [ 21].Another AMP with three disulﬁde bridges, the chemoattractant and AMP chemerin mayalso be regulated by redox networks in barrier organs. Chemerin is expressed by epithelialcells, including skin keratinocytes [ 31]. Although chemerin antimicrobial isoform(s) in
the skin remain to be determined, biochemical studies with chemerin-derived chemicallysynthesized peptides suggest that chemerin antimicrobial activity is primarily mediatedby Val66-Pro85fragment, peptide 4 (p4). P4 exhibits bactericidal properties against Gram-negative ( E. coli ) and Gram-positive ( S. aureus ) bacteria as well as fungi ( C. albicans ) [29,32]and can suppress bacterial growth in vivo when applied to the skin surface [ 30]. P4 is aredox active AMP capable of forming dimeric complexes in a cysteine-dependent manner(Figure 1) [ 30]. Both the monomeric form and the dimer interact with bacteria, but only thelatter causes rapid damage and degradation of cell membranes. Moreover, components ofthe bacterial electron transport chain (ETC) have been identiﬁed as a target for p4 [30].In contrast to hBD2, which is capable of restricting bacteria growth primarily whenstabilized by disulﬁde bridges, another human defensin, hBD1, exhibits increased antimi-
crobial potential in a reduced, unstructured form. Both, redhBD1 and oxhBD1 can killE. coli [10]. However, to unmask the antimicrobial activity of hBD1 against Staphylococci ,Lactobacilli orBacteroides species or fungus C. albicans , disulﬁde bonds in hBD1 must bereduced [ 4]. Taken together, these data suggest that the oxidation status of cysteines inβ-defensins not only regulates their efﬁcacy but also their target microbe speciﬁcity.Similarly to hBD1, the antimicrobial activity of human defensin alpha 6 (HD6) hasbeen experimentally linked to a reduction of the native oxidized form of HD6 producedby Paneth cells. While oxHD6 exerts little antibacterial activity against intestinal bacteria,including infectious microbes such as Salmonella , a reduced peptide shows increasedpotency against species like Lactobacillus acidophilus and Biﬁdobacterium spp. [ 3,23]. Atruncated form of HD6, devoid of 2 amino-terminal residues, has been identiﬁed in vivo in
ileum mucosa extracts and is more susceptible to alteration of its thiol-disulﬁde redox stateand gains some antimicrobial potential under reducing conditions [ 23]. The functionalmodiﬁcation of HD6 by both proteolysis and redox pathways highlights potentially morecommon mechanisms of regulation of AMPs that involve coexistence or co-dependenceof peptide processing and modiﬁcation of their redox status. Free sulfhydryl groups arenot crucial for antimicrobial functions of redHD6, although reducing conditions are likelyneeded to generate an unstructured form of the peptide. This is suggested by the ﬁndingthat substitution of cysteines with a steric, redox inactive cysteine analog α-amino butyricacid did not reduce but rather increased the antimicrobial potency of HD6 [23].The redox-state of an AMP may also drive membrane-independent mechanisms ofkilling, like formation of oligomeric structures or ion sequestration. HD6 and hBD1 were
shown to form oligomeric mesh-like structures that can effectively entrap bacteria, greatly
killing, like formation of oligomeric structures or ion sequestration. HD6 and hBD1 wereshown to form oligomeric mesh-like structures that can effectively entrap bacteria, greatlylimiting mobility and potentially spread of intestinal bacteria. hBD1 oligomerization isredox-dependent, requiring a reduced form of the AMP in order to create protein traps [ 3].Generation of these structures involves cysteine residues, as hBD1 analogs with cysteinereplaced with α-amino butyric acid were unable to form net-like oligomers [ 3]. hBD1-derived traps were stable even in protease-rich conditions of human duodenal ﬂuid andtheir assembly did not require microbial components [ 3]. While HD6 was ﬁrst reportedto form structures that can surround and entangle bacteria, including gastrointestinalpathogen- Salmonella typhimurium, via assembly into a net-like meshwork of ﬁbril struc-tures [ 33], the speciﬁc molecular mechanism likely differs from hBD1 since it does not
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 6 of 16involve cysteines. Instead, unique interaction of His27and Leu32in HD6 favors tetramerformation, leading to higher order oligomerization [ 33]. The initial oligomerization stepappears to be triggered by stochastic, sequence-independent interactions with potentialpathogenic microbes. However, without such a nucleation incident, HD6 remains in amesh-free metastable form. Notably this initial nucleation step is much less likely to occur ifthe targeted protein is heavily glycosylated, indicating some preference towards microbialsignals (which are in most cases aglycosylated) [33].Antimicrobial mechanisms based on ion sequestration have been extensively studiedfor redox active S100A7 protein also known as psoriasin. Psoriasin is a 22-kDa homodimerexpressed by epithelial cells, including skin keratinocytes [ 20,27]. Each subunit containstwo cysteine residues that can be modiﬁed in a redox-dependent manner [ 26]. Psoriasin eas-
ily undergoes air oxidation. Therefore, oxidized psoriasin (oxPSOR) is the prevailing formfound on healthy skin [ 2]. oxPSOR shows high antibacterial activity against E. coli [20,27] ,and, to a lesser extent, exhibits antifungal properties [ 2]. Importantly, the bactericidalactivity of oxPSOR is pH-dependent. Permeabilization of cytoplasmic membranes occursat pH below 6. This mechanism was observed primarily for Gram-positive bacterium B.megaterium . However, psoriasin does not form pores in the membrane of E. coli at eitherneutral or acidic pH [ 28]. Reduced psoriasin (redPSOR) exhibits high antibacterial ( E. coli )and antifungal activity against ﬁlamentous fungi including dermatophyte Trichophytonrubrum and Aspergillus fumigatus , but not C. albicans . Zn2+sequestration by psoriasin hasbeen proposed as a redox dependent antimicrobial mechanism of action [ 2,20,27]. redPSORpenetrates the fungal cell membrane and induces apoptosis-like cell death as a result of
Zn2+sequestration from vital intracellular targets [ 2]. Antibacterial activity can also be me-diated through nutrient deprivation in the extracellular space [ 26]. However, the chemicalmechanism underlying the zinc chelating ability of human oxPSOR and redPSOR remainsthe subject of debate. Each subunit of psoriasin homodimer has two transition-metal-binding His 3Asp sites. It was proposed that reduction of oxPSOR leads to the formation ofadditional thiol-based metal binding sites that may enhance Zn2+sequestration [ 2]. Onthe other hand, another report demonstrated that the cysteine thiolates in redPSOR do notform high-afﬁnity Zn2+binding sites [26].Redox conditions can also indirectly control AMP activity. RNase7 is a 14.5 kDaskin-expressed protein [ 34] that exhibits wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity againstGram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria as well as yeast [ 34]. The speciﬁc antimicrobial
mechanism of action of RNase7 is unknown but is independent of RNAse7 nucleaseactivity [ 35]. The nuclease and antimicrobial activity of RNase7 is inhibited by RNaseinhibitor (RI) [ 36]. Like RNase7, RI expression has been detected in human skin [ 37,38].Only a reduced form of the inhibitor can bind RNase7. RI contains 32 cysteine residues thatare reduced in its native form and can all undergo rapid oxidation once a single cysteineis modiﬁed [ 39]. Such changes cause RI to lose its ability to bind RNase, promotes RIdegradation and, consequently, activates RNase7 [40].Despite a high propensity for some AMPs to be redox-modified in a cysteine-dependentman nerin vitro , it remains to be determined to what extent AMP cysteines are targetedfor modiﬁcation in vivo . The recent comprehensive and quantitative map of the mousecysteine redox proteome in vivo (oximouse) indicate that highly modiﬁed cysteine sites
are scarce [ 41]. Although skin and gut associated AMPs were not included in these studies,
cysteine redox proteome in vivo (oximouse) indicate that highly modiﬁed cysteine sitesare scarce [ 41]. Although skin and gut associated AMPs were not included in these studies,oximouse revealed that thiol redox sensitivity is likely encoded in an amino acid motif thatdepends on charged amino acids proximal to cysteine residues. The common amino acidsignature that was found to be highly sensitive to redox modiﬁcation involves selectionfor the positively charged amino acid arginine and selection against acidic amino acids(e.g., aspartic acid and glutamic acid). The presence of a positively charged arginineprovided electrostatic stability for a negatively charged cysteine thiolate (which is muchmore sensitive to oxidation than a thiol), resulting in redox modiﬁcation-permissive localbiochemical feature [41].
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 7 of 16Thus, functional modulation of AMP activity by redox-mediated processes is likelyto be governed by two major variables; (i) the presence of a cysteine-containing motif inspeciﬁc AMPs that is able to confer redox sensitivity to cysteine residues as well as (ii)speciﬁc tissue microenvironments capable of controlling cysteines already structurallypoised to be modiﬁed by redox cues [41].3. Redox Ecosystems of the Skin and Intestine in the Context of AMPBactericidal ActivityEpithelial barriers offer a spectrum of redox properties, ranging from an overall pro-oxidative microenvironment at the skin surface and at the base of the crypts of the smallintestinal, to a largely reductive environment at the lowermost layers of skin epidermis asand gut lumen. Consequently, the activity and functionality of redox sensitive AMPs islikely to be dictated by distinct metabolic and spatiotemporal redox-deﬁning parametersacross epithelial tissues.
across epithelial tissues.Skin is a barrier organ composed of three main compartments: epidermis, dermisand hypodermis. Epidermis, as the outermost layer of the skin, serves as the ﬁrst lineof defense against microbial assaults. Keratinocytes are the major cellular componentof this layer. During epidermal differentiation, keratinocytes progress inside-out frommitotically active basal cells through spinous and granular cells of stratum spinosumand stratum granulosum to ﬂattened, anucleated squamous cells (corneocytes) of thestratum corneum. Basement membrane separates epidermis from the underlying ﬁbroblast-containing connective tissue, dermis. The lowermost skin compartment is hypodermiscomposed mostly of adipocytes [ 1]. All skin compartments produce AMPs as part of thehost defense strategy [1].Human and mouse skin are hypoxic, with baseline oxygen levels ranging from 1.5to 5% [ 42,43]. Air oxygen diffusion into the skin is limited to the corniﬁed envelope and
outermost viable layers of epidermis, to a maximum depth 400 µm [44]. Since the epidermishas no vasculature, oxygen cannot be delivered by blood [45]. Epidermal germinal layerssupply oxygen from papillary loops of dermal blood vessels [ 46]. Hypoxic conditions in theepidermis aid in pathogen clearance partly through stimulation of AMP production [ 47].Differential oxygen accessibility in various skin environments may initiate or amplifyhost responses against cutaneous microbes not only by regulating expression levels ofAMPs but also by mobilizing distinct bioenergetics pathways to control the activity ofbactericidal molecules. These include modiﬁcation of the redox status of cysteine residuesin AMPs [2,4].Given its location at the interface between body and environment, the epidermis isdirectly exposed to a highly pro-oxidative environment and oxidant assaults. In healthyskin, epidermal cells as well as ﬁbroblasts produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species. Mitochondrial electron transport chain, nitric oxide synthasereaction and peroxisomal beta-oxidation are all important producers of endogenous freeradicals [ 48]. Environmental assaults, including UVB radiation [ 49,50], xenobiotics [ 51],x-ray irradiation [ 52] and pathogens [ 53] are also either sources of ROS or stimulators ofROS production in the skin. To counterbalance pernicious skin-damaging oxidative stressconditions, skin is equipped with a variety of antioxidant systems. The outermost skin layerstratum corneum is rich in various antioxidants such as tripeptide glutathione (GSH), smallproteins thioredoxin (TXR) and vitamins C and E [ 54]. In addition, keratinocytes as wellas ﬁbroblasts express antioxidant enzymes, including catalase or superoxide dismutase.The antioxidant capacity of epidermis is higher than dermis [ 55]. However, the activity ofantioxidant enzymes is dependent on their location in the epidermis. This is exempliﬁed
The antioxidant capacity of epidermis is higher than dermis [ 55]. However, the activity ofantioxidant enzymes is dependent on their location in the epidermis. This is exempliﬁedby stratum corneum that exhibits decreasing levels of antioxidant enzymes activity closerto the skin surface [ 56]. The major ubiquitous factors implicated in maintaining proteinsin their reduced state (low redox potential and high free SH levels) are reductase TRXand GSH. TRX is reduced by electrons from NADPH via TRX reductase, whereas GSH byNADPH and GSH reductase [ 57]. Both GSH and TRX are capable of conversion of psoriasinisoforms, such as oxPSOR and sulﬁtoPSOR (an isoform generated as a result of cleavage of
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 8 of 16disulﬁde-bridges by dermatophytes) into an antifungal agent in vitro , suggesting that theymay also act in the skin environment as regulators of psoriasin activity [ 2]. The detection ofboth the Cys-oxidized and disulﬁde-reduced isoforms of psoriasin in the skin is consistentwith in vivo regulation of psoriasin function by changes in its cysteine redox status. Levelsof antifungal redPSOR in the skin increase during fungal skin infection [ 2], supportingthe interdependence of cutaneous regulatory redox pathways with psoriasin-mediatedantifungal responses.High levels of free radicals coupled with lower activity of antioxidants contributes toincreasingly oxidative conditions at the skin surface. Activities of many oxidants are higherin the epidermis than in dermis in both mouse and human skin [ 55]. AMPs producedin epidermis and operating at the skin surface can be expected to be modiﬁed by pro-
oxidative conditions. These include antimicrobial chemerin peptides. Indeed, oxidativeconditions substantially increase the efﬁcacy of chemerin-derived peptide p4 to inhibitbacterial growth by facilitating formation of cysteine-dependent p4 dimers [ 30] (Figure 1).The intestinal epithelium is a complex and dynamic tissue composed of a single layerof different cell types. The small intestinal epithelium is extensively folded into crypts(containing proliferating stem cells) and villi (with terminally differentiated cells), whilethe colon epithelium lacks villi. The great majority of enteric epithelial cells are absorptiveand highly polarized enterocytes. The remaining are secretory cells: mucus-secretinggoblet cells, hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells, and AMP-secreting Paneth cells [ 58].Paneth cells are the only differentiated cells in the crypts, producing large amounts andvarieties of AMPs. The most abundant antimicrobial peptides secreted by these cells are
α-defensins (HD5 and HD6), [ 59]. Furthermore, Paneth cell granules contain lysozymes,secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2), REG3 α(belonging to C-type lectins), angiogenin 4,and cathelicidins [60].The redox environment in rodent and human intestine is a highly reducing, with aredox potential of −150 mV in the ileum and −300 mV in the colon [ 61]. The reducing en-vironment in the intestinal lumen is established by pools of glutathione/glutathione disul-ﬁde (GSH/GSSG), cysteine/cystine (Cys/CysSS) and thioredoxin/thioredoxin disulﬁde(TRX/TRXSS). Extracellular GSH levels in the intestinal lumen are very high ( 60−300µM)—such large amounts of GSH derive from dietary intake and biliary output [ 62]. LuminalGSH participates in reduction of dietary disulﬁdes, metabolism of peroxidized lipids,xenobiotic detoxiﬁcation, and the assembly of mucin oligomers. The Cys/CysSS pool toa large extent contributes to maintaining the thiol-disulﬁde redox state of extracellular
proteins [ 63]. The extracellular Cys and CySS concentrations are low (40 µM and 8–10 µM,respectively) and are constantly regulated by dietary Cys/CySS, GSH hydrolysis andthiol-disulﬁde exchange reactions [64].One of the best functionally characterized redox proteins operating in the gut areintestinal TRX expressed in Paneth cells [ 65], acting in antioxidant defense and redox regu-lation through reduction of cysteine disulﬁdes [ 66]. The redox potential of TRX1 and TRX2is even lower than that of GSH/GSSG [ 67]. High levels of TRX are detected in intestinalepithelia [ 68], providing a physiological system that likely facilitates the antimicrobial func-tions of AMPs such as hBD1 against intestinal bacteria [ 69]. Ubiquitously expressed hBD1exhibits low antimicrobial activity. However, upon contact with the reducing environmentof the intestinal lumen, its disulﬁde bonds are likely reduced, for example by TRX or other
lumen reductants. RedhBD1 displays greatly enhanced antimicrobial efﬁcacy and potency
of the intestinal lumen, its disulﬁde bonds are likely reduced, for example by TRX or otherlumen reductants. RedhBD1 displays greatly enhanced antimicrobial efﬁcacy and potencyas well as an ability to form “nanonets” that can potentially prevent bacterial translocationfrom gut lumen across the intestinal epithelium [4].In vitro studies also show that reduction of HD6 can be catalyzed by TRX, but incontrast to hBD1, the antimicrobial activity of HD6 is less dependent on the generationof HD6 reduced isoforms. The potential functional consequences of HD6 reduction byTRX may involve maintaining homeostatic balance with colonizing microbiota in the smallintestine, as redHD6 exhibits some bactericidal potential against non-pathogenic bacteriapresent in human intestinal microbiota (e.g., Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis ) but not against
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 9 of 16pathogenic Salmonella [23]. As mentioned above, a key level of protection provided byHD6 is based on oligomerization and assembly into net-like structures that are cysteine-independent, and can entrap microbes, including Salmonella , limiting host-cell invasion byintestinal microorganisms [33].Different dependencies of hBD1 and HD6 on redox regulation can be explained bydifferences in distribution of hBD1 and HD6 in the intestine, and variations in oxygenavailability in the gut niches occupied by these AMPs. The partial pressure of oxygen (pO 2)in the healthy colon is less than 10 mmHg, mainly due to the microbial biomass [ 70]. How-ever, epithelial stem cells at the crypt base are highly oxygenated [experiencing a pO 2of~100 mmHg] [ 71], a pressure similar to pO 2in healthy lung alveolus [ 72]. Such differencesare a result of epithelial metabolism and the arrangement of the microvasculature network
in each villous structure [ 71]. AMPs, like HD6, secreted by Paneth cells and constantly intransit towards the gut lumen, might operate in both the aerobic (oxygenated) environmentfound in small intestine crypts and the hypoxic and reducing milieu of the gut lumen [ 23].In contrast, hBD1 secreted by different types of epithelial cells (including enterocytesand colonocytes) might be largely regulated by the reducing environment of the gut.Constitutive expression of hBD1 depends on basal HIF-1 αsignaling [ 73], and its oxidationis prevented by the low pO 2environment of the lumen [69].4. Redox Pathways Involved in Reciprocal Interactions between Bacteria and AMPsThe importance of AMPs as endogenous bactericidal factors has generated interestin therapeutic approaches to combat antibiotic-resistant microbial pathogens with theseantibiotic-like molecules. Of particular interest are AMPs that do not exclusively target
processes that require high replication rates, since non-replicating or slow-growing bacteriacan survive such approaches. Novel strategies may beneﬁt from antimicrobial compounds,including AMPs, that interfere with the bioenergetics of pathogens [ 74]. Production ofenergy is necessary for all life functions, from sustaining growth to persisting in harshenvironment (as exempliﬁed by energy-dependent efﬂux pumps that can remove antibioticsfrom bacteria). Redox-active AMPs are likely to have an impact on key energy-convertingpathways in microbes such as the respiratory chain that is driven by redox reactions.Moreover, the antimicrobial potential of AMPs might depend, at least in part, on theirfunctional thiols and their ability to interfere with speciﬁc components of OXPHOS and/orreducing the magnitude of the proton-motive force (PMF) leading to the depletion ofenergy in targeted microbes [75].All bacteria generate PMF across a proton-impermeable membrane. PMF is the
difference in the concentrations of protons ( ∆pH) and charges ( ∆Ψ) across a biologicalmembrane. The formation of a proton gradient is coupled to the transport of electrons viamembrane redox-active proteins (electron transport chain protein, ETC protein). Theseenzymes transfer electrons to each other via water-soluble protein (e.g., cytochrome c) ormembrane non-protein (ubiquinone) electron and proton carrier molecules undergoingoxidation/reduction reactions.PMF drives ATP synthase that couples proton transport with the formation of ATPfrom ADP and Pi. ATP is considered a universal “energy carrier” used by cells to carry outthe biochemical reactions necessary for their survival. The metabolic pathway containingETC along with the action of ATP synthase creates oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS,also called electron transport-linked phosphorylation). The proton gradient is also usedfor active transport of various compounds (substrates, metabolites) in and out of the cell.
Therefore, it is extremely important to maintain PMF and membrane integrity.
for active transport of various compounds (substrates, metabolites) in and out of the cell.Therefore, it is extremely important to maintain PMF and membrane integrity.Bacteria have developed different ways to generate PMF [ 74]. PMF can be generatedby the action of proteins functionally similar to enzymes of the mitochondrial ETC: proton-pumping Complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase); proton-pumping Complex IV(cytochrome coxidase); or proton-translocating Complex III (cytochrome bc1). Protonrelease may also be coupled to the operation of terminal reductase (for example, nitratereductase). In some bacteria, efﬂux of the ﬁnal product (e.g., lactate) may also generate
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 10 of 16PMF. Moreover, PMF can be generated when ATP synthase operates in a reverse direction,acting as an ATP-driven proton pump.Considering all these factors necessary to build PMF, both membrane integrity andETC proteins may provide novel targets for a new generation of antimicrobial compounds.These may include chemerin-derived p4, which is bactericidal against drug-resistant strainssuch as MRSA and can inhibit growth of either replicating microbes or to a lower extentbacteria in stationary phase [30,76].Like most AMPs, high concentrations of p4 (above the minimal inhibitory concentra-tion (MIC)), causes disruption of membrane integrity and bacterial cell death. However,below the MIC, p4 inhibited bacterial growth while having little effect on membrane in-tegrity. Since the bacterial membrane harbors proteins involved in the ETC, we proposedthat p4 may interfere with the function of ETC proteins. Indeed, p4 was a potent inhibitor
of the enzymatic activity of cytochrome bc1isolated from the purple bacterium Rhodobactercapsulatus [30]. Although it is likely that both bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity ofp4 involves targeting the ETC components, it remains to be determined to what extentdisruption of the membrane integrity is also dependent on p4 interference with the ETC.Cytochrome bc1is the central protein for various respiratory chains. It links the mem-brane ubiquinone pool and the cytochrome cintermembrane pool. Cytochrome bc1proteinparticipates in the building of PMF through proton translocation across the membranecoupled to reactions of oxidation/reduction of ubiquinol/ubiquinone. The interactionbetween cytochrome bc1and its physiological partner, cytochrome c, is electrostatic in na-ture [ 77,78]. The surface of the binding domain in the cytochrome bc1subunit, cytochromec1, contains numerous acidic residues and is therefore negatively charged. On the other
hand, the surface of cytochrome cinteracting with cytochrome c1is positively charged.Positively charged p4, and potentially other positively charged AMPs, can bind (throughelectrostatic interactions) to negatively charged cytochrome c1, thereby blocking access ofthe substrate, cytochrome c, to the active site. In this case, p4 acts as a competitive inhibitorfor cytochrome c[30].P4 is redox active due to a free cysteine. Oxidation of p4 leads to the formationof sulﬁde-bridged peptide dimers that are equipped with bacteriostatic and bactericidalactivity [ 30]. Among the potential oxidants of p4 in bacteria are high-potential redox-activecofactors of ETC proteins and/or ROS. For instance, in highly p4-sensitive Gram-negativebacteria, like R. capsulatus , the presence of functional cytochrome bc1renders the cellshighly susceptible to p4 action [ 30]. The reduction of cytochrome cby cytochrome bc1is
inhibited in the presence of oxidized but not reduced p4. Moreover, the free thiol group inthe cysteine of redp4 was oxidized both in the presence of cytochrome bc1and cytochromecwith formation of a disulﬁde bridge and dimerization of p4 (oxp4). The oxidation rate ofp4 was higher in the presence of cytochrome bc1than in the presence of cytochrome c. Thismay be a consequence of a higher redox potential (greater ability to accept an electron) ofheme c1of cytochrome bc1than heme cof cytochrome c. Following this reaction, newlyformed p4 dimers can function more effectively as antimicrobial factors [ 30]. Despite thefact that the cytochrome bc1complex is missing in certain bacteria, including E. coli [79],other high-potential redox-active cofactors might cause oxidation of p4.In aerobic microorganisms, ROS are spontaneously formed during normal aerobicrespiration and metabolism through the reduction of O 2by electron donors such as cy-
tochromes, quinones and ﬂavoproteins [ 80–83]. As a result of aberrant electron transfer in
respiration and metabolism through the reduction of O 2by electron donors such as cy-tochromes, quinones and ﬂavoproteins [ 80–83]. As a result of aberrant electron transfer inthe respiratory chain, the formed superoxide (O 2−) is detoxiﬁed by endogenous superoxidedismutases (SOD) to H 2O2[84]. Hydrogen peroxide is the most abundant and stable ROSthat can easily pass through membranes [ 85]. Bacteria can regulate the concentrationof H 2O2using aquaporins, which facilitate the bidirectional permeation of H 2O2acrosscellular membrane [ 86] (Figure 2). The presence of intracellular or extracellular H 2O2canmodify the redox state of AMPs such as p4. For example, H 2O2induces the formationof disulﬁde bonds and subsequently increases the bactericidal activity of p4 in vitro [30].Moreover, endogenous ROS generated by cytochrome bc1in response to inhibition with
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 11 of 16antimycin signiﬁcantly enhanced p4 activity [ 87]. Actively dividing bacteria in logarithmic(log) growth phase produce more O 2−than bacteria in stationary phase [ 83]. Therefore, ifa logarithmic growth rate favors ROS generation, it may also sensitize bacteria to speciﬁcredox-active AMPs, such as p4. Recent studies have shown that both mitochondrial andbacterial cytochrome bc1produce superoxide radicals in a rate dependent manner. Thehigher the activity of cytochrome bc1, the faster the rate of superoxide formation [ 88]. Thisis in line with increased ROS production and sensitivity to p4 in highly replicating bacteriarequiring a high energy demand to sustain their growth [ 76]. However, it is also likelythat other differences, such as an altered surface or cell membrane composition, may beresponsible for the diverse effects of p4 on highly replicating bacteria compared to bacteriain stationary phase.
in stationary phase.Figure 2. AMP interactions with the redox-active components in Gram-negative bacteria. ( A). Disul-ﬁde bond formation is catalyzed in periplasm by DsbA (ox), that becomes reduced following thetransfer of disulﬁde to substrate proteins (such as AMPs). DsbB mediates the reoxidation of DsbAvia transfer of electrons from DsbA to the respiratory chain. ( B). Within electron transport chain(ETC) some cofactors have a redox potential high enough to allow direct electron transfer from thesecofactors to AMPs with formation of dimeric AMPs. ( C). Hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) generatedduring normal or aberrant aerobic respiration induce the formation of disulﬁde bonds in AMPs.Microorganisms regulate the concentration of H 2O2via operation of SOD, which converts superoxideradical (O 2•−) to H 2O2or aquaporins, which allow the transmembrane diffusion of H 2O2.In Gram-negative bacteria there is an additional oxidizing system localized in the
periplasm that can regulate redox-active thiols in AMPs. The envelope of Gram-negativebacteria is composed of an inner and outer membrane separated by the periplasm, which isabsent in Gram-positive bacteria [ 80,89]. The periplasmic space is rich in soluble proteinsthat carry out important and diverse functions in bacteria such as protein folding, enve-lope assembly, ROS scavenging and nutrient import [ 80,89,90]. In contrast to cytoplasmicproteins, the majority of proteins in the periplasm contain oxidized cysteine residues.This is in line with a more highly oxidizing redox potential in the periplasm comparedwith cytoplasm [ 90,91]. In E. coli , disulﬁde bond formation in periplasmic proteins iscatalyzed by two oxidoreductases: DsbA and DsbB [ 80,89–91]. Proteins that translocate tothe periplasmic space react with highly oxidizing DsbA that acts as a donor of disulﬁdebonds. After introducing disulﬁde bonds into substrate proteins, the reduced DsbA needs
to be reoxidized. This reaction is catalyzed by DsbB that acts as a quinone reductase, trans-ferring electrons to ubiquinone or menaquinone under aerobic or anaerobic conditions,respectively [ 91]. Although the role of bacterial redox system DsbA/DsbB in oxidizingcysteine residues in AMPs remains obscure, recent evidence shows that both oxidoreduc-tases contribute to controlling the activity of the oxidized form of hBD1 (oxhBD1) [ 92].
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 12 of 16As mentioned earlier, oxhBD1 can control the growth of Gram-negative bacteria like E.colibut only in aerobic conditions [ 92]. The bactericidal properties of oxhBD1 are highlydiminished in bacteria deprived of functional DsbA/DsbB, such as Gram-positive bacte-ria or E. coli mutants lacking DsbA/DsbB [ 92]. This mechanism of oxhBD1 bactericidalaction requires two-step interactions with bacterial periplasm. First, oxhBD1 uses irontransporters like FepA and TonB to enter bacterial periplasm. Notably, TonB expressionis repressed in anaerobic conditions, explaining this speciﬁcity. The second step relieson oxhBD1 interactions with bacterial oxidoreductases DsbA and DsbB, leading to hBD1accumulation in the periplasmic space. This accumulation leads to bleb formation and celllysis by a currently unknown mechanism [92].Taken together, these data demonstrate that thiols in redox active AMPs can be
reversibly oxidized following AMP interaction with respiratory chain components (e.g.,selected ETC proteins) and products (such as ETC-produced ROS), or the periplasmic redoxsystem of Gram-negative bacteria (Figure 2). Cell membrane and the periplasmic spaceare ﬁrst points of contact between bacteria and AMPs and are strategically positioned tofunctionally tune interacting AMPs. AMPs can take advantage of the redox pathways inthese cellular compartments to inhibit microbial growth.5. ConclusionsThe antimicrobial activity of cysteine-based redox-sensitive AMPs is regulated byvariety of environmental redox-mediated cues in skin and intestinal epithelium as well asredox-dependent processes in microorganisms (Figure 3). Understanding the molecularmechanisms governing the activity of AMPs at barrier surfaces will open up new avenuesto effectively engage endogenous AMPs or deploy therapeutic synthetic AMPs to bolsterepithelial immune defense.
epithelial immune defense.Figure 3. Skin-, intestinal epithelium- and microbe-driven mechanisms inﬂuencing redox status and bactericidal potentialof AMPs.Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation, P .B., U.G., A.B., A.M., A.Z., P .K., M.K.,J.C.; writing—review and editing, B.A.Z., A.O., M.K., J.C.; funding acquisition, J.C. All authors haveread and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research was funded by Polish National Science Center (NCN), grant number UMO-2014/12/W/NZ6/00454.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 13 of 16References1. Kwiecien, K.; Zegar, A.; Jung, J.; Brzoza, P .; Kwitniewski, M.; Godlewska, U.; Grygier, B.; Kwiecinska, P .; Morytko, A.; Cichy, J.Architecture of antimicrobial skin defense. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2019 ,49, 70–84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Hein, K.Z.; Takahashi, H.; Tsumori, T.; Yasui, Y.; Nanjoh, Y.; Toga, T.; Wu, Z.; Grötzinger, J.; Jung, S.; Wehkamp, J.; et al.Disulphide-reduced psoriasin is a human apoptosis-inducing broad-spectrum fungicide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015 ,112,13039–13044. [CrossRef]3. Raschig, J.; Mailänder-S ánchez, D.; Berscheid, A.; Berger, J.; Strömstedt, A.A.; Courth, L.F.; Malek, N.P .; Brötz-Oesterhelt, H.;Wehkamp, J. Ubiquitously expressed Human Beta Defensin 1 (hBD1) forms bacteria-entrapping nets in a redox dependent modeof action. PLoS Pathog. 2017 ,13, e1006261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Schroeder, B.O.; Wu, Z.; Nuding, S.; Groscurth, S.; Marcinowski, M.; Beisner, J.; Buchner, J.; Schaller, M.; Stange, E.F.; Wehkamp, J.Reduction of disulphide bonds unmasks potent antimicrobial activity of human β-defensin 1. Nat. Cell Biol. 2011 ,469, 419–423.[CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Nguyen, L.T.; Haney, E.F.; Vogel, H.J. The expanding scope of antimicrobial peptide structures and their modes of action. TrendsBiotechnol. 2011 ,29, 464–472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Mahlapuu, M.; Håkansson, J.; Ringstad, L.; Björn, C. Antimicrobial Peptides: An Emerging Category of Therapeutic Agents.Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2016 ,6, 194. [CrossRef]7. Wang, G. Structures of Human Host Defense Cathelicidin LL-37 and Its Smallest Antimicrobial Peptide KR-12 in Lipid Micelles. J.Biol. Chem. 2008 ,283, 32637–32643. [CrossRef]8. Schibli, D.J.; Hunter, H.N.; Aseyev, V .; Starner, T.D.; Wiencek, J.M.; McCray, P .B., Jr.; Tack, B.F.; Vogel, H.J. The Solution Structures
of the Human β-Defensins Lead to a Better Understanding of the Potent Bactericidal Activity of HBD3 against Staphylococcusaureus. J. Biol. Chem. 2002 ,277, 8279–8289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]9. Uteng, M.; Hauge, H.H.; Markwick, P .R.L.; Fimland, G.; Mantzilas, D.; Nissen-Meyer, J.; Muhle-Goll, C. Three-DimensionalStructure in Lipid Micelles of the Pediocin-like Antimicrobial Peptide Sakacin P and a Sakacin P Variant That Is StructurallyStabilized by an Inserted C-Terminal Disulﬁde Bridge †. Biochemestry 2003 ,42, 11417–11426. [CrossRef] [PubMed]10. Taylor, K.; Barran, P .E.; Dorin, J.R. Structure-activity relationships in β-defensin peptides. Biopolymers 2007 ,90, 1–7. [CrossRef][PubMed]11. Malmsten, M. Interactions of Antimicrobial Peptides with Bacterial Membranes and Membrane Components. Curr. Top. Med.Chem. 2015 ,16, 16–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]12. Yeaman, M.R.; Yount, N.Y.; Hauger, R.L.; Grigoriadis, D.E.; Dallman, M.F.; Plotsky, P .M.; Vale, W.W.; Dautzenberg, F.M.
Mechanisms of Antimicrobial Peptide Action and Resistance. Pharmacol. Rev. 2003 ,55, 27–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Mavri, J.; Vogel, H.J. Ion pair formation of phosphorylated amino acids and lysine and arginine side chains: A theoretical study.Proteins 1996 ,24, 495–501. [CrossRef]14. Yin, L.M.; Edwards, M.A.; Li, J.; Yip, C.M.; Deber, C.M. Roles of Hydrophobicity and Charge Distribution of Cationic AntimicrobialPeptides in Peptide-Membrane Interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 2012 ,287, 7738–7745. [CrossRef]15. Harris, F.; Dennison, S.R.; Phoenix, D.A. Anionic Antimicrobial Peptides from Eukaryotic Organisms. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 2009 ,10, 585–606. [CrossRef]16. Stadtman, E.R.; Levine, R.L. Protein Oxidation. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2006 ,899, 191–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Wanders, R.J.A.; Duran, M.; Loupatty, F.J. Enzymology of the branched-chain amino acid oxidation disorders: The valine pathway.J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 2010 ,35, 5–12. [CrossRef]
18. Janssen-Heininger, Y.M.; Mossman, B.T.; Heintz, N.H.; Forman, H.J.; Kalyanaraman, B.; Finkel, T.; Stamler, J.S.; Rhee, S.G.;
J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 2010 ,35, 5–12. [CrossRef]18. Janssen-Heininger, Y.M.; Mossman, B.T.; Heintz, N.H.; Forman, H.J.; Kalyanaraman, B.; Finkel, T.; Stamler, J.S.; Rhee, S.G.;van der Vliet, A. Redox-based regulation of signal transduction: Principles, pitfalls, and promises. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2008 ,45,1–17. [CrossRef]19. Winterbourn, C.C.; Hampton, M.B. Thiol chemistry and speciﬁcity in redox signaling. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2008 ,45, 549–561.[CrossRef]20. Lee, R.L.E.K.C.; Eckert, R.L. S100A7 (Psoriasin)—Mechanism of Antibacterial Action in Wounds. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2007 ,127,945–957. [CrossRef] [PubMed]21. Routsias, J.G.; Karagounis, P .; Parvulesku, G.; Legakis, N.J.; Tsakris, A. In vitro bactericidal activity of human β-defensin 2 againstnosocomial strains. Pept. 2010 ,31, 1654–1660. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Wu, Z.; Hoover, D.M.; Yang, D.; Boul ègue, C.; Santamaria, F.; Oppenheim, J.J.; Lubkowski, J.; Lu, W. Engineering disulﬁde
bridges to dissect antimicrobial and chemotactic activities of human -defensin 3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2003 ,100, 8880–8885.[CrossRef]23. Schroeder, B.O.; Ehmann, D.; Precht, J.C.; Castillo, P .A.; Küchler, R.; Berger, J.; Schaller, M.; Stange, E.F.; Wehkamp, J. Paneth cellα-defensin 6 (HD-6) is an antimicrobial peptide. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 ,8, 661–671. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Ericksen, B.; Wu, Z.; Lu, W.; Lehrer, R.I. Antibacterial activity and speciﬁcity of the six human {alpha}-defensins. Antimicrob.Agents Chemother. 2005 ,49, 269–275. [CrossRef]25. Szyk, A.; Wu, Z.; Tucker, K.; Yang, D.; Lu, W.; Lubkowski, J. Crystal structures of human α-defensins HNP4, HD5, and HD6.Protein Sci. 2006 ,15, 2749–2760. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 14 of 1626. Cunden, L.S.; Brophy, M.B.; Rodriguez, G.E.; Flaxman, H.A.; Nolan, E.M. Biochemical and Functional Evaluation of theIntramolecular Disulﬁde Bonds in the Zinc-Chelating Antimicrobial Protein Human S100A7 (Psoriasin). Biochemestry 2017 ,56,5726–5738. [CrossRef]27. Gläser, R.; Harder, J.; Lange, H.; Bartels, J.; Christophers, E.; Schröder, J.-M. Antimicrobial psoriasin (S100A7) protects human skinfrom Escherichia coli infection. Nat. Immunol. 2004 ,6, 57–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Michalek, M.; Gelhaus, C.; Hecht, O.; Podschun, R.; Schröder, J.M.; Leippe, M.; Grötzinger, J. The human antimicrobial proteinpsoriasin acts by permeabilization of bacterial membranes. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 2009 ,33, 740–746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Banas, M.; Zabieglo, K.; Kasetty, G.; Kapinska-Mrowiecka, M.; Borowczyk, J.; Drukala, J.; Murzyn, K.; Zabel, B.A.; Butcher, E.C.;
Schroeder, J.M.; et al. Chemerin Is an Antimicrobial Agent in Human Epidermis. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e58709. [CrossRef]30. Godlewska, U.; Bilska, B.; Zegar, A.; Brzoza, P .; Borek, A.; Murzyn, K.; Bochenska, O.; Morytko, A.; Kuleta, P .; Kozik, A.; et al.The antimicrobial activity of chemerin-derived peptide p4 requires oxidative conditions. J. Biol. Chem. 2019 ,294, 1267–1278.[CrossRef] [PubMed]31. Banas, M.; Zegar, A.; Kwitniewski, M.; Zabieglo, K.; Marczynska, J.; Kapinska-Mrowiecka, M.; LaJevic, M.; Zabel, B.A.; Cichy, J.The Expression and Regulation of Chemerin in the Epidermis. PLoS ONE 2015 ,10, e0117830. [CrossRef]32. Kulig, P .; Kantyka, T.; Zabel, B.A.; Bana´ s, M.; Chyra, A.; Stefa ´ nska, A.; Tu, H.; Allen, S.J.; Handel, T.M.; Kozik, A.; et al. Regulationof Chemerin Chemoattractant and Antibacterial Activity by Human Cysteine Cathepsins. J. Immunol. 2011 ,187, 1403–1410.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Chu, H.; Pazgier, M.; Jung, G.; Nuccio, S.-P .; Castillo, P .A.; De Jong, M.F.; Winter, M.G.; Winter, S.E.; Wehkamp, J.; Shen, B.; et al.Human -Defensin 6 Promotes Mucosal Innate Immunity Through Self-Assembled Peptide Nanonets. Science 2012 ,337, 477–481.[CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Harder, J.; Schröder, J.-M. RNase 7, a Novel Innate Immune Defense Antimicrobial Protein of Healthy Human Skin. J. Biol. Chem.2002 ,277, 46779–46784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Huang, Y.-C.; Lin, Y.-M.; Chang, T.-W.; Wu, S.-J.; Lee, Y.-S.; Chang, M.D.-T.; Chen, C.; Liao, Y.-D. The Flexible and ClusteredLysine Residues of Human Ribonuclease 7 Are Critical for Membrane Permeability and Antimicrobial Activity. J. Biol. Chem.2007 ,282, 4626–4633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Spencer, J.D.; Schwaderer, A.L.; Eichler, T.; Wang, H.; Kline, J.; Justice, S.S.; Cohen, D.M.; Hains, D.S. An endogenous ribonuclease
inhibitor regulates the antimicrobial activity of ribonuclease 7 in the human urinary tract. Kidney Int. 2014 ,85, 1179–1191.[CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Abtin, A.; Eckhart, L.; Mildner, M.; Ghannadan, M.; Harder, J.; Schröder, J.M.; Tschachler, E. Degradation by Stratum CorneumProteases Prevents Endogenous RNase Inhibitor from Blocking Antimicrobial Activities of RNase 5 and RNase 7. J. Investig.Dermatol. 2009 ,129, 2193–2201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Dressel, S.; Harder, J.; Cordes, J.; Wittersheim, M.; Sunderkötter, C.; Gläser, R.; Meyer-Hoffert, U. Differential expression ofantimicrobial peptides in margins of chronic wounds. Exp. Dermatol. 2010 ,19, 628–632. [CrossRef]39. Moenner, M.; Vosoghi, M.; Ryazantsev, S.; Glitz, D.G. Ribonuclease Inhibitor Protein of Human Erythrocytes: Characterization,Loss of Activity in Response to Oxidative Stress, and Association with Heinz Bodies. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 1998 ,24, 149–164.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]40. Blázquez, M.; Fominaya, J.M.; Hofsteenge, J. Oxidation of Sulfhydryl Groups of Ribonuclease Inhibitor in Epithelial Cells IsSufﬁcient for Its Intracellular Degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 1996 ,271, 18638–18642. [CrossRef]
Sufﬁcient for Its Intracellular Degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 1996 ,271, 18638–18642. [CrossRef]41. Xiao, H.; Jedrychowski, M.P .; Schweppe, D.K.; Huttlin, E.L.; Yu, Q.; Heppner, D.E.; Li, J.; Long, J.; Mills, E.L.; Szpyt, J.; et al. AQuantitative Tissue-Speciﬁc Landscape of Protein Redox Regulation during Aging. Cell2020 ,180, 968–983.e24. [CrossRef]42. Evans, N.; Naylor, P . The systemic oxygen supply to the surface of human skin. Respir. Physiol. 1967 ,3, 21–37. [CrossRef]43. Stewart, F.A.; Denekamp, J.; Randhawa, V .S. Skin sensitization by misonidazole: A demonstration of uniform mild hypoxia. Br. J.Cancer 1982 ,45, 869–877. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Stücker, M.; Struk, A.; Altmeyer, P .; Herde, M.; Baumgärtl, H.; Lübbers, D.W. The cutaneous uptake of atmospheric oxygencontributes signiﬁcantly to the oxygen supply of human dermis and epidermis. J. Physiol. 2002 ,538, 985–994. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]45. Evans, S.M.; Schrlau, A.E.; Chalian, A.A.; Zhang, P .; Koch, C.J. Oxygen Levels in Normal and Previously Irradiated Human Skinas Assessed by EF5 Binding. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2006 ,126, 2596–2606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Shirshin, E.A.; Gurﬁnkel, Y.I.; Priezzhev, A.V .; Fadeev, V .V .; Lademann, J.; Darvin, M.E. Two-photon autoﬂuorescence lifetimeimaging of human skin papillary dermis in vivo : Assessment of blood capillaries and structural proteins localization. Sci. Rep.2017 ,7, 1–10. [CrossRef]47. Peyssonnaux, C.; Boutin, A.T.; Zinkernagel, A.S.; Datta, V .; Nizet, V .; Johnson, R.S. Critical Role of HIF-1 αin Keratinocyte Defenseagainst Bacterial Infection. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2008 ,128, 1964–1968. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Pascual-Ahuir, A.; Manzanares-Estreder, S.; Proft, M. Pro- and Antioxidant Functions of the Peroxisome-Mitochondria Connectionand Its Impact on Aging and Disease. Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 2017 ,2017 , 1–17. [CrossRef]
49. Albrecht, S.; Elpelt, A.; Kasim, C.; Reble, C.; Mundhenk, L.; Pischon, H.; Hedtrich, S.; Witzel, C.; Lademann, J.; Zastrow, L.; et al.Quantiﬁcation and characterization of radical production in human, animal and 3D skin models during sun irradiation measuredby EPR spectroscopy. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2019 ,131, 299–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 15 of 1650. Bossi, O.; Gartsbein, M.; Leitges, M.; Kuroki, T.; Grossman, S.; Tennenbaum, T. UV irradiation increases ROS production via PKC δsignaling in primary murine ﬁbroblasts. J. Cell. Biochem. 2008 ,105, 194–207. [CrossRef]51. Mena, S.; Ortega, A.; Estrela, J.M. Oxidative stress in environmental-induced carcinogenesis. Mutat. Res. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen.2009 ,674, 36–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Chi, C.; Tanaka, R.; Okuda, Y.; Ikota, N.; Yamamoto, H.; Urano, S.; Ozawa, T.; Anzai, K. Quantitative Measurements of OxidativeStress in Mouse Skin Induced by X-Ray Irradiation. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 2005 ,53, 1411–1415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Grange, P .A.; Ch éreau, C.; Raingeaud, J.; Nicco, C.; Weill, B.; Dupin, N.; Batteux, F. Production of Superoxide Anions byKeratinocytes Initiates P . acnes-Induced Inﬂammation of the Skin. PLoS Pathog. 2009 ,5, e1000527. [CrossRef]
54. Thiele, J.; Schroeter, C.; Hsieh, S.; Podda, M.; Packer, L. The Antioxidant Network of the Stratum corneum. Sex. Transm. Dis. Adv.Diagn. Treat. 2000 ,29, 26–42. [CrossRef]55. Shindo, Y.; Witt, E.; Han, D.; Epstein, W.; Packer, L. Enzymic and Non-Enzymic Antioxidants in Epidermis and Dermis of HumanSkin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1994 ,102, 122–124. [CrossRef]56. Hellemans, L.; Corstjens, H.; Neven, A.; Declercq, L.; Maes, D. Antioxidant Enzyme Activity in Human Stratum Corneum ShowsSeasonal Variation with an Age-Dependent Recovery. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2003 ,120, 434–439. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Arnér, E.S.J.; Holmgren, A. Physiological functions of thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase. JBIC J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2000 ,267,6102–6109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]58. Van Der Flier, L.G.; Clevers, H. Stem Cells, Self-Renewal, and Differentiation in the Intestinal Epithelium. Annu. Rev. Physiol.2009 ,71, 241–260. [CrossRef]
2009 ,71, 241–260. [CrossRef]59. Bevins, C.L.; Salzman, N.H. Paneth cells, antimicrobial peptides and maintenance of intestinal homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2011 ,9, 356–368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]60. Clevers, H.C.; Bevins, C.L. Paneth Cells: Maestros of the Small Intestinal Crypts. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 2013 ,75, 289–311. [CrossRef]61. Willson, M. Microbial Inhabitants of Humans: Their Ecology and Role in Health and Disease ; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,UK, 2005; p. 476.62. Aw, T.Y. Biliary glutathione promotes the mucosal metabolism of luminal peroxidized lipids by rat small intestine in vivo .J. Clin.Investig. 1994 ,94, 1218–1225. [CrossRef]63. Dahm, L.J.; Jones, D.P . Rat Jejunum Controls Luminal Thiol-Disulﬁde Redox. J. Nutr. 2000 ,130, 2739–2745. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Circu, M.L.; Aw, T.Y. Redox biology of the intestine. Free. Radic. Res. 2011 ,45, 1245–1266. [CrossRef]
65. Takaishi, S.; Sawada, M.; Seno, H.; Kayahara, T.; Morita-Fujisawa, Y.; Fukuzawa, H.; Chiba, T. Growth promoting effect ofthioredoxin on intestinal epithelial cells. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2003 ,48, 379–385. [CrossRef]66. Motohashi, K.; Romano, P .G.N.; Hisabori, T. Identiﬁcation of Thioredoxin Targeted Proteins Using Thioredoxin Single-CysteineMutant-Immobilized Resin. Methods Mol. Biol. 2009 ,479, 117–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Kemp, M.; Go, Y.-M.; Jones, D.P . Nonequilibrium thermodynamics of thiol/disulﬁde redox systems: A perspective on redoxsystems biology. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2008 ,44, 921–937. [CrossRef]68. Gasdaska, J.R.; Gasdaska, P .Y.; Gallegos, A.; Powis, G. Human Thioredoxin Reductase Gene Localization to ChromosomalPosition 12q23–q24.1 and mRNA Distribution in Human Tissue. Genome 1996 ,37, 257–259. [CrossRef]69. Jaeger, S.U.; Schroeder, B.O.; Meyer-Hoffert, U.; Courth, L.; Fehr, S.N.; Gersemann, M.; Stange, E.F.; Wehkamp, J. Cell-mediated
reduction of human β-defensin 1: A major role for mucosal thioredoxin. Mucosal Immunol. 2013 ,6, 1179–1190. [CrossRef][PubMed]70. Kelly, C.J.; Zheng, L.; Campbell, E.L.; Saeedi, B.; Scholz, C.C.; Bayless, A.J.; Wilson, K.E.; Glover, L.E.; Kominsky, D.J.;
[PubMed]70. Kelly, C.J.; Zheng, L.; Campbell, E.L.; Saeedi, B.; Scholz, C.C.; Bayless, A.J.; Wilson, K.E.; Glover, L.E.; Kominsky, D.J.;Magnuson, A. ; et al. Crosstalk between Microbiota-Derived Short-Chain Fatty Acids and Intestinal Epithelial HIF AugmentsTissue Barrier Function. Cell Host Microbe 2015 ,17, 662–671. [CrossRef] [PubMed]71. Zheng, L.; Kelly, C.J.; Colgan, S.P . Physiologic hypoxia and oxygen homeostasis in the healthy intestine. A Review in the Theme:Cellular Responses to Hypoxia. Am. J. Physiol. Physiol. 2015 ,309, C350–C360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]72. Schaible, B.; Schaffer, K.; Taylor, C.T. Hypoxia, innate immunity and infection in the lung. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 2010 ,174,235–243. [CrossRef]73. Kelly, C.J.; Glover, L.E.; Campbell, E.L.; Kominsky, D.J.; Ehrentraut, S.F.; Bowers, B.E.; Bayless, A.J.; Saeedi, B.J.; Colgan, S.P .Fundamental role for HIF-1 αin constitutive expression of human βdefensin-1. Mucosal Immunol. 2013 ,6, 1110–1118. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]74. Cook, G.M.; Greening, C.; Hards, K.; Berney, M. Energetics of Pathogenic Bacteria and Opportunities for Drug Development. Adv.Microb. Physiol. 2014 ,65, 1–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Brogden, K.A. Antimicrobial peptides: Pore formers or metabolic inhibitors in bacteria? Nat. Rev. Genet. 2005 ,3, 238–250.[CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Godlewska, U.; Bilska, B.; Majewski, P .; Pyza, E.; Zabel, B.A.; Cichy, J. Bacteria Modify Their Sensitivity to Chemerin-DerivedPeptides by Hindering Peptide Association with the Cell Surface and Peptide Oxidation. Front. Microbiol. 2020 ,11, 1819.[CrossRef]77. Engstrom, G.; Rajagukguk, R.; Saunders, A.J.; Patel, C.N.; Rajagukguk, S.; Merbitz-Zahradnik, T.; Xiao, K.; Pielak, G.J.;Trumpower, B.; Yu, C.-A.; et al. Design of a Ruthenium-Labeled CytochromecDerivative to Study Electron Transfer withthe Cytochromebc1Complex †. Biochemestry 2003 ,42, 2816–2824. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2021 ,10, 446 16 of 1678. Sarewicz, M.; Borek, A.; Daldal, F.; Froncisz, W.; Osyczka, A. Demonstration of Short-lived Complexes of Cytochrome c withCytochrome bc1 by EPR Spectroscopy. J. Biol. Chem. 2008 ,283, 24826–24836. [CrossRef]79. Unden, G.; Bongaerts, J. Alternative respiratory pathways of Escherichia coli: Energetics and transcriptional regulation inresponse to electron acceptors. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA) Bioenerg. 1997 ,1320 , 217–234. [CrossRef]80. Ezraty, B.; Gennaris, A.; Barras, F.; Collet, J.-F. Oxidative stress, protein damage and repair in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2017 ,15, 385–396. [CrossRef]81. Imlay, J.A. The molecular mechanisms and physiological consequences of oxidative stress: Lessons from a model bacterium. Nat.Rev. Genet. 2013 ,11, 443–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Korshunov, S.; Imlay, J.A. Two sources of endogenous hydrogen peroxide inEscherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 2010 ,75, 1389–1401.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]83. McBee, M.E.; Chionh, Y.H.; Sharaf, M.L.; Ho, P .; Cai, M.W.L.; Dedon, P .C. Production of Superoxide in Bacteria Is Stress- and CellState-Dependent: A Gating-Optimized Flow Cytometry Method that Minimizes ROS Measurement Artifacts with FluorescentDyes. Front. Microbiol. 2017 ,8, 459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Najmuldeen, H.; Alghamdi, R.; Alghofaili, F.; Yesilkaya, H. Functional assessment of microbial superoxide dismutase isozymessuggests a differential role for each isozyme. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2019 ,134, 215–228. [CrossRef]85. Kim, S.Y.; Park, C.; Jang, H.-J.; Kim, B.-O.; Bae, H.-W.; Chung, I.-Y.; Kim, E.S.; Cho, Y.-H. Antibacterial strategies inspired by theoxidative stress and response networks. J. Microbiol. 2019 ,57, 203–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]86. Tong, H.; Wang, X.; Dong, Y.; Hu, Q.; Zhao, Z.; Zhu, Y.; Dong, L.; Bai, F.; Dong, X. A Streptococcus aquaporin acts as peroxiporin
for efﬂux of cellular hydrogen peroxide and alleviation of oxidative stress. J. Biol. Chem. 2019 ,294, 4583–4595. [CrossRef][PubMed]87. Godlewska, U.; Zegar, A.; Cichy, J. Rola chemeryny i jej antybakteryjnych pochodnych w utrzymaniu funkcji barierowychnabłonka. Post˛ epy Biochemii 2020 ,66, 1–9. [CrossRef]88. Pagacz, J.; Broniec, A.; Wolska, M.; Osyczka, A.; Borek, A. ROS signaling capacity of cytochrome bc1: Opposing effects of adaptiveand pathogenic mitochondrial mutations. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2021 ,163, 243–254. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Collet, J.-F.; Cho, S.-H.; Iorga, B.I.; Goemans, C.V . How the assembly and protection of the bacterial cell envelope depend oncysteine residues. J. Biol. Chem. 2020 ,295, 11984–11994. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Arts, I.S.; Gennaris, A.; Collet, J.-F. Reducing systems protecting the bacterial cell envelope from oxidative damage. FEBS Lett.2015 ,589, 1559–1568. [CrossRef]
2015 ,589, 1559–1568. [CrossRef]91. Messens, J.; Collet, J.-F. Pathways of disulﬁde bond formation in Escherichia coli. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2006 ,38, 1050–1062.[CrossRef] [PubMed]92. Wendler, J.; Ehmann, D.; Courth, L.; Schroeder, B.O.; Malek, N.P .; Wehkamp, J. Bacterial Periplasmic Oxidoreductases Control theActivity of Oxidized Human Antimicrobial beta-Defensin 1. Infect. Immun. 2018 ,86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
