PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Heuristic Decision MakingGerd Gigerenzer and Wolfgang GaissmaierCenter for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for HumanDevelopment, 14195 Berlin, Germany; email: gigerenzer@mpib-berlin.mpg.deAnnu. Rev. Psychol. 2011. 62:451–82The Annual Review of Psychology is online atpsych.annualreviews.orgThis article’s doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-145346Copyright c⃝2011 by Annual Reviews.All rights reserved0066-4308/11/0110-0451$20.00Key Wordsaccuracy-effort trade-off, business decisions, ecological rationality,legal decision making, medical decision making, social intelligenceAbstractAs reﬂected in the amount of controversy, few areas in psychology haveundergone such dramatic conceptual changes in the past decade as theemerging science of heuristics. Heuristics are efﬁcient cognitive pro-cesses, conscious or unconscious, that ignore part of the information.
Because using heuristics saves effort, the classical view has been thatheuristic decisions imply greater errors than do “rational” decisions asdeﬁned by logic or statistical models. However, for many decisions, theassumptions of rational models are not met, and it is an empirical ratherthan an a priori issue how well cognitive heuristics function in an uncer-tain world. To answer both the descriptive question (“Which heuris-tics do people use in which situations?”) and the prescriptive question(“When should people rely on a given heuristic rather than a complexstrategy to make better judgments?”), formal models are indispensable.We review research that tests formal models of heuristic inference, in-cluding in business organizations, health care, and legal institutions.This research indicates that (a) individuals and organizations often relyon simple heuristics in an adaptive way, and (b) ignoring part of the infor-
mation can lead to more accurate judgments than weighting and addingall information, for instance for low predictability and small samples.The big future challenge is to develop a systematic theory of the build-ing blocks of heuristics as well as the core capacities and environmentalstructures these exploit.451
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43ContentsI N T R O D U C T I O N.................. 4 5 2Scope of Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 453W H A TI SAH E U R I S T I C ?........... 4 5 4D e ﬁ n i t i o n......................... 4 5 4Less-Can-Be-More: Managers’One-Good-Reason Decisions .... 4 5 5The Adaptive Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456W H YH E U R I S T I C S ?................ 4 5 6Accuracy-Effort Trade-Off . . . . . . . . . 456Ecological Rationality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 457METHODOLOGICALP R I N C I P L E S..................... 4 5 8Comparative Versus SingularT e s t s........................... 4 5 9Test of Individuals VersusG r o u pM e a n s................... 4 5 9Testing the Adaptive VersusUniversal Use of Heuristics . . . . . 459Prediction Versus Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . 459RECOGNITION-BASEDDECISION MAKING . . . . . . . . . . . . 460
DECISION MAKING . . . . . . . . . . . . 460Recognition Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 460F l u e n c yH e u r i s t i c.................. 4 6 2Neural Basis of Recognitionand Evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 463ONE-REASON DECISIONM A K I N G......................... 4 6 3One-Clever-Cue Heuristics . . . . . . . . 463T a k e - t h e - B e s t..................... 4 6 4F a s t - a n d - F r u g a lT r e e s............. 4 6 7T R A D E - O F FH E U R I S T I C S......... 4 6 9T a l l y i n g........................... 4 6 9Mapping Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4701/NR u l e.......................... 4 7 0SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE . . . . . . . . . . 471Recognition-Based Decisions . . . . . . . 471One-Reason Decision Making . . . . . . 472T r a d e - O f fH e u r i s t i c s............... 4 7 2S o c i a lH e u r i s t i c s................... 4 7 2M o r a lB e h a v i o r.................... 4 7 3C O N C L U S I O N S.................... 4 7 3
C O N C L U S I O N S.................... 4 7 3INTRODUCTIONHow are decisions made? Three major answershave been proposed: The mind applies logic,statistics, or heuristics. Yet these mental toolshave not been treated as equals, each suited toa particular kind of problem ,as we believe theyshould be. Rather, rules of logic and statisticshave been linked to rational reasoning andheuristics linked to error-prone intuitions oreven irrationality. Since the 1970s, this oppo-sition has been entrenched in psychologicalresearch, from the heuristics-and-biases pro-gram (Tversky & Kahneman 1974) to varioustwo-system theories of reasoning (Evans 2008).Deviations from logical or statistical principlesbecame routinely interpreted as judgmentalbiases and attributed to cognitive heuristicssuch as “representativeness” or to an intuitive“System 1.” The bottom line was that peopleoften rely on heuristics, but they would be bet-ter off in terms of accuracy if they did not. As
ter off in terms of accuracy if they did not. AsKahneman (2003) explained in his NobelMemorial Lecture: “Our research attemptedto obtain a map of bounded rationality, byexploring the systematic biases that separatethe beliefs that people have and the choicesthey make from the optimal beliefs and choicesassumed in rational-agent models” (p. 1449). Inthis research, it is assumed that the conditionsfor rational models hold and can thus deﬁneoptimal reasoning. The “father” of boundedrationality, Simon (1989), however, asked afundamentally different question, leading to adifferent research program.Simon’s question: “How do human beings rea-son when the conditions for rationality postu-lated by the model of neoclassical economicsare not met?” (p. 377)As Simon (1979, p. 500) stressed in his No-bel Memorial Lecture, the classical model of ra-tionality requires knowledge of all the relevantalternatives, their consequences and probabili-
alternatives, their consequences and probabili-ties, and a predictable world without surprises.These conditions, however, are rarely met forthe problems that individuals and organizationsface. Savage (1954), known as the founder ofmodern Bayesian decision theory, called suchperfect knowledge small worlds, to be distin-
the problems that individuals and organizationsface. Savage (1954), known as the founder ofmodern Bayesian decision theory, called suchperfect knowledge small worlds, to be distin-guished from large worlds. In large worlds, part452 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43of the relevant information is unknown or hasto be estimated from small samples, so that theconditions for rational decision theory are notmet, making it an inappropriate norm for opti-mal reasoning (Binmore 2009). In a large world,as emphasized by both Savage and Simon, onecan no longer assume that “rational” modelsautomatically provide the correct answer. Evensmall deviations from the model conditions canmatter. In fact, small-world theories can leadto disaster when applied to the large world,as Stiglitz (2010) noted with respect to the ﬁ-nancial crash of 2008: “It simply wasn’t truethat a world with almost perfect informationwas very similar to one in which there was per-fect information” (p. 243, emphasis added). AndSorros (2009) concluded that “rational expecta-tions theory is no longer taken seriously outsideacademic circles” (p. 6).In recent years, research has moved beyond
In recent years, research has moved beyondsmall worlds such as the ultimatum game andchoice between monetary gambles. To test howwell heuristics perform in large worlds, oneneeds formal models of heuristics. Such testsare not possible as long as heuristics are onlyvaguely characterized by general labels, becauselabels cannot make the precise predictions thatstatistical techniques can.When heuristics were formalized, a surpris-ing discovery was made. In a number of largeworlds, simple heuristics were more accuratethan standard statistical methods that have thesame or more information. These results be-came known as less-is-more effects: There isan inverse-U-shaped relation between level ofaccuracy and amount of information, computa-tion, or time. In other words, there is a pointwhere more is not better, but harmful. Startingin the late 1990s, it was shown for the ﬁrst timethat relying on one good reason (and ignoringthe rest) can lead to higher predictive accuracy
the rest) can lead to higher predictive accuracythan achieved by a linear multiple regression(Czerlinski et al. 1999, Gigerenzer & Goldstein1996) and a three-layer feedforward connec-tionist network trained using the back propa-gation algorithm (Brighton 2006, Chater et al.2003, Gigerenzer & Brighton 2009). Theseresults put heuristics on par with standardstatistical models of “rational” cognition (seeGigerenzer 2008). Simon (1999) spoke of a“revolution in cognitive science, striking a greatblow for sanity in the approach to humanrationality.”The revolution Simon referred to could nothave happened without formal models and thepower of modern computers. Moreover, it is a“revolution” in the original sense of the term,building on earlier demonstrations of the robustbeauty of simple models. These include Dawes& Corrigan (1974) and Einhorn & Hogarth(1975), who showed that simple equal weightspredict about as well as—and sometimes better
predict about as well as—and sometimes betterthan—multiple regression with “optimal” betaweights. Their important work has not receivedthe recognition it deserves and is not even men-tioned in standard textbooks in econometrics(Hogarth 2011).Although the study of heuristics has beentypically considered as purely descriptive, less-is-more effects open up a prescriptive role forheuristics, resulting in two research questions:Description: Which heuristics do people usein which situations?Prescription: When should people rely on agiven heuristic rather than a complex strategyto make more accurate judgments?Scope of ReviewWe review a ﬁeld that is in a fundamental tran-sition, focusing on the major new ideas. Theliterature on heuristics does not speak with onevoice, and we do not attempt to cover it ex-haustively. Rather than presenting a patchworkof ideas to the reader, we organize this review
of ideas to the reader, we organize this reviewwithin a theoretical framework and restrict itto (a) formal models of heuristics and ( b)i n f e r -ences rather than preferences.The ﬁrst restriction excludes explanation bymere labels but also by verbally stated pro-cesses that have not been formalized, such as
ences rather than preferences.The ﬁrst restriction excludes explanation bymere labels but also by verbally stated pro-cesses that have not been formalized, such asthe tools-to-theories heuristic in scientiﬁc dis-covery (Gigerenzer 1991). Formal models al-low rigorous tests of both descriptive and pre-scriptive questions. “Inference” refers to taskswww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 453Small world: asituation in which allrelevant alternatives,their consequences,and probabilities areknown, andwhere thefuture is certain, sothat the optimalsolution to a problemcan be determinedLarge world:a situation in whichsome relevantinformation isunknown or must beestimated fromsamples, and the futureis uncertain, violatingthe conditions forrational decisiontheoryLess-is-more effects:when less informationor computation leadsto more accuratejudgments than moreinformation orcomputationErrata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43for which a unique criterion exists, whereas“preference” (or preferential choice) refers totasks where no such criteria exist, as in mattersof taste. The advantage of studying inferenceis that the accuracy of a strategy can be deter-mined. At the same time, we agree with Weber& Johnson (2009) that inferences and prefer-ences draw on the same cognitive processes; infact, most heuristics covered in this review canbe used for preferential choice as well, as illus-trated with examples from consumer choice andhealth. Note that the general term “decisionmaking” is used here to cover both inferencesand preferences.We begin with a brief, incomplete history(for more, see Groner et al. 1983), deﬁne theterm heuristic, and provide an illustration ofthe use of heuristics in organizations, includingan empirical demonstration of a less-is-moreeffect.WHAT IS A HEURISTIC?The term heuristic is of Greek origin and
The term heuristic is of Greek origin andmeans, “serving to ﬁnd out or discover.” Ein-stein included the term in the title of his Nobelprize–winning paper from 1905 on quantumphysics, indicating that the view he presentedwas incomplete but highly useful (Holton1988, pp. 360–361). Max Wertheimer, whowas a close friend of Einstein, and his fellowGestalt psychologists spoke of heuristic meth-ods such as “looking around” to guide searchfor information. The mathematician GeorgePolya distinguished heuristics from analyticalmethods: For instance, heuristics are neededto ﬁnd a proof, whereas analysis is for checkinga proof. Simon and Allen Newell, a student ofPolya, developed formal models of heuristics tolimit large search spaces. Luce (1956), Tversky(1972), Dawes (1979), and others studied mod-els of heuristics, such as lexicographic rules,elimination-by-aspect, and equal-weight rules.Payne and colleagues (1993) provided evidence
Payne and colleagues (1993) provided evidencefor the adaptive use of these and other heuristicsin their seminal research. Similarly, behavioralbiologists studied experimentally the rules ofthumb (their term for heuristics) that animalsuse for choosing food sites, nest sites, or mates(Hutchinson & Gigerenzer 2005). After aninitial phase dominated by logic, researchersin artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) began to studyheuristics that can solve problems that logicand probability cannot, such as NP-complete(computationally intractable) problems. WhileAI researchers began to study how heuristicsmake computers smart, psychologists in the1970s became interested in demonstrating hu-man reasoning errors, and they used the termheuristic to explain why people make errors.This change in the evaluation of heuristicswent hand-in-hand with replacing models ofheuristics by general labels, such as “availabil-ity” and, later, “affect.” Unlike in biology and
ity” and, later, “affect.” Unlike in biology andAI, heuristics became tied to biases, whereasthe content-free laws of logic and probabilitybecame identiﬁed with the principles ofsound thinking (Kahneman 2003, Tversky &Kahneman 1974). The resulting heuristics-and-biases program has had immense inﬂuence,contributing to the emergence of behavioraleconomics and behavioral law and economics.DeﬁnitionMany deﬁnitions of heuristics exist. Kahneman& Frederick (2002) proposed that a heuristicassesses a target attribute by another property(attribute substitution) that comes more read-ily to mind. Shah & Oppenheimer (2008) pro-posed that all heuristics rely on effort reductionby one or more of the following: ( a) examin-ing fewer cues, (b) reducing the effort of re-trieving cue values, (c) simplifying the weight-ing of cues, (d ) integrating less information, and(e) examining fewer alternatives. Although bothattribute substitution and effort reduction are
attribute substitution and effort reduction areinvolved, attribute substitution is less speciﬁcbecause most inference methods, includingmultiple regression, entail it: An unknown cri-terion is estimated by cues. For the purpose ofthis review, we adopt the following deﬁnition:
because most inference methods, includingmultiple regression, entail it: An unknown cri-terion is estimated by cues. For the purpose ofthis review, we adopt the following deﬁnition:A heuristic is a strategy that ignores part of theinformation, with the goal of making decisionsmore quickly, frugally, and/or accurately thanmore complex methods.454 Gigerenzer ·GaissmaierHeuristics: strategiesthat ignoreinformation to makedecisions faster, morefrugally, and/or moreaccurately than morecomplex methodsErrata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Let us explain the terms. Heuristics are asubset of strategies; strategies also include com-plex regression or Bayesian models. The partof the information that is ignored is coveredby Shah and Oppenheimer’s list of ﬁve aspects.The goal of making judgments more quicklyand frugally is consistent with the goal of effortreduction, where “frugal” is often measured bythe number of cues that a heuristic searches. Ofcourse, there is no strict dichotomy betweenheuristic and nonheuristic, as strategies canignore more or less information. The goal ofmaking judgments more accurately by ignoringinformation is new. It goes beyond the classicalassumption that a heuristic trades off someaccuracy for less effort. Unlike the two-systemmodels of reasoning that link heuristics tounconscious, associative, and error-proneprocesses, no such link is made in this review.Every heuristic reviewed in this article can
also be relied upon consciously and is deﬁnedas a rule. The amount of error it generatescan be measured and compared to otherstrategies.Consider the following illustration.Less-Can-Be-More: Managers’One-Good-Reason DecisionsCommercial retailers need to distinguish thosecustomers who are likely to purchase again in agiven time frame (active customers) from thosewho are not (inactive customers). These com-panies have a large database containing theamount, kind, and date of every customer’s pre-vious purchases. Based on this information, howcan an executive predict which customers willbe active in the future?Statistically sophisticated academics mightopt for a Bayesian analysis, regression analy-sis, or some other optimizing strategy to pre-dict the probability that a customer with agiven purchase history is active at some fu-ture time. Researchers in business share this vi-sion, and the state-of-the-art approach is thePareto/NBD model (negative binomial distri-
bution; Schmittlein & Peterson 1994). Thismodel assumes that purchases follow a Poissonprocess with a purchase parameter λ, that cus-tomer lifetimes follow an exponential distribu-tion with a dropout rate parameter μ,a n dt h a t ,across customers, purchase and dropout ratesare distributed according to a gamma distri-bution. However, most managers in Europe,North America, Japan, Brazil, and India relyon “intuitive” heuristics rather than on this orsimilar statistical forecasting methods (Parikh1994). W ¨ubben & Wangenheim (2008) re-ported that experienced managers use a simplerecency-of-last-purchase rule:Hiatus heuristic: If a customer has not pur-chased within a certain number of months (thehiatus), the customer is classiﬁed as inactive;otherwise, the customer is classiﬁed as active.The managers of an apparel retailer and anairline relied on nine months as the hiatus,whereas the hiatus of an online CD retailer
whereas the hiatus of an online CD retailerwas six months. Note that by relying on re-cency only, the managers ignore informationsuch as the frequency and the spacing of previ-ous purchases. Yet how accurate is the heuristiccompared to the Pareto/NBD model? To in-vestigate this question, the Pareto/NBD modelwas allowed to estimate its parameters from40 weeks of data and was tested over the follow-ing 40 weeks. The hiatus heuristic does not needto estimate any parameters. For the apparel re-tailer, the hiatus heuristic correctly classiﬁed83% of customers, whereas the Pareto/NBDmodel classiﬁed only 75% correctly. For theairline, the score was 77% versus 74%, and forthe online CD business, the two methods tied at77% (W ¨ubben & Wangenheim 2008). Similarresults were found for forecasting future bestcustomers and for a second complex statisticalmodel.This study demonstrated empirically a less-
This study demonstrated empirically a less-is-more effect: The complex model had all theinformation the simple heuristic used and more,performed extensive estimations and computa-tions, but nevertheless made more errors. Thestudy also showed how important it is to for-
performed extensive estimations and computa-tions, but nevertheless made more errors. Thestudy also showed how important it is to for-malize a heuristic so that its predictions can betested and compared to competing models.www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 455
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Adaptive toolbox:the cognitiveheuristics, theirbuilding blocks (e.g.,rules for search,stopping, decision),and the core capacities(e.g., recognitionmemory) they exploitEcologicalrationality: the studyof ecologicalrationality investigatesin which environmentsa given strategy isbetter than otherstrategies (better—notbest—because in largeworlds the optimalstrategy is unknown)Accuracy-efforttrade-off: thetraditional explanationwhy people useheuristics, assumingthat effort is tradedagainst accuracy. Notgenerally true (seeless-is-more effects)The Adaptive ToolboxFormal models of heuristics represent progressover labels, but precision alone is not enough tobuild a science of heuristics. For instance, be-havioral biology has experimentally identiﬁedvarious rules of thumb that animals use, whichoften look like curiosities in the absence of anoverarching theory (Hutchinson & Gigeren-zer 2005). Further progress requires a theo-
zer 2005). Further progress requires a theo-retical framework that reaches beyond a listof heuristics. One step toward such a theoryis to look for common building blocks, fromwhich the various heuristics are constructed asan organizing principle. This would allow re-ducing the larger number of heuristics to asmaller number of components, similar to howthe number of chemical elements in the peri-odic table is built from a small number of parti-cles. Three building blocks have been proposed(Gigerenzer et al. 1999):1. Search rules specify in what direction thesearch extends in the search space.2. Stopping rules specify when the search isstopped.3. Decision rules specify how the ﬁnal deci-sion is reached.For instance, the hiatus heuristic searchesfor recency-of-last-purchase information; stopswhen it is found, ignoring further information;and uses a nine-month threshold to make thedecision. Similarly, Simon’s (1955) satisﬁcing
heuristic searches through options in any order,stops as soon the ﬁrst option exceeds an aspi-ration level, and chooses this option. Many butnot all heuristics are composed of these threebuilding blocks; thus, the list of building blocksis incomplete.The collection of heuristics and buildingblocks an individual or a species has at its dis-posal for constructing heuristics, together withthe core mental capacities that building blocksexploit, has been called the adaptive toolbox(Gigerenzer et al. 1999). Core capacities in-clude recognition memory, frequency monitor-ing, object tracking, and the ability to imitate.These vary systematically between species andindividuals. Heuristics can be fast and frugalonly because the core capacities are already inplace.How are heuristics selected for a givenproblem? Although some authors implied thatthe selection problem is unique to heuristics(Gl¨ockner et al. 2010, Newell 2005), it equally
applies to statistical models of mind. There aremany such models. Even if one proposes thatthe mind has only one tool in its statisticaltoolbox, such as Bayes, regression, or neuralnetwork, the strategy selection problem trans-lates into the question of how parameter valuesare selected for each new problem (Marewski2010).Several principles appear to guide learningwhich strategy to select. First, heuristics andtheir underlying core capacities can be (partly)hardwired by evolution, as it appears to be inbees’ collective decision about the location ofa new hive (Seeley 2001) and in perceptualmechanisms for inferring the extension of ob-jects in three-dimensional space (Kleffner &Ramachandran 1992). The second selectionprinciple is based on individual learning; a for-mal model is Rieskamp & Otto’s (2006) strategyselection learning theory. Third, heuristics canbe selected and learned by social processes, as
be selected and learned by social processes, asin imitation and explicit teaching of heuristics(e.g., Snook et al. 2004). Finally, the content ofindividual memory determines in the ﬁrst place
be selected and learned by social processes, asin imitation and explicit teaching of heuristics(e.g., Snook et al. 2004). Finally, the content ofindividual memory determines in the ﬁrst placewhich heuristics can be used, and some heuris-tics’ very applicability appears to be correlatedwith their “ecological rationality” (see below).For instance, the ﬂuency heuristic is most likelyto be applicable in situations where it is alsolikely to succeed (Marewski & Schooler 2010).WHY HEURISTICS?Two answers have been proposed to the ques-tion of why heuristics are useful: the accuracy-effort trade-off, and the ecological rationality ofheuristics.Accuracy-Effort Trade-OffThe classical explanation is that people save ef-fort with heuristics, but at the cost of accuracy456 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43(Payne et al. 1993, Shah & Oppenheimer 2008).In this view, humans and other animals rely onheuristics because information search and com-putation cost time and effort; heuristics trade-off some loss in accuracy for faster and morefrugal cognition.There are two interpretations of this trade-off: (a) Rational trade-offs. Not every decision isimportant enough to warrant spending the timeto ﬁnd the best course of action; thus, peoplechoose shortcuts that save effort. The programon the adaptive decision maker (Payne et al.1993) is built on the assumption that heuris-tics achieve a beneﬁcial trade-off between ac-curacy and effort. Here, relying on heuristicscan be rational in the sense that costs of effortare higher than the gain in accuracy. ( b) Cog-nitive limitations. Capacity limitations preventus from acting rationally and force us to relyon heuristics, which are considered a source ofjudgmental errors.
judgmental errors.The accuracy-effort trade-off is regularlytouted as a potentially universal law of cogni-tion. Yet the study on the hiatus heuristic il-lustrated that this assumption is not generallycorrect. The hiatus heuristic saves effort com-pared to the sophisticated Pareto/NBD model,but is also more accurate: a less-is-more effect.Ecological RationalityLess-is-more effects require a new conceptionof why people rely on heuristics. The study ofthe ecological rationality of heuristics, or strate-gies in general, is such a new framework: “Aheuristic is ecologically rational to the degreethat it is adapted to the structure of the envi-ronment” (Gigerenzer et al. 1999, p. 13). Smith(2003) used this deﬁnition in his Nobel lectureand generalized it from heuristics to marketsand institutions. The study of ecological ra-tionality ﬂeshes out Simon’s scissors analogy:“Human rational behavior (and the rational be-havior of all physical symbol systems) is shaped
havior of all physical symbol systems) is shapedby a scissors whose two blades are the structureof task environments and the computational ca-pabilities of the actor” (Simon 1990, p. 7). If onelooks only at one blade, cognition, one cannotunderstand why and when it succeeds or fails.The study of ecological rationality addressestwo related questions: How does cognition ex-ploit environmental structures, and how does itdeal with error?Exploiting environmental structure. Inwhich environments will a given heuristic suc-ceed, and in which will it fail? Environmentalstructures that have been identiﬁed include(Todd et al. 2011):1. Uncertainty: how well a criterion can bepredicted.2. Redundancy: the correlation betweencues.3. Sample size: number of observations (rel-ative to number of cues).4. Variability in weights: the distribution ofthe cue weights (e.g., skewed or uniform).For instance, heuristics that rely on only onereason, such as the hiatus heuristic and take-
reason, such as the hiatus heuristic and take-the-best heuristic (see below), tend to succeed(relative to strategies that rely on more rea-sons) in environments with (a) moderate to highuncertainty (Hogarth & Karelaia 2007) and(b) moderate to high redundancy (Dieckmann& Rieskamp 2007). For customer activity, un-certainty means that it is difﬁcult to predict fu-ture purchases, and redundancy might be re-ﬂected in a high correlation between length ofhiatus and spacing of previous purchases. Thestudy of ecological rationality results in com-parative statements of the kind “strategy Xismore accurate (frugal, fast) than Yin environ-ment E” or in quantitative relations between theperformance of strategy Xwhen the structureof an environment changes (e.g., Baucells et al.2008, Karelaia 2006, Martignon & Hoffrage2002). Speciﬁc ﬁndings are introduced below.Dealing with error. In much research on rea-soning, a bias typically refers to ignoring part
soning, a bias typically refers to ignoring partof the information, as in the base rate fallacy.This can be captured by the equation:Error =bias+ε, (1)where εis an irreducible random error. Inthis view, if the bias is eliminated, good
of the information, as in the base rate fallacy.This can be captured by the equation:Error =bias+ε, (1)where εis an irreducible random error. Inthis view, if the bias is eliminated, goodwww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 457
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43inferences are obtained. In statistical theory(Geman et al. 1992), however, there are threesources of errors:Error =bias+variance +ε, (2)where bias refers to a systematic deviation be-tween a model and the true state, as in Equation1. To deﬁne the meaning of variance, consider100 people who rely on the same strategy, buteach one has a different sample of observationsfrom the same population. Because of samplingerror, the 100 inferences may not be the same.Across samples, bias is the difference betweenthe mean prediction and the true state of nature,and variance is the expected squared deviationaround this mean. To illustrate, the nine-monthhiatus heuristic has a bias but zero variance,because it has no free parameters to adjust tospeciﬁc samples. In contrast, the Pareto/NBDmodel has free parameters and is likely to suf-fer from both variance and bias. Variance de-
fer from both variance and bias. Variance de-creases with increasing sample size, but alsowith simpler strategies that have fewer free pa-rameters (and less ﬂexible functional forms; Pittet al. 2002). Thus, a cognitive system needs todraw a balance between being biased and ﬂexi-ble (variance) rather than simply trying to elim-inate bias. In the extreme, as illustrated by thenine-month hiatus, the total elimination of vari-ance at the price of higher bias can lead to bet-ter inferences. This “bias-variance dilemma”helps to explicate the rationality of simpleheuristics and how less can be more (Brighton& Gigerenzer 2008, Gigerenzer & Brighton2009).The study of ecological rationality is re-lated to the view that human cognition isadapted to its past environment (Cosmides &Tooby 2006), yet it should not be confusedwith the biological concept of adaptation. Amatch between a heuristic and an environmen-
match between a heuristic and an environmen-tal structure does not imply that the heuristicevolved because of that environment (Hutchin-son & Gigerenzer 2005). The distinction be-tween ecological and logical rationality is linkedto that between correspondence and coher-ence (Hammond 2007), but it is not identi-cal. If correspondence means achieving a goalin the world rather than cohering to a rule oflogic, correspondence and ecological rational-ity refer to similar goals—although the studyof the latter adds a mathematical analysis ofthe relation between heuristic and environ-ment. If correspondence, however, means thatthe mental representation corresponds to theworld, as in a fairly accurate mental model or inShepard’s (2001) view of the mind as a mirrorreﬂecting the world, then ecological rational-ity is different. A heuristic is functional, not averidical copy of the world.Ecological rationality does not mean that allpeople are perfectly adapted to their environ-
people are perfectly adapted to their environ-ment. As Simon (1992) noted, if that were thecase, one would only need to study the environ-ment to predict behavior; the study of heuristicswould be obsolete.METHODOLOGICALPRINCIPLESFormal models of heuristics are indispensablefor progress, yet remain the exception in psy-chology. Much of the research ﬁrst documentsan error of judgment and thereafter attributesit to a heuristic. In a widely cited experiment,Tversky & Kahneman (1973) reported that cer-tain letters were falsely judged to occur morefrequently in the ﬁrst than the third positionin English words. They attributed this error tothe availability heuristic: Words with a letterin the ﬁrst position come to mind more eas-ily. Note that availability was introduced afterthe fact, without any independent measure ortest. Once the heuristic is formalized, conclu-sions change. Sedlmeier and colleagues (1998)deﬁned and modeled the two most common
deﬁned and modeled the two most commonmeanings of availability—the speed of retrievalof the ﬁrst word and the number of retrievedwords within a constant time period. Neitherversion of the availability heuristic could pre-dict participants’ frequency estimates. Instead,estimated frequencies were best predicted by
words within a constant time period. Neitherversion of the availability heuristic could pre-dict participants’ frequency estimates. Instead,estimated frequencies were best predicted byactual frequencies, consistent with the classi-cal ﬁndings by Attneave (1953). Formal modelsprotect against the seductive power of generallabels.458 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43We are concerned about the replacementof formal models by general labels in partsof psychology. For instance, Tversky’s (1977)seminal model of similarity makes testablepredictions (e.g., the asymmetry of similarity),whereas the widely cited label “representative-ness” can predict little but is so ﬂexible that itis consistent with many judgments, includingopposite intuitions (Ayton & Fischer 2004).Similarly, research on the adaptive decisionmaker (Payne et al. 1993) and the adaptive tool-box (Gigerenzer et al. 1999) has studied formalmodels of heuristics, which have been ignoredin two-system theories of reasoning in favor ofa “System 1” (Evans 2008). The problem withtwo-system theories “is the lack of any predic-tive power and the tendency to employ them asan after-the-fact explanation” (Keren & Schul2009, p. 544). Moving backward from existingmodels to labels is a rare event in science, which
typically proceeds in the opposite direction.The study of formal models entails fourmethodological principles.Comparative Versus Singular TestsAll models are wrong. But some predict betterthan others and lead to novel questions. There-fore, tests of cognitive strategies need to becomparative, that is, test several models. Thisdiffers from the widespread practice of null hy-pothesis testing, where only one model (thenull) is speciﬁed.Test of Individuals VersusGroup MeansNumerous studies have documented system-atic individual differences in the use of heuris-tics (e.g., Lee & Cummins 2004, Nosofsky &Bergert 2007), including in old age (Mata et al.2007). In the presence of individual differences,tests of group mean differences can be highlymisleading (see Pachur et al. 2008).Testing the Adaptive Versus UniversalUse of HeuristicsResearch has shifted from asking whether
Research has shifted from asking whetherpeople use one heuristic in all situations toasking whether heuristics are applied in situa-tions where these are ecologically rational. Forinstance, Br ¨oder began by asking whether allpeople use the take-the-best heuristic all thetime, but soon asked whether people rely ontake-the-best in situations where it is ecolog-ically rational, for instance, when cue validi-ties are highly skewed (Br ¨oder & Schiffer 2003,2006).Prediction Versus FittingPrediction takes place when the data have notyet been observed and a model with ﬁxed pa-rameter values is used to predict them; ﬁttingtakes place when the data have already been ob-served and the parameters of a model are cho-sen so that they maximize the ﬁt (such as R2).In general, the more free parameters a modelhas, the better the ﬁt, but this does not hold forpredictions. In a large world where parameters
predictions. In a large world where parametersneed to be estimated from small or unreliablesamples, the function between predictive accu-racy and the ﬂexibility of a model (e.g., num-ber of free parameters) is typically inversely U-shaped. Both too few and too many parameterscan hurt performance (Pitt et al. 2002). Com-peting models of strategies should be tested fortheir predictive ability, not their ability to ﬁtalready known data.In the next sections, we review four classesof heuristics. The ﬁrst class exploits recognitionmemory, the second relies on one good reasononly (and ignores all other reasons), the thirdweights all cues or alternatives equally, and thefourth relies on social information. As men-tioned in the introduction, formal models ofheuristics allow asking two questions: whetherthey can describe decisions, and whether theycan prescribe how to make better decisionsthan, say, a complex statistical method. The
than, say, a complex statistical method. Theprescriptive question is particularly relevant fororganizations, from business to health care.Organizations seem ideally suited to the appli-cation of heuristics because of the inherent un-certainty and the pressure to act quickly. Onemight therefore presume that plenty of studieshave investigated fast-and-frugal heuristics in
cation of heuristics because of the inherent un-certainty and the pressure to act quickly. Onemight therefore presume that plenty of studieshave investigated fast-and-frugal heuristics inwww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 459
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43organizations. Not so, as Hodgkinson & Healey(2008) pointed out. Our working hypothesisis that heuristic decision making in individu-als and organizations can be modeled by thesame cognitive building blocks: rules of search,stopping, and decision.RECOGNITION-BASEDDECISION MAKINGThe recognition memory literature indicatesthat a sense of recognition (often called famil-iarity) appears in consciousness earlier than rec-ollection (Ratcliff & McKoon 1989). The ﬁrstclass of heuristics exploits this core capacity.Recognition HeuristicThe goal is to make inferences about a crite-rion that is not directly accessible to the de-cision maker, based on recognition retrievedfrom memory. This is possible in an environ-ment (reference class) Rwhere the recognitionof alternatives a,b∈Rpositively correlates withtheir criterion values. For two alternatives, theheuristic is deﬁned as (Goldstein & Gigerenzer2002):
2002):Recognition heuristic: If one of two alterna-tives is recognized and the other is not, theninfer that the recognized alternative has thehigher value with respect to the criterion.The higher the recognition validity αfor agiven criterion, the more ecologically rationalit is to rely on this heuristic and the more likelypeople will rely on it. For each individual, αcanbe computed byα=C/(C+W),where Cis the number of correct inferences therecognition heuristic would make, computedacross all pairs in which one alternative is recog-nized and the other is not, and Wis the numberof wrong inferences.A number of studies addressed the ques-tion of whether people rely on the recognitionheuristic in an ecologically rational way. For in-stance, name recognition of Swiss cities is a validpredictor of their population (α =0.86) butnot their distance from the center of Switzer-land (α =0.51). Pohl (2006) reported that 89%of inferences accorded with the model in judg-
of inferences accorded with the model in judg-ments of population, compared to only 54%in judgments of the distance. More generally,there is a positive correlation of r=0.64 be-tween the recognition validity and the propor-tion of judgments consistent with the recogni-tion heuristic across 11 studies (Pachur et al.2011). Similarly, old and young people alikeadjust their reliance on the recognition heuris-tic between environments with high versus lowrecognition validities, even though old peoplehave poorer recognition memory (Pachur et al.2009).The recognition heuristic is a model thatrelies on recognition only. This leads to thetestable prediction that people who rely on itwill ignore strong, contradicting cues (so-callednoncompensatory inferences). Several studiesthat taught participants between one and threecontradicting cues, typically of higher validitythanα(Newell & Fernandez 2006; Pachur et al.2008; Richter & Sp ¨ath 2006, experiment 3), re-
2008; Richter & Sp ¨ath 2006, experiment 3), re-ported that mean accordance rates decreased. Areanalysis of these studies at an individual level,however, showed that typically about half of theparticipants consistently followed the recog-nition heuristic in every single trial, even inthe presence of up to three contradicting cues(Pachur et al. 2008).The model of the recognition heuristic doesnot distinguish between pairs where the modelleads to a correct inference and pairs where itleads to a wrong inference. However, the meanaccordance rates were 90% and 74%, respec-tively (Pohl 2006, Hilbig & Pohl 2008). To-gether with the effect of contradicting cues, thisresult indicated that some people did not followthe recognition heuristic, although the overallaccordance rates remain high. Various authorsconcluded that people relied on a compensatorystrategy, such as weighting and adding of allcues (e.g., Hilbig & Pohl 2008, Oppenheimer2003). None of the studies above, however,
2003). None of the studies above, however,460 Gigerenzer ·GaissmaierRecognition-baseddecisions:  a class of
cues (e.g., Hilbig & Pohl 2008, Oppenheimer2003). None of the studies above, however,460 Gigerenzer ·GaissmaierRecognition-baseddecisions:  a class of heuristics that basesjudgments on recog-nition information only,ignoring other cues(e.g., recognition andfluency heuristic) ErrataErrata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43formulated and tested a compensatory strategyagainst the recognition heuristic, leaving thestrategies that participants relied on unknown.One study since tested ﬁve compensatory mod-els and found that none could predict judgmentsbetter than the simple model of the recognitionheuristic (Marewski et al. 2010).The recognition heuristic model also makesanother bold prediction:Ifα>β,a n d α,βare independent of n,then a less-is-more effect will be observed.Here, βis the knowledge validity, measuredasC/(C+W) for all pairs in which both al-ternatives are recognized, and nis the num-ber of alternatives an individual recognizes. Aless-is-more effect means that the function be-tween accuracy and nis inversely U-shapedrather than monotonically increasing. Somestudies reported less-is-more effects empiricallyamong two, three, or four alternatives (Froschet al. 2007, Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2002) and
et al. 2007, Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2002) andin group decisions (Reimer & Katsikopoulos2004), whereas others failed to do so (Pachur& Biele 2007, Pohl 2006), possibly because theeffect is predicted to be small [see Katsikopoulos(2010) for an excellent analysis of the evidence].Using a signal detection analysis, Pleskac (2007)showed how the less-is-more effect depends onthe false alarms and miss rates in the recogni-tion judgments.Dougherty et al. (2008) criticized the modelof the recognition heuristic for treating recog-nition as binary input (threshold model) ratherthan continuously. In contrast, Br ¨oder &Sch¨utz (2009) argued that the widespread cri-tique of threshold models is largely invalid. Ina reanalysis of 59 published studies, they con-cluded that threshold models in fact ﬁt the databetter in about half of the cases.Predicting Wimbledon. Although much ofthe work has addressed the descriptive ques-tion of what proportion of people rely on the
tion of what proportion of people rely on theheuristic when it is ecologically rational, theprescriptive question is how well the heuristiccan compete with well-established forecastinginstruments (Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2009).For instance, Serwe & Frings (2006) reportedthat collective recognition of amateur play-ers (who knew only half of the contestants)turned out to be a better predictor of the 2004Wimbledon tennis match outcomes (72% cor-rect) than did the Association of Tennis Pro-fessionals (ATP) Entry Ranking (66%), ATPChampions Race (68%), and the seeding ofthe Wimbledon experts (69%). Scheibehenne&B r ¨oder (2007) found the same surprising re-sult for Wimbledon 2006.Predicting elections. Gaissmaier &Marewski (2010) put the recognition heuristicto a test in predicting federal and state electionsin Germany. Surprisingly, forecasts based onname recognition were almost as accurate as inter-viewing voters about their voting intentions.
viewing voters about their voting intentions.This particularly held true when predictingthe success of small parties, for which no pollsare usually available because those polls wouldrequire huge samples. In contrast to surveys ofvoting intentions, recognition-based forecastscan be computed from small, “lousy” samples.Investment. In three studies on predictingthe stock market, Ortmann et al. (2008) re-ported that recognition-based portfolios (theset of most-recognized options), on average,outperformed managed funds such as the Fi-delity Growth Fund, the market (Dow or Dax),chance portfolios, and stock experts. In con-trast, Boyd (2001) found no such advantagewhen he used college students’ recognition ofstocks rather than that of the general public. It isimperative to understand why and under whatconditions this simple heuristic can survive inﬁnancial markets without making a systematicmarket analysis. This remains an open question.
market analysis. This remains an open question.Consumer choice. The recognition heuris-tic could be a ﬁrst step in consideration setformation (Marewski et al. 2010), as it allowsthe choice set to be quickly reduced. This ideais consistent with research that suggests that
tic could be a ﬁrst step in consideration setformation (Marewski et al. 2010), as it allowsthe choice set to be quickly reduced. This ideais consistent with research that suggests thatpriming a familiar brand increases the probabil-ity that it will be considered for purchase (e.g.,Coates et al. 2004). Brand recognition can beeven more important than attributes that are awww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 461Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43more direct reﬂection of quality. For instance,in a blind test, most people preferred a jar ofhigh-quality peanut butter to two alternativejars of low-quality peanut butter. Yet when afamiliar brand label was attached to one of thelow-quality jars, the preferences changed. Most(73%) now preferred the jar with the label theyrecognized, and only 20% preferred the unla-beled jar with the high-quality peanut butter(Hoyer & Brown 1990). Brand recognition maywell dominate the taste cues, or the taste cuesthemselves might even be changed by brandrecognition—people “taste” the brand name.Fluency HeuristicThe recognition heuristic is mute about theunderlying recognition process, just as Bayes’rule is mute about source of prior probabilities.Dougherty et al. (2008) argued that it needs tobe embedded in a theory of the recognition pro-cess. Schooler & Hertwig (2005) implementedthe heuristic based on the ACT-R (Adaptive
Control of Thought-Rational) model of mem-ory, which showed how forgetting—a processoften seen as nuisance and handicap—can befunctional in the context of inference, gener-ating less-is-more effects. In this same work,the ﬂuency heuristic was formulated for situ-ations when both alternatives are recognized,that is, when the recognition heuristic cannot beapplied:Fluency heuristic: If both alternatives are rec-ognized but one is recognized faster, then inferthat this alternative has the higher value withrespect to the criterion.The ﬂuency heuristic builds on earlier workon ﬂuency ( Jacoby & Dallas 1981). For in-stance, ﬂuent processing that stems from previ-ous exposure can increase the perceived truthof repeated assertions (Hertwig et al. 1997)and the perceived fame of names ( Jacoby et al.1989), and it is related to the mere exposureeffect (Zajonc 1968). People’s sense of ﬂuencyhas been reported to predict the performance
has been reported to predict the performanceof stocks (Alter & Oppenheimer 2006).By formalizing the ﬂuency heuristic,Schooler & Hertwig (2005) clearly deﬁned thedifference between the recognition and ﬂuencyheuristics and contributed to the progress inreplacing verbal labels with computationalmodels. The ﬂuency heuristic is ecologicallyrational if the speed of recognition is correlatedwith the criterion, that is, the ﬂuency validity>0.5. Hertwig et al. (2008) reported that thevalidity of ﬂuency for predicting variables suchas sales ﬁgures and wealth was always lowerthan recognition validity, although alwaysabove chance. Subsequently, they showedthat people can accurately tell the differencebetween two recognition latencies if thedifference exceeded 100 ms, and that acrossthree environments, the mean proportions ofinferences consistent with the ﬂuency heuristicwere 74%, 63%, and 68%, respectively.Accordance rates were as high as 82% when
differences in recognition latencies were large.Deriving the ﬂuency heuristic’s predictionfor individual people and individual items isa strong test. Yet it is not how the impactof ﬂuency is commonly tested in social andcognitive psychology, where researchers tendto manipulate ﬂuency experimentally andobserve the consequences.Fluency also plays a role when alternativesare not given (as in a two-alternative choice) butneed to be generated from memory. Johnson &Raab (2003) proposed a variant of the ﬂuencyheuristic when alternatives are sequentially re-trieved rather than simultaneously perceived:Take-the-ﬁrst heuristic: Choose the ﬁrst al-ternative that comes to mind.Johnson & Raab (2003) showed experiencedhandball players video sequences from a pro-fessional game and asked what they would havedone—e.g., pass the ball to the player at theleft or take a shot. On average, the ﬁrst op-tion that came to mind was better than later
tion that came to mind was better than lateroptions and when more time was given to in-spect the situation. This result was replicatedfor basketball players (Hepler 2008). Klein’s(2004) recognition-primed decision model for
options and when more time was given to in-spect the situation. This result was replicatedfor basketball players (Hepler 2008). Klein’s(2004) recognition-primed decision model for462 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43expertise appears to be closely related to thetake-the-ﬁrst heuristic.Neural Basis of Recognitionand EvaluationAlthough a number of studies have shown thatpeople do not automatically use the recogni-tion heuristic when it can be applied, it is lessclear how this evaluation process can be mod-eled. A functional magnetic resonance imag-ing study tested whether the two processes,recognition and evaluation, can be separated ona neural basis (Volz et al. 2006). Participantswere given two tasks: The ﬁrst involved only arecognition judgment (“Have you ever heard ofModena? Milan?”), while the second involvedan inference in which participants could relyon the recognition heuristic (“Which city hasthe larger population: Milan or Modena?”). Formere recognition judgments, activation in theprecuneus, an area that is known from inde-pendent studies to respond to recognition con-ﬁdence (Yonelinas et al. 2005), was reported.
ﬁdence (Yonelinas et al. 2005), was reported.In the inference task, precuneus activation wasalso observed, as predicted, and activation wasdetected in the anterior frontomedian cortex(aFMC), which has been linked in earlier stud-ies to evaluative judgments and self-referentialprocessing. The aFMC activation could repre-sent the neural basis of this evaluation of eco-logical rationality. Furthermore, the neural ev-idence suggests that the recognition heuristicmay be relied upon by default, consistent withthe ﬁnding that response times were consid-erably faster when participants’ inferences fol-lowed the recognition heuristic than when theydid not (Pachur & Hertwig 2006, Volz et al.2006).ONE-REASON DECISIONMAKINGWhereas the recognition and ﬂuency heuris-tics base decisions on recognition information,other heuristics rely on recall. One class looksfor only one “clever” cue and bases its decisionon that cue alone. The hiatus heuristic is oneOne-reason
decisions: a class ofheuristics that basesjudgments on onegood reason only,ignoring other cues(e.g., take-the-best andhiatus heuristic)example. A second class involves sequentialsearch through cues, and it may search formore than one cue but also bases its deci-sion on only one. Examples include lexico-graphic rules (Fishburn 1974, Luce 1956) andelimination-by-aspect (Tversky 1972). Theseheuristics were originally developed for prefer-ences; here, we focus on models of inferences.One-Clever-Cue HeuristicsMany animal species appear to rely on a sin-gle “clever” cue for locating food, nest sites, ormates. For instance, in order to pursue a prey ora mate, bats, birds, and ﬁsh do not compute tra-jectories in three-dimensional space, but sim-ply maintain a constant optical angle betweentheir target and themselves—a strategy calledthe gaze heuristic (Gigerenzer 2007, Shafferet al. 2004). In order to catch a ﬂy ball, baseballoutﬁelders and cricket players rely on the same
outﬁelders and cricket players rely on the samekind of heuristics rather than trying to computethe ball’s trajectory (McLeod & Dienes 1996).Similarly, to choose a mate, a peahen investi-gates only three or four of the peacocks dis-playing in a lek and chooses the one with thelargest number of eyespots (Petrie & Halliday1994).When are one-clever-cue heuristics ecolog-ically rational? The answer is not entirely clearat this point in time, but candidates are envi-ronments where the variability of cue weightsand redundancy is moderate to high and sam-ple size is small (see Hogarth & Karelaia 2007,Katsikopoulos et al. 2010, McGrath 2008).Geographic proﬁling. The task of geographicproﬁling is to predict where a serial criminal ismost likely to live given the sites of the crimes.Typically, geographical proﬁling is performedby sophisticated statistical software programs,such as CrimeStat, that calculate a probabil-ity distribution across possible locations. Snook
and colleagues (2005) were among the ﬁrst tochallenge the “complexity equals accuracy” as-sumptions in the ﬁeld of proﬁling. They tested
and colleagues (2005) were among the ﬁrst tochallenge the “complexity equals accuracy” as-sumptions in the ﬁeld of proﬁling. They testedthe circle heuristic, which predicts the crim-inal’s most likely location in the center of awww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 463
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43circle drawn through the two most distant sitesof crime. It relies on one cue only, the largestdistance. In a comparison with 10 other proﬁl-ing strategies, the heuristic predicted the loca-tions best. Complex proﬁling strategies appearto become more accurate if the number of crimelocations known is nine or higher. Snook et al.(2004) taught two heuristics (including the cir-cle heuristic) to laypeople in criminology andreported that after a single session, laypeoplebecame about as accurate in predicting offenderlocations as the CrimeStat algorithm. These re-sults led to a heated debate with proponentsof optimization algorithms in proﬁling (e.g.,Rossmo 2005).Take-the-BestThe take-the-best heuristic is a model of howpeople infer which of two alternatives has ahigher value on a criterion, based on binarycue values retrieved from memory. For conve-nience, the cue value that signals a higher cri-
terion value is 1, and the other cue value is 0.Take-the-best consists of three building blocks:1. Search rule: Search through cues in orderof their validity.2. Stopping rule: Stop on ﬁnding the ﬁrstcue that discriminates between the alter-natives (i.e., cue values are 1 and 0).3. Decision rule: Infer that the alternativewith the positive cue value (1) has thehigher criterion value.Take-the-best simpliﬁes decision making bystopping after the ﬁrst cue and ordering cuesunconditionally according to validity v,w h i c his given by:v=C/(C+W),where Cis the number of correct inferenceswhen a cue discriminates, and Wis the num-ber of wrong inferences. Alternative searchrules such as success (Martignon & Hoffrage2002, Newell et al. 2004) and discrimination(Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1996) have been in-vestigated. Todd & Dieckmann (2005) studied
vestigated. Todd & Dieckmann (2005) studiedalternative simple principles for learning cueorders. Karelaia (2006) showed that a “conﬁr-matory” stopping rule—stop after two cues arefound that point to the same alternative—leadsto remarkably robust results across varying cueorders, which is ecologically rational in situ-ations where the decision maker knows littleabout the validity of the cues.A striking discovery was that take-the-best can predict more accurately than linearmultiple regression models (Czerlinski et al.1999). It can even predict more accurately thancomplex nonlinear strategies. Figure 1 showsthe predictive accuracy of an exemplar-basedmodel (nearest-neighbor classiﬁer), Quinlan’sdecision-tree induction algorithm C4.5, andclassiﬁcation and regression trees (CARTs),compared to take-the-best. In both tasks,and across most sample sizes, take-the-bestachieves higher predictive accuracy than eachof the three complex strategies (Brighton &
Gigerenzer 2011). This is not to say that re-lying on one good reason is always better, butthe result in Figure 1 is the most frequently ob-tained in a total of 20 environments. Note thatCARTs have been designed to be robust againstestimation error (variance) due to small samplesand other factors. These complex algorithmscan mimic the outcome of take-the-best in thesense that they are models that include take-the-best as a special case. Yet, although theirgreater ﬂexibility leads to better ﬁt of knowndata, more general models do not necessarilylead to better predictions of unknown data.As noted above, take-the-best orders cuesunconditionally, unlike the other models inFigure 1. Ordering cues conditionally, thatis, taking their interdependencies into account,may seem a more rational strategy. In fact, in asmall world where all cue validities are perfectlyknown, conditional validity leads to higher (orat least equal) accuracy than unconditional va-
at least equal) accuracy than unconditional va-lidity (Schmitt & Martignon 2006). However,in large worlds as in Figure 1,w h e r et h ecue order needs to be estimated from samples,this no longer holds. If one makes take-the-best more sophisticated by ordering cues con-ditionally (greedy take-the-best), the predic-
cue order needs to be estimated from samples,this no longer holds. If one makes take-the-best more sophisticated by ordering cues con-ditionally (greedy take-the-best), the predic-tive accuracy drops to the level of the complex464 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43A 0 2 04 06 08 050 55 60 65 70 75City PopulationsSample size, nMean predictive accuracyTake-the-bestNearest NeighborC45CARTGreedy TTBB 0 1 02 03 04 05 06 050 55 60 65 70 75Mammal LifespansSample size, nMean predictive accuracyTake-the-bestNearest NeighborC45CARTGreedy TTBFigure 1A competition between take-the-best and three well-known learning algorithms [nearest neighbor classiﬁer, Quinlan’s decision-treeinduction algorithm C4.5, and classiﬁcation and regression tree (CART)], also including a greedy version of take-the-best (TTB) thatorders cues by conditional validity instead of unconditional validity. Mean predictive accuracy in cross-validation is plotted as a functionof the sample size of the training set. The two tasks were deciding ( A) which of two German cities has more inhabitants, and ( B) whichof two mammal species lives longer on average (Brighton & Gigerenzer 2011).strategies (Figure 1). This suggests that the
strategies (Figure 1). This suggests that thepredictive power of take-the-best stems mostlyfrom the search rule rather than the stoppingrule.The ecological rationality of take-the-besthas been studied in three different situations:(a) when the cue order is known (Katsikopoulos& Martignon 2006, Martignon & Hoffrage2002), (b) when error is introduced in thatknowledge (Hogarth & Karelaia 2007), and(c) when the order of cues needs to be inferredfrom samples (Brighton 2006, Gigerenzer &Brighton 2009). Taken together, these resultssuggest two structures of environments thattake-the-best can exploit: moderate to high cueredundancy and moderate to high variabilityin cue weights.Many experimental studies asked thedescriptive question whether take-the-bestcanpredict people’s inferences (e.g., Br ¨oder 2003,Br¨oder & Gaissmaier 2007, Br ¨oder & Schiffer2006, Newell & Shanks 2003, Rieskamp &Hoffrage 1999). Dieckmann & Rieskamp
(2007) ﬁrst showed that in environmentswith high redundancy, take-the-best is asaccurate as and more frugal than na ¨ıve Bayes(a strategy that integrates all cues), and thenexperimentally demonstrated that in high-redundancy environments, take-the-best pre-dicted participants’ judgments best, whereas inlow-redundancy environments, compensatorystrategies predicted best, indicating adaptivestrategy selection. Rieskamp & Otto (2006)showed that in an environment with high vari-ability of cue validities, judgments consistentwith take-the-best increased over experimentaltrials from 28% to 71%, whereas in an envi-ronment with low variability, they decreased to12%. Br ¨oder (2003) reported similar selectionof take-the-best dependent on the variabilityor cue validities. In several experiments,individuals classiﬁed as take-the-best users fortasks where the heuristic is ecologically rationalshowed higher IQs than those who were classi-
showed higher IQs than those who were classi-ﬁed as compensatory decision makers, suggest-ing that cognitive capacity as measured by IQ “isnot consumed by strategy execution, but ratherby strategy selection” (Br ¨oder & Newell 2008,p. 209).www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 465Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Bergert & Nosofsky (2007) formulateda stochastic version of take-the-best, testedit against a weighted additive model at theindividual level, and concluded that the vastmajority of participants adopted the take-the-best heuristic. Comparing take-the-best withboth weighted additive and exemplar modelsof categorization, Nosofsky & Bergert (2007)found that most participants did not use anexemplar-based strategy but instead followedthe response time predictions of take-the-best.Br¨oder & Gaissmaier (2007) analyzed ﬁve pub-lished experiments and one new experiment,and reported that in all instances when decisionoutcomes indicated the use of take-the-best,decision times increased monotonically withthe number of cues that had to be searched inmemory, as predicted by take-the-best’s searchand stopping rules. Taken together, these stud-ies indicate systematic individual differences instrategy use and adaptive use of take-the-best.
strategy use and adaptive use of take-the-best.Garc ´ıa-Retamero & Dhami (2009) testedhow policemen, professional burglars, andlaypeople infer which of two residential prop-erties is more likely to be burgled. Both ex-pert groups’ inferences were best modeled bytake-the-best, and laypeople’s inferences by aweighted additive rule. The latter may reﬂectthat laypeople need to explore all the infor-mation, whereas experts know what is relevant,consistent with ﬁndings of the literature on ex-pertise (Ericsson et al. 2007, Reyna & Lloyd2006, Shanteau 1992).Concerns were raised by Juslin & Persson(2002) that take-the-best is not so simple afterall but requires complex computations forordering the cues; Dougherty et al. (2008)and Newell (2005) voiced similar concerns.First, it is true that estimating validity ordercan sometimes be nontrivial, yet it is simplerthan estimating other kinds of weights such
than estimating other kinds of weights suchas regression weights. Second, people estimateorder from samples rather than by calculatingthe “true” order from perfect knowledge aboutthe entire population, as Juslin and Persson as-sumed. Even with minute sample sizes of two toten—resulting in estimated orders that deviatefrom the true order—take-the-best predictedmore accurately than multiple regression whenboth were provided with continuous cue values(Katsikopoulos et al. 2010). Finally, a persondoes not need to learn cue orders individuallybut instead can learn from others, as throughteaching and imitation (Gigerenzer et al. 2008).Consumer choice. How do consumers decidewhich product to buy among an ever-increasingassortment on the Internet or on supermarketshelves? The classical methodology to answerthis question has been conjoint analysis, whichassumes a weighted linear combination of fea-tures or cues. When John Hauser, a propo-
tures or cues. When John Hauser, a propo-nent of conjoint analysis, began to test mod-els of heuristics, he found to his surprise thatsequential heuristics predict consumer choiceswell (Hauser et al. 2009). Examples are deci-sions between computers (Kohli & Jedidi 2007)and smartphones (Yee et al. 2007). In particu-lar, heuristics are important early in the deci-sion process to form a consideration set, whichconsists of eliminating most products from fur-ther consideration. Once the consideration setis formed, consumers evaluate the remainingoptions more carefully (Gaskin et al. 2007; seealso Reisen et al. 2008). Within their considera-tion set of potential suppliers, they then appearto trade off price and reliability to reach theirﬁnal choice.Literature search. How should an organi-zation design a search algorithm for priori-tizing literature searches from the PsycINFOdatabase? Lee and colleagues (2002) engineered
database? Lee and colleagues (2002) engineeredtwo methods for identifying articles relevantto a given topic of interest (e.g., eyewitnesstestimony), one a variant of take-the-best, theother a Bayesian model using all available in-formation. Lee et al. tested both methods onten actual literature searches and measured the
testimony), one a variant of take-the-best, theother a Bayesian model using all available in-formation. Lee et al. tested both methods onten actual literature searches and measured themethods’ performances against effort (i.e., theproportion of the articles read by the user)and accuracy (i.e., proportion of relevant arti-cles found). The variant of take-the-best was asgood as or better than the Bayesian model, par-ticularly in searches in which the proportion ofrelevant articles was small.466 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Fast-and-Frugal TreesOne way to model classiﬁcation is in termsof trees. For instance, Bayes’ rule can be rep-resented as a tree with 2mleaves, where mis the number of binary cues or attributes.Natural frequencies provide such a represen-tation. Yet when the number of cues grows,a Bayesian analysis—with or without natu-ral frequencies—becomes computationally in-tractable or fraught with estimation error be-cause one typically has too few data points forthe thousands of leaves of such a gigantic tree.A fast-and-frugal tree has only m+1 leaves andthus is likely more robust. It has building blockssimilar to take-the-best (Martignon et al. 2003):1. Search rule: Search through cues in a pre-determined order.2. Stopping rule: Stop search as soon as acue leads to an exit.3. Decision rule: Classify the objectaccordingly.Fast-and-frugal trees are used by experts inmany ﬁelds, from  emergency screening to bail de-
many ﬁelds, from  emergency screening to bail de-cisions (see Figure 2). Martignonet al. (2008)testedthe accuracy of fast-and-frugal trees in30 classiﬁcation problems from ﬁelds such asmedicine, sports, and economics. They re-ported that complex benchmark strategies in-cluding logistic regression excelled in data ﬁt-ting, but fast-and-frugal trees were close oridentical to these strategies in their predictiveaccuracy.Emergency medicine. When patients ar-rive at the hospital with severe chest pain,emergency physicians have to decide quicklywhether they suffer from acute ischemic heartdisease and should be assigned to the inten-sive coronary care unit (ICU). In a Michiganhospital, doctors preferred to err on what theybelieved was the safe side by sending about90% of the patients to the ICU, although onlyabout 25% of these actually had a myocardialFigure 2
Figure 2Fast-and-frugal trees for medical and legal decisions. The tree on the left prescribes how emergency physicians can detect acuteischemic heart disease. It only asks up to three yes/no questions, namely whether the patient’s electrocardiogram shows a certainanomaly (“ST segment changes”), whether chest pain is the patient’s primary complaint, and whether there is any other factor (Green& Mehr 1997). The tree on the right describes how magistrates at a London court decided whether to bail a defendant or to reactpunitively by imposing conditions such as curfew or imprisonment. The logic is defensive and “passes the buck.” The tree predicted92% of bail decisions correctly (Dhami 2003). Abbreviations: MI, myocardial infarction; N.A., not applicable; NTG, nitroglycerin;T, T-waves with peaking or inversion.www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 467Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43infarction (Green & Mehr 1997). The resultwas an overly crowded ICU, a decrease in qual-ity of care, an increase in cost, and a risk of seri-ous infection among those who were incorrectlyassigned. Something had to be done. Green& Mehr (1997) tried two solutions: ( a) a lo-gistic regression, the Heart Disease PredictiveInstrument (HDPI), and (b) a fast-and-frugaltree. To use the HDPI, doctors received a chartwith some 50 probabilities, checked the pres-ence and absence of symptoms, and inserted therelevant probabilities into a pocket calculator.The fast-and-frugal tree ignored all probabil-ities and asked only a few yes-or-no questions(Figure 2). Ultimately, the tree was more accu-rate in predicting actual heart attacks than theHDPI: It sent fewer patients who suffered froma heart attack wrongly into a regular bed andalso nearly halved physicians’ high false-alarmrate. Last but not least, the tree was transparent,
easy to memorize, and easy to modify, and wasaccepted by physicians who disliked relying ona logistic regression they barely understood.Easy memorization is an important featureof fast-and-frugal trees, particularly in emer-gency situations. After the terrorist attacks onSeptember 11, 2001, START (Simple Triageand Rapid Treatment; Cook 2001) helpedparamedics to quickly classify victims into twomajor categories: those who needed medicaltreatment immediately and those whose treat-ment could be delayed. A tree with only twocues—age and duration of fever—was devel-oped to decide upon macrolide prescriptionin young children with community-acquiredpneumonia (Fischer et al. 2002). This tree wasslightly less accurate than a scoring systembased on logistic regression (72% versus 75%),but it does not require any expensive technol-ogy and thus can be applied to millions of chil-dren worldwide who would otherwise not haveaccess to healthcare.How to model physicians’ thinking? Tak-
How to model physicians’ thinking? Tak-ing for granted that physicians use heuristicsfor diagnosing patients, the medical commu-nity quickly adopted the heuristics-and-biasesview and has left it mainly unrevised as of today(Croskerry 2009). For instance, Elstein (1999)described heuristics as “mental shortcuts com-monly used in decision making that can lead tofaulty reasoning or conclusions” (p. 791) andblamed them for many errors in clinical rea-soning. Some researchers, however, recognizetheir potential to improve decisions. McDonald(1996), for one, wrote, “admitting the role ofheuristics confers no shame” (p. 56). Rather,the goal should be to formalize and understandheuristics so that their use can be effectivelytaught, which could lead to less practice varia-tion and more efﬁcient medical care. “The nextfrontier will involve fast and frugal heuristics;rules for patients and clinicians alike” (Elwynet al. 2001, p. 358).For diagnosis, which is a form of classiﬁ-
For diagnosis, which is a form of classiﬁ-cation, fast-and-frugal trees potentially modelhow physicians make decisions. For treatmentchoice, all heuristics described above are po-tential models. Both fast-and-frugal trees andother heuristics differ from traditional modelsof medical decision making, such as logisticregression for classiﬁcation and expected utilitymaximization for choice. Dhami & Harries(2001) compared a fast-and-frugal tree(“matching heuristic”) to a linear regressionmodel on general practitioners’ decisionsto prescribe lipid-lowering drugs for a setof hypothetical patients. Both models ﬁttedprescription decisions equally well, but thesimple tree relied on less information. Similarresults were obtained by Smith & Gilhooly(2006) and Backlund et al. (2009). Thesestudies reported only ﬁtting—not predicting—physicians’ judgments, which is a limitation.More direct evidence comes from the routineuse of fast-and-frugal trees by physicians in
use of fast-and-frugal trees by physicians incancer screening and HIV tests.Bail decisions. Heuristics matter in the law inmultiple respects. They play a role in the mak-
use of fast-and-frugal trees by physicians incancer screening and HIV tests.Bail decisions. Heuristics matter in the law inmultiple respects. They play a role in the mak-ing of law (Haidt et al. 2006) as well as in lit-igation (Hastie & Wittenbrink 2006). In bothdomains, there has been debate whether heuris-tics are a problem or a solution (Gigerenzer &Engel 2006).468 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43One of the initial decisions of the legal sys-tem is whether to bail a defendant uncondi-tionally or to react punitively by conditionssuch as curfew or imprisonment. In Englandand Wales, around two million bail decisionsare made every year by benches of two orthree magistrates, 99.9% of whom are mem-bers of the local community without legaltraining. How do they make these decisions?When magistrates were interviewed, they gen-erally responded that they thoroughly exam-ined and weighed all information in a complexway (Dhami & Ayton 2001). However, whenDhami (2003) observed several hundreds of tri-als in two London courts, she found that theaverage time magistrates spent on a case was6 to 10 minutes and that their decisions couldbe predicted better with a fast-and-frugal tree(“matching heuristic”) than with weighting andadding all information ( Figure 2). The logic
of the tree appears to be to “pass the buck,”because it copies the punitive decisions of theprosecution, a previous court, or the police.It violates due process because it ignores rel-evant information about the defendant. In thetwo courts, the fast-and-frugal trees predicted92% and 85% of all decisions correctly (cross-validation), compared to 86% and 73% by aweighted additive model that would correspondto due process and what magistrates respondedin the interviews.TRADE-OFF HEURISTICSUnlike recognition-based and one-reason deci-sions, the third class of heuristics weights cuesor alternatives equally and thus makes trade-offs(compensatory strategies).TallyingWhereas take-the-best ignores cues (but in-cludes a simple form of weighting cues by or-dering them), tallying ignores weights, weight-ing all cues equally. It entails simply countingthe number of cues favoring one alternative incomparison to others.Trade-offs: a class ofheuristics that weights
heuristics that weightsall cues or alternativesequally and thus makestrade-offs (e.g.,tallying and 1/N)1. Search rule: Search through cues in anyorder.2. Stopping rule: Stop search after mout ofa total of Mcues (with 1 <m≤M). If thenumber of positive cues is the same forboth alternatives, search for another cue.If no more cues are found, guess.3. Decision rule: Decide for the alternativethat is favored by more cues.Dawes (1979; Dawes & Corrigan 1974)showed that tallying was about as accurate asmultiple regression and sometimes even better.In a more extensive test across 20 environments,Czerlinski et al. (1999) demonstrated that tal-lying had, on average, a higher predictive accu-racy than multiple regression. The challenge is tofigure out when this is the case. Einhorn& Hogarth(1975) found that unit-weight models were successfulin comparison to multiple regression when the ratio
of alternatives to cues was 10 or smaller, thelinear predictability of the criterion was small(R2≤0.5), and cues were highly redundant.Relatively few studies have identiﬁed condi-tions under which people would use a tally-ing strategy. Interestingly, it seems that morepeople prefer to dispense with particular cues(as in one-reason decision making) than withcue order or weights (Br ¨oder & Schiffer 2003,Rieskamp & Hoffrage 2008; but see Wang2008). One reason for the relatively low preva-lence of tallying could be that these studies usedonly few cues, typically four or ﬁve. Below weprovide two illustrations of the prescriptive useof tallying in institutions (for more, see Astebro& Elhedhli 2006, Graefe & Armstrong 2009,Lichtman 2008, Wang 2008).Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) orsimple bedside rules? There are about2.6 million emergency room visits for dizzi-ness or vertigo in the United States every year
ness or vertigo in the United States every year(Kattah et al. 2009). The challenging task forthe emergency physician is to detect the rarecases where dizziness is due to a dangerousbrainstem or cerebellar stroke. Frontline mis-diagnosis of strokes happens in about 35%
cases where dizziness is due to a dangerousbrainstem or cerebellar stroke. Frontline mis-diagnosis of strokes happens in about 35%of the cases. One solution to this challengecould be technology. Getting an early MRI withwww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 469Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43diffusion-weighted imaging takes 5 to 10 min-utes plus several hours of waiting time, costsmore than $1,000, and is not readily availableeverywhere. However, Kattah et al. (2009) de-veloped a simple bedside eye exam that actu-ally outperforms MRI and takes only about oneminute: It consists of three tests and raises analarm if at least one indicates a stroke. Thissimple tallying rule correctly detected 100% ofthose patients who actually had a stroke (sen-sitivity), whereas an early MRI only detected88%. Out of 25 patients who did not have astroke, the bedside exam raised a false alarm inonly one case (i.e., 4% false positive rate =96%speciﬁcity). Even though the MRI did not raiseany false alarms, the bedside exam seems prefer-able in total, given that misses are more severethan false alarms and that it is faster, cheaper,and universally applicable.Avoiding avalanche accidents. Hikers and
Avoiding avalanche accidents. Hikers andskiers need to know when avalanches could oc-cur. The obvious clues method is a tallyingheuristic that checks how many out of sevencues have been observed en route or on theslope that is evaluated (McCammon & H ¨ageli2007). These cues include whether there hasbeen an avalanche in the past 48 hours andwhether there is liquid water present on thesnow surface as a result of recent sudden warm-ing. When more than three of these cues arepresent on a given slope, the situation shouldbe considered dangerous. With this simple tal-lying strategy, 92% of the historical accidents(where the method would have been applicable)could have been prevented.Mapping ModelHow do people arrive at quantitative estimatesbased on cues? The mapping model assumesthat people tally the number of relevant cueswith an object’s positive values (von Helversen& Rieskamp 2008). The estimate is the mediancriterion value of objects with the same number
criterion value of objects with the same numberof positive cues. The mapping model capturedpeople’s judgment better than a linear regres-sion and an exemplar model when the criterionvalues followed a skewed distribution.Sentencing decision. In the adversarial U.S.legal system, the vast majority of cases are closedby plea bargaining, where the prosecution anddefense negotiate a sentence, which is then rat-iﬁed by a judge. In contrast, in Germany andmany other countries, plea bargaining before acase goes to court is an exception rather than therule. Here, the judge has to determine an appro-priate sentence proportional to the offender’sguilt, within the range of the minimum andmaximum sentence speciﬁed for each offense.The single most important factor inﬂuencingjudges’ decisions is the prosecution’s sentenc-ing recommendation. How should the prose-cution make its recommendation? The German
cution make its recommendation? The Germanpenal code lists over 20 factors to consider. Thelegal literature recommends a three-step strat-egy: Determine ﬁrst all relevant factors and thedirection of their effect on the sentence (aggra-vating or mitigating), then weight these by theirimportance, and add them up to determine thesentence. Von Helversen & Rieskamp (2009)analyzed trial records of sentencing and testedﬁve models of how sentencing decisions havebeen made in theft, fraud, and forgery, includ-ing a linear regression model. The best predic-tions of actual sentences were obtained by themapping model, a heuristic model of quantita-tive estimation, based on a simple tallying ruledescribed above. As von Helversen & Rieskamp(2009) pointed out, this result “provides furtherevidence that legal decision makers rely heav-ily on simple decision heuristics ...and suggeststhat eliciting these employed heuristics is an im-portant step in understanding and improving
legal decision making” (pp. 389–390).1/NRuleAnother variant of the equal weighting princi-ple is the 1/N rule, which is a simple heuristicfor the allocation of resources (time, money) toNalternatives:1/Nrule: Allocate resources equally to each ofNalternatives.
for the allocation of resources (time, money) toNalternatives:1/Nrule: Allocate resources equally to each ofNalternatives.This rule is also known as the equalityheuristic (Messick 1993). Sharing an amount470 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43of money equally is the modal response in theone-shot ultimatum game for adults and alsothe most frequent split in children’s group de-cisions, contrary to the predictions of game the-ory (Takezawa et al. 2006).Investment. When deciding how to allocateﬁnancial resources among Noptions, some in-dividuals rely on the 1/N rule (Benartzi &Thaler 2001), which allocates ﬁnancial re-sources equally across all alternatives. The 1/Nrule was compared to 14 optimizing mod-els, including a Nobel Prize–winning model,Markowitz’s mean-variance portfolio, in seveninvestment problems (DeMiguel et al. 2009).To estimate the models’ parameters, each opti-mizing strategy received 10 years of stock dataand then had to predict the next month’s per-formance on this basis. The same procedure wasrepeated, with a moving window, for the nextmonth, and so forth, until no data were left.Note that 1/N does not have any free parame-
Note that 1/N does not have any free parame-ters that need to be estimated. Nevertheless, itcame out ﬁrst on certainty equivalent returns,second on turnover, and ﬁfth on the Sharpe ra-tio. None of the complex optimizing modelscould consistently beat it.SOCIAL INTELLIGENCEAccording to the social intelligence hypothesis,also called the Machiavellian intelligence hy-pothesis (Whiten & Byrne 1997), highly so-cial species such as humans and other socialprimates should be intellectually superior toless social ones because the social environ-ment is more complex, less predictable, andmore intellectually challenging. In Humphrey’s(1976/1988) words, social primates “must beable to calculate the consequences of theirown behavior, to calculate the likely behavioursof others, to calculate the balance of advan-tage and loss” (p. 19). For the sake of argu-ment, let us assume that the social world isindeed more complex and unpredictable than
the nonsocial one. Would social intelligencetherefore require more complex cognition? Notnecessarily, according to the following two hy-potheses (Hertwig & Herzog 2009):1. Social intelligence does not require com-plex mental calculation; it also works withheuristics.2. The same heuristics that underlie nonso-cial decision making also apply to socialdecisions (but not vice versa).The justiﬁcation for hypothesis 1 is the sameas for complex nonsocial problems: The moreunpredictable a situation is, the more infor-mation needs to be ignored to predict the fu-ture. One reason for hypothesis 2 is that thedistinction between social and nonsocial is acommon oversimpliﬁcation in the ﬁrst place.Nevertheless, for the purpose of this review,we distinguish two meanings of social: whetherthe input into a strategy is social informa-tion (e.g., when imitating the behavior of apeer) or not (e.g., features of digital cameras),
peer) or not (e.g., features of digital cameras),and whether the task is a game against na-ture or a social game involving other humans(Hertwig et al. 2011). The goals of social intel-ligence go beyond accuracy, frugality, and mak-ing fast decisions. They include transparency,group loyalty, and accountability (Lerner &Tetlock 1999). Consistent with hypothesis 2,heuristics from all three classes discussed abovehave been investigated in social situations.Below are a few examples.Recognition-Based DecisionsReimer & Katsikopoulos (2004) ﬁrst showedanalytically that less-is-more effects are largerin group decisions than in individual decisionsand subsequently demonstrated this effect em-pirically in an experiment in which anotherfascinating phenomenon emerged. Consider agroup of three in which one member recog-nized only city awhile the other two membersrecognized both cities aand band individuallychose bas the larger one. The majority rule
chose bas the larger one. The majority rulepredicts that bwould always be selected, yetin 59% of the cases, the ﬁnal group decisionwas a, following the one who had not heardofb.www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 471
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43One-Reason Decision MakingAs mentioned above, the behavior of most peo-ple in the one-shot ultimatum game is in-consistent with the classical economic predic-tions. Most researchers nevertheless retainedthe utility-maximizing framework and addedfree parameters for other-regarding disposi-tions (e.g., Fehr & Schmidt 1999). In contrast,Rubinstein (2003) called for a radical change,“to open the black box of decision making, andcome up with some completely new and freshmodeling devices” (p. 1215). Fischbacher andcolleagues (2011) did so and modeled the in-dividual differences observed in the ultimatumgame by fast-and-frugal trees of different sizes,involving one to four cues. The number of cuespredicted how long decisions took.Trade-Off HeuristicsMany parents try to divide their time every daybetween their Nchildren equally by 1/ N.If par-ents have only two children, 1/N will attain the
ents have only two children, 1/N will attain thelong-term goal of providing each child with asmuch time as the other. But if there are three ormore children (excepting multiple births), onlythe ﬁrst-born and last-born have exclusive timewith the parents, while the middle-borns haveto share with their siblings throughout theirchildhood and thus end up receiving less time intotal. The simple 1/ Nrule predicts a complexpattern of care time for each child, a patternobserved in a survey of 1,296 families (Hertwiget al. 2002). This result illustrates that a heuris-tic and its goal (fair division during childhood)are not the same—the environment has the lastword. The majority rule is a second exampleof a tallying rule applied to group decisions; italso deﬁnes democratic voting systems (Hastie& Kameda 2005).Social HeuristicsAlthough the heuristics discussed so far can befed with both social and nonsocial information,there are genuinely social heuristics designed
exclusively for social information. Examplesinclude imitation heuristics, tit-for-tat, thesocial-circle heuristic, and averaging the judg-ments of others to exploit the “wisdom ofcrowds” (Hertwig & Herzog 2009). Imitate-the-successful, for instance, speeds up learn-ing of cue orders and can ﬁnd orders thatexcel take-the-best’s validity order (Garcia-Retamero et al. 2009). Social heuristics proveparticularly helpful in situations in which theactor has little knowledge. The classic exampleis that of Francis Galton, who visited a livestockfair where villagers estimated the weight of anox and was surprised to ﬁnd that their medianand mean average estimates were only 9 and1 pounds, respectively, off the actual weight of1198 pounds (Galton 1907).A peculiar social rule is the default heuristic:“If there is a default, do nothing about it.”Defaults are set by institutions and act as im-plicit recommendations ( Johnson & Goldstein2003). Every year, an estimated 5,000
2003). Every year, an estimated 5,000Americans and 1,000 Germans die while wait-ing for a suitable organ donor. Although mostcitizens profess that they approve of organdonation, relatively few sign a donor card: onlyabout 28% and 12% in the United States andGermany, respectively. In contrast, 99.9% ofthe French and Austrians are potential donors.These striking differences can be explainedby the default heuristic. In explicit-consentsocieties such as Germany, the law prescribesthat nobody is a donor unless one opts in. Inpresumed-consent societies such as France, thedefault is that everyone is a donor unless oneopts out. Although most people appear to fol-low the same heuristic, the result is drasticallydifferent because the legal environment differs.Very few studies use large-scale demo-graphic data to test social heuristics. For in-stance, marriage patterns are studied by demog-raphers without much attention to the social
raphers without much attention to the socialheuristics that generate these, and vice versa.Todd and colleagues (2005) had the ingeniousmethodological insight that the aggregate de-
raphers without much attention to the socialheuristics that generate these, and vice versa.Todd and colleagues (2005) had the ingeniousmethodological insight that the aggregate de-mographic data rule out certain heuristics andcan be used to test various satisﬁcing strategiesfor mate choice.472 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Moral BehaviorAlthough moral behavior has long been at-tributed to conscious reﬂection, Haidt &Bjorklund (2008) argued that reasons are typi-cally used to justify behavior after the fact andthat the causes are mostly unconscious or in-tuitive. Gigerenzer (2010) proposed that theseunconscious causes are often social heuristics,such as imitating the behavior of peers in or-der to gain acceptance by the group. Note thatone and the same social heuristic can lead to be-havior evaluated as moral or immoral, such aswhen imitating benevolent or malevolent peerbehavior. This perspective on moral behavior isdifferent from assuming that people have inter-nalized speciﬁc moral rules such as don’t stealand don’t kill.Moral behavior has been related to “sacredvalues” (Fiske & Tetlock 1997). If one under-stands sacred values as top cues in lexicographic
heuristics, decisions between alternatives wherea sacred value conﬂicts with a secular value (e.g.,life versus money) should be faster and eas-ier than when two sacred values (e.g., one lifeversus another) conﬂict with each other, as re-ported by Hanselmann & Tanner (2008). Baron& Ritov (2009) argued that, from a utilitarianperspective, this form of one-reason decisionmaking can cause great problems for policy de-cisions as it could prevent trade-offs for thegreater good. In the same vein, Sunstein (2005)asserted that moral heuristics can lead to greaterror, but added that we would not necessarily“be better off without them. On the contrary,such heuristics might well produce better re-sults, from the moral point of view, than the fea-sible alternatives” (p. 535). Cosmides & Tooby(2006) located the origins of moral heuristics inour ancestral world of tiny bands of individu-als. An example of a moral heuristic is an intu-
als. An example of a moral heuristic is an intu-itive search rule that looks for information thatcould reveal whether one has been cheated ina social contract. This heuristic correctly pre-dicts when information search in the Wasonselection task contradicts propositional logic(Gigerenzer 2000).CONCLUSIONSWe began this review with the observation thatthe three major tools for modeling decisionmaking—logic, statistics, and heuristics—havenot been treated equally, with each suited to aparticular kind of problem. Instead, in psychol-ogy, heuristics became associated with errorsand contrasted with logical and statistical rulesthat were believed to deﬁne rational thinking inall situations. Yet this view has been questionedfor uncertain, large worlds where the assump-tions of rational models are not met. We re-viewed studies on decisions by individuals andinstitutions, including business, medical, andlegal decision making, that show that heuristics
legal decision making, that show that heuristicscan often be more accurate than complex “ratio-nal” strategies. This puts heuristic on a par withstatistical methods and emphasizes a new eco-logical question: In what environment does agiven strategy (heuristic or otherwise) succeed?This insight adds a prescriptive research pro-gram to that of the existing descriptive researchprogram on heuristics. Pioneers such as Dawes,Hogarth, and Makridakis demonstrated yearsago that simple forecasting methods can oftenpredict better than standard statistical proce-dures; as James March, one of the most inﬂuen-tial researchers in organizational decision mak-ing, put it more than 30 years ago, “If behaviorthat apparently deviates from standard proce-dures of calculated rationality can be shown tobe intelligent, then it can plausibly be arguedthat models of calculated rationality are deﬁ-cient not only as descriptors of human behaviorbut also as guides to intelligent choice” (1978,
but also as guides to intelligent choice” (1978,p. 593).Nonetheless, a large community contin-ues to routinely model behavior with com-plex statistical procedures without testing theseagainst simple rules. Yet a fundamental changein thinking about human and animal behav-ior seems to be occurring. Mathematical biol-
against simple rules. Yet a fundamental changein thinking about human and animal behav-ior seems to be occurring. Mathematical biol-ogists McNamara & Houston (2009) describedthis shift: “Although behavioral ecologists havebuilt complex models of optimal behavior insimple environments, we argue that they needwww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 473
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43to focus on simple mechanisms that performwell in complex environments” (p. 675).Formal models also help to answer the de-scriptive question of when people rely on whatheuristic. As for the prescriptive question, asimilar conﬂict is waged between those who ar-gue in favor of classical statistical techniquesas models of the mind (typically weightingand adding of all information) and those whoargue that many people consistently rely onheuristics. The best way to decide is compar-ative testing; the difﬁculty is to understandthe individual differences reported in mostexperiments.With all these new insights, we are leftwith big challenges. How should we developa systematic theory of the building blocks ofheuristics and the core capacities as well asenvironmental structures that these exploit?To what extent can the emerging science ofheuristic decision making provide a unifyingframework for the study of the mind? One
way to proceed is theory integration, that is,to connect the simple heuristics frameworkwith other theoretical frameworks in psychol-ogy. This is already happening with ACT-R(Adaptive Control of Thought-Rational)theory (Schooler & Hertwig 2005), signaldetection theory (Luan et al. 2010, Pleskac2007), and the heuristics-and-biases program(Read & Grushka-Cockayne 2010). In physics,theory integration, such as quantum theoryand relativity theory, is a primary goal. Inpsychology, theory integration is not accordedthe importance it deserves; instead, the ﬁeldstill resembles a colorful loose patchwork. Weenvision that the study of cognitive heuristicsmay help to sew some of the pieces together.SUMMARY POINTS1. Heuristics can be more accurate than more complex strategies even though they processless information (less-is-more effects).2. A heuristic is not good or bad, rational or irrational; its accuracy depends on the structureof the environment (ecological rationality).
of the environment (ecological rationality).3. Heuristics are embodied and situated in the sense that they exploit core capacities ofthe brain and their success depends on the structure of the environment. They providean alternative to stable traits, attitudes, preferences, and other internal explanations ofbehavior.4. With sufﬁcient experience, people learn to select proper heuristics from their adaptivetoolbox.5. Usually, the same heuristic can be used both consciously and unconsciously, for inferencesand preferences, and underlies social as well as nonsocial intelligence.6. Decision making in organizations typically involves heuristics because the conditions forrational models rarely hold in an uncertain world.FUTURE ISSUES1. How do people learn, individually or socially, to use heuristics in an adaptive way? Andwhat prevents them from doing so? (For a start: Rieskamp & Otto 2006)2. Does intelligence mean knowing when to select which strategy from the adaptive toolbox?
(For a start: Br ¨oder & Newell 2008)474 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:433. Are gut feelings based on heuristics, and if so, on which? (For a start: Gigerenzer 2007)4. To what extent is moral (and immoral) behavior guided by social heuristics? (For a start:Gigerenzer 2010, Sunstein 2005)5. How does the content of the adaptive toolbox change over the life span and betweencultures? (For a start: Mata et al. 2007)6. Can people adapt the use of heuristics to idiosyncrasies in their core capacities, such asdifferences in memory span, but also differences in knowledge? (For a start: Br ¨oder &Gaissmaier 2007)7. Which heuristics do humans share with which animals, and why? (For a start: Hutchinson& Gigerenzer 2005 and commentaries)8. Finally, the overarching goal: Develop a systematic theory of the building blocks of cog-nitive heuristics (such as search, stopping, and decision rules) anchored in core capacitiesand the social and physical structures they exploit.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe thank Mirta Galesic, Sebastian Hafenbr ¨adl, Ralph Hertwig, Ulrich Hoffrage, KonstantinosKatsikopoulos, Julian N. Marewski, and Lael J. Schooler for helpful comments, and Rona Unraufor editing the manuscript.DISCLOSURE STATEMENTThe authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings thatmight be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.LITERATURE CITEDAlter AL, Oppenheimer DM. 2006. Predicting short-term stock ﬂuctuations by using processing ﬂuency. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103:9369–72Astebro T, Elhedhli S. 2006. The effectiveness of simple decision heuristics: forecasting commercial successfor early-stage ventures. Manage. Sci. 52:395–409Attneave E. 1953. Psychological probability as a function of experienced frequency. J. Exp. Psychol. 46:81–86Ayton P, Fischer I. 2004. The hot hand fallacy and the gambler’s fallacy: two faces of subjective randomness?Mem. Cogn. 32:1369–78
Mem. Cogn. 32:1369–78Backlund LG, Bring J, Skaner Y, Strender L-E, Montgomery H. 2009. Improving fast and frugal in relationto regression analysis: test of 3 models for medical decision making. Med. Decis. Making 29:140–48Baron J, Ritov I. 2009. Protected values and omission bias as deontological judgments. In The Psychology ofLearning and Motivation. Vol. 50: Moral Judgment and Decision Making , ed. DM Bartels, CW Bauman, LJSkitka, DL Medin, pp. 133–67. San Diego, CA: AcademicBaucells M, Carrasco JA, Hogarth RM. 2008. Cumulative dominance and heuristic performance in binarymultiattribute choice. Oper. Res. 56:1289–304Benartzi S, Thaler RH. 2001. Na ¨ıve diversiﬁcation strategies in deﬁned contribution saving plans. Am. Econ.Rev. 91:79–98Bergert FB, Nosofsky RM. 2007. A response-time approach to comparing generalized rational and take-the-best models of decision making. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 331:107–29
Binmore K. 2009. Rational Decisions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Presswww.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 475
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Boyd M. 2001. On ignorance, intuition and investing: a bear market test of the recognition heuristic. J. Psychol.Finan. Market. 2:150–56Brighton H. 2006. Robust inference with simple cognitive models. In Between a Rock and a Hard Place: CognitiveScience Principles Meet AI-Hard Problems. Papers from the AAAI Spring Symposium (AAAI Tech. Rep. No.SS-06–03), ed. C Lebiere, B Wray, pp. 17–22. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI PressBrighton H, Gigerenzer G. 2008. Bayesian brains and cognitive mechanisms: harmony or dissonance? In TheProbabilistic Mind: Prospects for Bayesian Cognitive Science , ed. N Chater, M Oaksford, pp. 189–208. NewYork: Oxford Univ. PressBrighton H, Gigerenzer G. 2011. How heuristics exploit uncertainty. In Ecological Rationality: Intelligence inthe World, ed. PM Todd, G Gigerenzer, ABC Res. Group. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. In press
Br¨oder A. 2003. Decision making with the “adaptive toolbox”: inﬂuence of environmental structure, intelli-gence, and working memory load. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 29:611–25Br¨oder A, Gaissmaier W. 2007. Sequential processing of cues in memory-based multi-attribute decisions.Psychon. Bull. Rev. 14:895–900Br¨oder A, Newell BR. 2008. Challenging some common beliefs: empirical work within the adaptive toolboxmetaphor. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 3:205–14Br¨oder A, Schiffer S. 2003. Take the best versus simultaneous feature matching: probabilistic inferences frommemory and effects of representation format. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 132:277–93Br¨oder A, Schiffer S. 2006. Stimulus format and working memory in fast and frugal strategy selection. J. Behav.Decis. Mak. 19:361–80Br¨oder A, Sch ¨utz J. 2009. Recognition ROCs are curvilinear—or are they? On premature arguments againstthe two-high-threshold model of recognition. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 35:587–606
Chater N, Oaksford M, Nakisa R, Redington M. 2003. Fast, frugal and rational: how rational norms explainbehavior. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 90:63–86Coates SL, Butler LT, Berry DC. 2004. Implicit memory: a prime example for brand consideration and choice.Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 18:1195–211Cook L. 2001. The World Trade Center attack. The paramedic response: an insider’s view. Crit. Care 5:301–3Cosmides L, Tooby J. 2006. Evolutionary psychology, moral heuristics, and the law. See Gigerenzer & Engel2006, pp. 175–205Croskerry P. 2009. A universal model of diagnostic reasoning. Acad. Med. 84:1022–28Czerlinski J, Gigerenzer G, Goldstein DG. 1999. How good are simple heuristics? See Gigerenzer et al. 1999,pp. 97–118Dawes RM. 1979. The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making. Am. Psychol. 34:571–82Dawes RM, Corrigan B. 1974. Linear models in decision making. Psychol. Bull. 81:95–106
DeMiguel V, Garlappi L, Uppal R. 2009. Optimal versus naive diversiﬁcation: How inefﬁcient is the 1/Nportfolio strategy? Rev. Financ. Stud. 22:1915–53Dhami MK. 2003. Psychological models of professional decision making. Psychol. Sci. 14:175–80Dhami MK, Ayton P. 2001. Bailing and jailing the fast and frugal way. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 14:141–68Dhami MK, Harries C. 2001. Fast and frugal versus regression models of human judgment. Think. Reasoning7:5–27Dieckmann A, Rieskamp J. 2007. The inﬂuence of information redundancy on probabilistic inferences. Mem.Cogn. 35:1801–13Dougherty MR, Franco-Watkins AM, Thomas R. 2008. Psychological plausibility of the theory of probabilisticmental models and the fast and frugal heuristics. Psychol. Rev. 115:199–213Einhorn HJ, Hogarth RM. 1975. Unit weighting schemes for decision making. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.Process. 13:171–92Elstein AS. 1999. Heuristics and biases: selected errors in clinical reasoning. Acad. Med. 74:791–94
Elwyn G, Edwards A, Eccles M, Rovner D. 2001. Decision analysis in patient care. Lancet 358:571–74Ericsson KA, Prietula MJ, Cokely ET. 2007. The making of an expert. H a r v .B u s .R e v . 85:114–21
Ericsson KA, Prietula MJ, Cokely ET. 2007. The making of an expert. H a r v .B u s .R e v . 85:114–21Evans JS. 2008. Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol.59:255–78Fehr E, Schmidt KM. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Q. J. Econ. 114:817–68476 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Fischbacher U, Hertwig R, Bruhin U. 2011. How simple heuristics embody social intelligence in games. InSocial Heuristics That Make Us Smart, ed. R Hertwig, U Hoffrage, ABC Res. Group. New York: OxfordUniv. Press. In pressFischer JE, Steiner F, Zucol F, Berger C, Martignon L, et al. 2002. Use of simple heuristics to target macrolideprescription in children with community-acquired pneumonia. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 156:1005–8Fishburn PC. 1974. Lexicographic orders, utilities and decision rules: a survey. Manage. Sci. 20:1442–71Fiske AP, Tetlock PE. 1997. Taboo trade-offs: reactions to transactions that transgress the spheres of justice.Polit. Psychol. 18:255–97Frosch C, Beaman CP, McCloy R. 2007. A little learning is a dangerous thing: an experimental demonstrationof ignorance-driven inference. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 60:1329–36
Gaissmaier W, Marewski JN. 2010. Forecasting elections with mere recognition from lousy samples A comparisonof collective recognition, wisdome of crowds, and representative polls. Judgm. Decis. Mak. In pressGalton F.1907. Vox populi. Nature 75:7Garc ´ıa-Retamero R, Dhami MK. 2009. Take-the-best in expert-novice decision strategies for residentialburglary. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 16:163–69Garc ´ıa-Retamero R, Takezawa M, Gigerenzer G. 2009. Does imitation beneﬁt cue order learning? Exp.Psychol. 56:307–20Gaskin S, Evgeniou T, Bailiff D, Hauser J. 2007. Two-stage models: identifying noncompensatory heuristicsfor the consideration set then adaptive polyhedral methods within the consideration set. Proc. SawtoothSoftware Conf. 13:67–83Geman S, Bienenstock E, Doursat R. 1992. Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma. Neural Comput.4:1–58Gigerenzer G. 1991. From tools to theories: a heuristic of discovery in cognitive psychology. Psychol. Rev.98:254–67
98:254–67Gigerenzer G. 2000. Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World. New York: Oxford Univ. PressGigerenzer G. 2007. Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious . New York: VikingGigerenzer G. 2008. Rationality for Mortals: How People Cope with Uncertainty. New York: Oxford Univ. PressGigerenzer G. 2010. Moral satisﬁcing: rethinking moral behavior as bounded rationality. Topics Cogn. Sci.2:528–54Gigerenzer G, Brighton H. 2009. Homo heuristicus: why biased minds make better inferences. Topics Cogn.Sci.1:107–43Gigerenzer G, Engel C. 2006. Heuristics and the Law. Cambridge, MA: MIT PressGigerenzer G, Goldstein DG. 1996. Reasoning the fast and frugal way: models of bounded rationality. Psychol.Rev. 104:650–69Gigerenzer G, Hoffrage U, Goldstein DG. 2008. Fast and frugal heuristics are plausible models of cognition:reply to Dougherty, Franco-Watkins, and Thomas. Psychol. Rev. 115:230–39
Gigerenzer G, Todd PM, ABC Res. Group. 1999. Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart. New York: OxfordUniv. PressGl¨ockner A, Betsch T, Schindler N. 2010. Coherence shifts in probabilistic inference tasks. J. Behav. Decis.Mak.I np r e s sGoldstein DG, Gigerenzer G. 2002. Models of ecological rationality: the recognition heuristic. Psychol. Rev.109:75–90Goldstein DG, Gigerenzer G. 2009. Fast and frugal forecasting. Int. J. Forecast. 25:760–72Graefe A, Armstrong J. 2009. Forecasting elections from voters’ perceptions of candidates’ ability to handleissues. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1206683Green L, Mehr DR. 1997. What alters physicians’ decisions to admit to the coronary care unit? J. Fam. Pract.45:219–26Groner M, Groner R, Bischof WF. 1983. Approaches to heuristics: a historical review. In Methods of Heuristics,ed. R Groner, pp. 1–18. Hillsdale, NJ: ErlbaumHaidt J, Baer S, Cosmides L, Epstein RA, Fikentscher W, et al. 2006. What is the role of heuristics in making
law? See Gigerenzer & Engel 2006, pp. 239–57www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 477Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Haidt J, Bjorklund F. 2008. Social intuitionists answer six questions about moral psychology. In Moral Psychol-ogy: Vol. 2. The Cognitive Science of Morality: Intuition and Diversity, ed. W Sinnott-Armstrong, pp. 181–217.Cambridge, MA: MIT PressHammond KR. 2007. Beyond Rationality: The Search for Wisdom in a Troubled Time . Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ.PressHanselmann M, Tanner C. 2008. Taboos and conﬂicts in decision making: sacred values, decision difﬁculty,and emotions. Judgm. Decis. Mak. 3:51–63Hastie R, Kameda T. 2005. The robust beauty of majority rules in group decisions. Psychol. Rev. 112:494–508Hastie R, Wittenbrink B. 2006. Heuristics for applying laws to facts. See Gigerenzer & Engel 2006, pp. 259–80Hauser JR, Ding M, Gaskin SP. 2009. Non-compensatory (and compensatory) models of consideration-setdecisions. In Proceedings of the Sawtooth Software Conference, Delray Beach, FL
Hepler TJ. 2008. Decision-making in sport: an examination of the take the ﬁrst heuristic and self-efﬁcacy theory .Doctoral dissert., Michigan State Univ.Hertwig R, Davis JN, Sulloway FJ. 2002. Parental investment: how an equity motive can produce inequality.Psychol. Bull. 128:728–45Hertwig R, Gigerenzer G, Hoffrage U. 1997. The reiteration effect in hindsight bias. Psychol. Rev. 104:194–202Hertwig R, Herzog SM, Schooler LJ, Reimer T. 2008. Fluency heuristic: a model of how the mind exploits aby-product of information retrieval. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 34:1191–206Hertwig R, Herzog SM. 2009. Fast and frugal heuristics: tools of social rationality. Soc. Cogn. 27:661–98Hertwig R, Hoffrage U, ABC Research Group. 2011. Social Heuristics That Make Us Smart . New York: OxfordUniv. PressHilbig BE, Pohl RF. 2008. Recognizing users of the recognition heuristic. Exp. Psychol. 55:394–401
Hodgkinson GP, Healey MP. 2008. Cognition in organizations. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 59:387–417Hogarth RM. 2011. When simple is hard to accept. In Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World ,e d .P MTodd, G Gigerenzer, ABC Res. Group. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press. In pressHogarth RM, Karelaia N. 2007. Heuristic and linear models of judgment: matching rules and environments.Psychol. Rev. 114:733–58Holton G. 1988. Thematic Origins of Scientiﬁc Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 2nd ed.Hoyer WD, Brown SP. 1990. Effects of brand awareness on choice for a common, repeat purchase product.J. Consum. Res. 17:141–48Humphrey N. 1976 /1988. The social function of intellect. In Machiavellian Intelligence , ed. R Byrne, A Whiten,pp. 13–26. Oxford, UK: ClarendonHutchinson JMC, Gigerenzer G. 2005. Simple heuristics and rules of thumb: where psychologists and be-havioural biologists might meet. Behav. Processes 69:87–124
Jacoby LL, Dallas M. 1981. On the relationship between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning.J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 110:306–40Jacoby LL, Woloshyn V, Kelly CM. 1989. Becoming famous without being recognized: unconscious inﬂuencesof memory produced by dividing attention. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 118:115–25Johnson EJ, Goldstein DG. 2003. Do defaults save lives? Science 302:1338–39Johnson JG, Raab M. 2003. Take the ﬁrst: option generation and resulting choices. O r g a n .B e h a v .H u m .D e c i s .Process. 91:215–29Juslin P, Persson M. 2002. PROBabilities from EXemplars (PROBEX): a “lazy” algorithm for probabilisticinference from generic knowledge. Cogn. Sci. 26:563–607Kahneman D. 2003. Maps of bounded rationality: a perspective on intuitive judgment and choice. In Les PrixNobel: The Nobel Prizes 2002 , ed. T Frangsmyr, pp. 449–89. Stockholm: Nobel Found.Kahneman D, Frederick S. 2002. Representativeness revisited: attribute substitution in intuitive judgment.
InHeuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment , ed. T Gilovich, D Grifﬁn, D Kahneman,pp. 49–81. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
InHeuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment , ed. T Gilovich, D Grifﬁn, D Kahneman,pp. 49–81. New York: Cambridge Univ. PressKarelaia N. 2006. Thirst for conﬁrmation in multi-attribute choice: Does search for consistency impair decisionperformance? Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 100:128–43Katsikopoulos KV, Martignon L. 2006. Naive heuristics for paired comparisons: some results on their relativeaccuracy. J. Math. Psychol. 50:488–94478 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Katsikopoulos KV, Schooler LJ, Hertwig R. 2010. The robust beauty of ordinary information. Psychol. Rev.In pressKattah JC, Talkad AV, Wang DZ, Hsieh YH, Newman-Toker DE. 2009. HINTS to diagnose stroke in theacute vestibular syndrome. Three-step bedside oculomotor examination more sensitive than early MRIdiffusion-weighted imaging. Stroke 40:3504–10Keren G, Schul Y. 2009. Two is not always better than one. A critical evaluation of two-system theories.Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 4:533–50Kleffner DA, Ramachandran VS. 1992. On the perception of shape from shading. Percept. Psychophys. 52:18–36Klein G. 2004. The Power of Intuition: How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work . New York:Currency/DoubledayKohli R, Jedidi K. 2007. Representation and inference of lexicographic preference models and their variants.Market. Sci. 26:380–99
Market. Sci. 26:380–99Lee MD, Cummins TDR. 2004. Evidence accumulation in decision making: unifying the “take the best” andthe “rational” models. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 11:343–52Lee MD, Loughlin N, Lundberg IB. 2002. Applying one reason decision-making: the prioritisation of literaturesearches. Aust. J. Psychol. 54:137–43Lerner JS, Tetlock PE. 1999. Accounting for the effects of accountability. Psychol. Bull. 125:255–75Lichtman AJ. 2008. The keys to the White House: an index forecast for 2008. Int. J. Forecast. 24:301–9Luan S, Schooler L, Gigerenzer G. 2010. A signal detection analysis of fast-and-frugal trees. Manuscr. underrevisionLuce RD. 1956. Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica 24:178–91March JG. 1978. Bounded rationality, ambiguity, and the engineering of choice. Bell J. Econ. 9:587–608Marewski JN. 2010. On the theoretical precision, and strategy selection problem of a single-strategy approach:
a comment on Gl ¨ockner, Betsch, and Schindler. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. In pressMarewski JN, Gaissmaier W, Schooler LJ, Goldstein DG, Gigerenzer G. 2010. From recognition to decisions:extending and testing recognition-based models for multi-alternative inference. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 17:287–309Marewski JN, Schooler LJ. 2010.Cognitive niches: An ecological model of emergent strategy selection. Manuscr. submittedMartignon L,Hoffrage U. 2002. Fast, frugal, and ﬁt: simple heuristics for paired comparisons. Theory Decis.52:29–71Martignon L, Katsikopoulos KV, Woike J. 2008. Categorization with limited resources: a family of simpleheuristics. J. Math. Psychol. 52:352–61Martignon L, Vitouch O, Takezawa M, Forster M. 2003. Naive and yet enlightened: from natural frequenciesto fast and frugal trees. In Thinking: Psychological Perspectives on Reasoning, Judgment, and Decision Making ,ed. D Hardman, L Macchi, pp. 189–211. Chichester, UK: Wiley
Mata R, Schooler LJ, Rieskamp J. 2007. The aging decision maker: cognitive aging and the adaptive selectionof decision strategies. Psychol. Aging 22:796–810McCammon I, H ¨ageli P. 2007. An evaluation of rule-based decision tools for travel in avalanche terrain. ColdReg. Sci. Tech. 47:193–206McDonald C. 1996. Medical heuristics: the silent adjudicators of clinical practice. Ann. Intern. Med. 124:56–62McGrath RE. 2008. Predictor combination in binary decision-making situations. Psychol. Assess. 20:195–205McLeod P, Dienes Z. 1996. Do ﬁelders know where to go to catch the ball or only how to get there? J. Exp.Psychol.: Hum. Percept. Perform. 22:531–43McNamara JM, Houston AI. 2009. Integrating function and mechanism. Trends Ecol. Evol. 24:670–75Messick DM. 1993. Equality as decision heuristic. In Psychological Perspectives on Justice: Theory and Application ,ed. BA Mellers, J Baron, pp. 11–31. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
Newell BR. 2005. Re-visions of rationality. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9:11–15Newell BR, Fernandez D. 2006. On the binary quality of recognition and the inconsequentiality of further
Newell BR. 2005. Re-visions of rationality. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9:11–15Newell BR, Fernandez D. 2006. On the binary quality of recognition and the inconsequentiality of furtherknowledge: two critical tests of the recognition heuristic. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 19:333–46Newell BR, Rakow T, Weston NJ, Shanks DR. 2004. Search strategies in decision-making: the success of“success.” J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 17:117–37Newell BR, Shanks DR. 2003. Take the best or look at the rest? Factors inﬂuencing “one-reason” decisionmaking. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 29:53–65www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 479Errata
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Nosofsky RM, Bergert FB. 2007. Limitations of exemplar models of multi-attribute probabilistic inference.J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 33:999–1019Oppenheimer D. 2003. Not so fast! (and not so frugal!): rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition 90:B1–9Ortmann A, Gigerenzer G, Borges B, Goldstein DG. 2008. The recognition heuristic: a fast and frugal way toinvestment choice? In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results: Vol .1 (Handbooks in Economics No. 28),ed. CR Plott, VL Smith, pp. 993–1003. Amsterdam: North HollandPachur T, Biele G. 2007. Forecasting from ignorance: the use and usefulness of recognition in lay predictionsof sports events. Acta Psychol. 125:99–116Pachur T, Br ¨oder A, Marewski JN. 2008. The recognition heuristic in memory-based inference: Is recognitiona noncompensatory cue? J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 21:183–210
Pachur T, Hertwig R. 2006. On the psychology of the recognition heuristic: retrieval primacy as a keydeterminant of its use. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 32:983–1002Pachur T, Mata R, Schooler LJ. 2009. Cognitive aging and the adaptive use of recognition in decision making.Psychol. Aging 24:901–15Pachur T, Todd PM, Gigerenzer G, Schooler LJ, Goldstein DG. 2011. When is the recognition heuristic anadaptive tool? In Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World , ed. PM Todd, G Gigerenzer, ABC Res.Group. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. In pressParikh J. 1994. Intuition: The New Frontier of Management. Oxford, UK: Blackwell BusinessPayne JW, Bettman JR, Johnson EJ. 1993. The Adaptive Decision Maker. New York: Cambridge Univ. PressPetrie M, Halliday T. 1994. Experimental and natural changes in the peacock’s (Pavo cristatus) train can affectmating success. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 35:213–17
mating success. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 35:213–17Pitt MA, Myung IJ, Zhang S. 2002. Toward a method for selecting among computational models for cognition.Psychol. Rev. 109:472–91Pleskac TJ. 2007. A signal detection analysis of the recognition heuristic. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 14:37–91Pohl R. 2006. Empirical tests or the recognition heuristic. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 19:251–71Ratcliff R, McKoon G. 1989. Similarity information versus relational information: differences in the timecourse of retrieval. Cogn. Psychol. 21:139–55Read D, Grushka-Cockayne Y. 2010. The similarity heuristic. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. In pressReimer T, Katsikopoulos K. 2004. The use of recognition in group decision-making. Cogn. Sci. 28:1009–29Reisen N, Hoffrage U, Mast FW. 2008. Identifying decision strategies in a consumer choice situation. Judgm.Decis. Mak. 3:641–58Reyna VF, Lloyd FJ. 2006. Physician decision making and cardiac risk: effects of knowledge, risk perception,
risk tolerance, and fuzzy processing. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 12:179–95Richter T, Sp ¨ath P. 2006. Recognition is used as one cue among others in judgment and decision making.J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 32:150–62Rieskamp J, Hoffrage U. 1999. When do people use simple heuristics, and how can we tell? See Gigerenzeret al. 1999, pp. 141–67Rieskamp J, Hoffrage U. 2008. Inferences under time pressure: how opportunity costs affect strategy selection.Acta Psychol. 127:258–76Rieskamp J, Otto P. 2006. SSL: a theory of how people learn to select strategies. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 135:207–36Rossmo DK. 2005. Geographic heuristics or shortcuts to failure? A response to Snook et al. 2004. Appl. Cogn.Psychol. 19:651–54Rubinstein A. 2003. Economics and psychology? The case of hyperbolic discounting. Int. Econ. Rev. 44:1207–16Savage LJ. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Dover. 2nd ed.
Scheibehenne B, Br ¨oder A. 2007. Predicting Wimbledon 2005 tennis results by mere player name recognition.Int. J. Forecast. 23:415–26Schmitt M, Martignon L. 2006. On the complexity of learning lexicographic strategies. J. Mach. Learn. Res.7:55–83
Int. J. Forecast. 23:415–26Schmitt M, Martignon L. 2006. On the complexity of learning lexicographic strategies. J. Mach. Learn. Res.7:55–83Schmittlein DC, Peterson RA. 1994. Customer base analysis: an industrial purchase process application.Market. Sci. 13:41–67480 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Schooler LJ, Hertwig R. 2005. How forgetting aids heuristic inference. Psychol. Rev. 112:610–28Sedlmeier P, Hertwig R, Gigerenzer G. 1998. Are judgments of the positional frequencies of letters system-atically biased due to availability? J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 24:754–70Seeley TD. 2001. Decision making in superorganisms: how collective wisdom arises from the poorly informedmasses. In Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox , ed. G Gigerenzer, R Selten, pp. 249–61. Cambridge,MA: MIT PressSerwe S, Frings C. 2006. Who will win Wimbledon? The recognition heuristic in predicting sports events.J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 19:321–32Shaffer DN, Krauchunas SM, Eddy M, McBeath MK. 2004. How dogs navigate to catch Frisbees. Psychol. Sci.15:437–41Shah AK, Oppenheimer DM. 2008. Heuristics made easy: an effort-reduction framework. Psychol. Bull.137:207–22
137:207–22Shanteau J. 1992. How much information does an expert use? Is it relevant? Acta Psychol. 81:75–86Shepard RN. 2001. Perceptual-cognitive universals as reﬂections of the world. Behav. Brain Sci. 24:581–601Simon HA. 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. Q. J. Econ. 69:99–118Simon HA. 1979. Rational decision making in business organizations. Am. Econ. Rev. 69:493–513Simon HA. 1989. The scientist as problem solver. In Complex Information Processing: The Impact of Herbert A.Simon, ed. D Klahr, K Kotovsky, pp. 373–98. Hillsdale, NJ: ErlbaumSimon HA. 1990. Invariants of human behavior. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 41:1–19Simon HA. 1992. What is an “explanation” of behavior? Psychol. Sci. 3:150–61Simon HA. 1999. Appraisal. See Gigerenzer et al. 1999, back coverSmith L, Gilhooly K. 2006. Regression versus fast and frugal models of decision-making: the case of prescribingfor depression. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 20:265–74
for depression. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 20:265–74Smith VL. 2003. Constructivist and ecological rationality in economics. Am. Econ. Rev. 93:465–508Snook B, Taylor PJ, Bennell C. 2004. Geographic proﬁling: the fast, frugal and accurate way. Appl. Cogn.Psychol. 18:105–21Snook B, Zito M, Bennell C, Taylor PJ. 2005. On the complexity and accuracy of geographic proﬁlingstrategies. J. Quant. Criminol. 21:1–26Sorros G. 2009. The Crash of 2008 and What It Means: The New Paradigm for Financial Markets. New York:Public AffairsStiglitz JE. 2010. Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy . New York: NortonSunstein CR. 2005. Moral heuristics. Behav. Brain Sci. 28:531–73Takezawa M, Gummerum M, Keller M. 2006. A stage for the rational tail of the emotional dog: roles of moralreasoning in group decision making. J. Econ. Psychol. 27:117–39Todd PM, Billari F, Sim ˜ao J. 2005. Aggregate age-at-marriage patterns from individual mate-search heuristics.
Demography 42:559–74Todd PM, Dieckmann A. 2005. Heuristics for ordering cue search in decision making. In Advances in NeuralInformation Processing Systems , vol. 17, ed. LK Saul, Y Weiss, L Bottou, pp. 1393–400. Cambridge, MA:MIT PressTodd PM, Gigerenzer G, ABC Res. Group. 2011. Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World . New York:Oxford Univ. PressTversky A. 1972. Elimination by aspects: a theory of choice. Psychol. Rev. 79:281–99Tversky A. 1977. Features of similarity. Psychol. Rev. 84:327–52Tversky A, Kahneman D. 1973. Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cogn. Psychol.5:207–32Tversky A, Kahneman D. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185:1124–30Volz KG, Schooler LJ, Schubotz RI, Raab M, Gigerenzer G, von Cramon DY. 2006. Why you think Milanis larger than Modena: neural correlates of the recognition heuristic. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18:1924–36
von Helversen B, Rieskamp J. 2008. The mapping model: a cognitive theory of quantitative estimation. J. Exp.Psychol.: Gen. 137:73–96von Helversen B, Rieskamp J. 2009. Predicting sentencing for low level crimes: comparing models of humanjudgment. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 15:375–95
Psychol.: Gen. 137:73–96von Helversen B, Rieskamp J. 2009. Predicting sentencing for low level crimes: comparing models of humanjudgment. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 15:375–95www.annualreviews.org •Heuristic Decision Making 481
PS62CH17-Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6:43Wang XT. 2008. Decision heuristics as predictors of public choice. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 21:77–89Weber EU, Johnson EJ. 2009. Mindful judgment and decision making. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60:53–86Whiten A, Byrne RW. 1997. Machiavellian Intelligence II: Evaluations and Extensions . New York: CambridgeUniv. PressW¨ubben M, von Wangenheim F. 2008. Instant customer base analysis: managerial heuristics often “get itright.” J. Mark. 72:82–93Yee M, Dahan E, Hauser J, Orlin J. 2007. Greedoid-based noncompensatory inference. Market. Sci. 26:532–49Yonelinas AP, Otten LJ, Shaw KN, Rugg MD. 2005. Separating the brain regions involved in recollectionand familiarity in recognition memory. J. Neurosci. 25:3002–8Zajonc RB. 1968. Attitudinal effects of mere exposures. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 9:1–27482 Gigerenzer ·Gaissmaier
