Citation: Mascarenhas-Melo, F.;Araújo, A.R.T.S.; Rodrigues, M.;Mathur, A.; Gonçalves, M.B.S.;Tanwar, K.; Heidarizadeh, F.;Nejaddehbashi, F.; Rahdar, A.;Mazzola, P .G.; et al. DermatologicalBioactivities of Resveratrol andNanotechnology Strategies to BoostIts Efficacy—An Updated Review.Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68. https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics10030068Academic Editor: AdeyemiOladapo AremuReceived: 18 March 2023Revised: 3 April 2023Accepted: 17 April 2023Published: 24 April 2023Correction Statement: This articlehas been republished with a minorchange. The change does not affectthe scientific content of the article andfurther details are available within thebackmatter of the website version ofthis article.Copyright: ©2023 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).cosmetics
4.0/).cosmetics ReviewDermatological Bioactivities of Resveratrol andNanotechnology Strategies to Boost Its Efficacy—AnUpdated ReviewFilipa Mascarenhas-Melo1,2,*, Andr éR. T. S. Ara újo3,4, Márcio Rodrigues3,5, Ankita Mathur6,Maria Beatriz S. Gonçalves1, Kalpita Tanwar7, Fariba Heidarizadeh8, Fereshteh Nejaddehbashi9,Abbas Rahdar10, Priscila Gava Mazzola11, Francisco Veiga1,2and Ana Cl áudia Paiva-Santos1,2,*1Laboratory of Development and Drug Technologies, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, AzinhagaSta. Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal; mariabsgoncalves@gmail.com (M.B.S.G.); fveiga@ff.uc.pt (F.V .)2LAQV , REQUIMTE, Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra,Azinhaga Sta. Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal3CPIRN-UDI-IPG—Center for Potential and Innovation of Natural Resources, Research Unit for InlandDevelopment, Polytechnic Institute of Guarda, Av. Dr. Francisco de S áCarneiro, 6300-559 Guarda, Portugal;
andrearaujo@ipg.pt (A.R.T.S.A.)4LAQV , REQUIMTE, Laboratory of Applied Chemistry, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty ofPharmacy, Porto University, Rua Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, No. 228, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal5CICS-UBI—Health Sciences Research Center, University of Beira Interior, Av. Infante D. Henrique,6200-506 Covilh ã, Portugal6Research and Development Department, Abode Biotech India Pvt. Limited, MLA Colony, Banjara HillsHyderabad-Telangana, Hyderabad 500033, Telangana, India; ankitamathur38@gmail.com7Department of Bioinformatics, Martin Luther Christian University, Dongktieh, Block-1, Nongrah,Shillong 793006, Meghalaya, India; rathore.kalpita@gmail.com8Department of Chemistry, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz 6135743169, Iran;heidarizadeh@scu.ac.ir9Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Medical Basic Sciences Institute, Ahvaz Jundishapur University ofMedical Sciences, Ahvaz 61357-1579, Iran
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz 61357-1579, Iran10Department of Physics, University of Zabol, Zabol 98613-35856, Iran; a.rahdar@uoz.ac.ir11Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Campinas, Campinas 13083-871, SP , Brazil;pmazzola@fcf.unicamp.br*Correspondence: filipamelo@ff.uc.pt (F.M.-M.); acsantos@ff.uc.pt (A.C.P .-S.);Tel.: +351-239-488-400 (F.M.-M. & A.C.P .-S.)Abstract: Resveratrol is a polyphenolic phytoalexin, whose main natural sources are red grapes,red wine, berries, and peanuts. When applied to the skin, resveratrol evidences a good penetratingcapacity and low degradation compared to the oral route, allowing for a longer and improved topicaleffect. This bioactive molecule has been gaining interest in dermo-pharmacy and cosmetics for theprevention and treatment of skin alterations. Its inherent meritorious biomedical potentials, includinganti-aging, photoprotective, estrogen-like, skin-whitening, anti-acne, wound healing, anti-scarring,
antimicrobial, and anti-skin cancer properties are the most evident. However, resveratrol evidences
antimicrobial, and anti-skin cancer properties are the most evident. However, resveratrol evidencesstability hurdles, becoming an unstable molecule when exposed to ultraviolet radiation. Severaltechnological strategies have been developed to improve its stability, efficacy, and safety. We havedescribed the main topical properties of resveratrol, and the involved mechanisms of action, and agreat focus was placed on the technological strategies for the efficient application of resveratrol indermatological and cosmetic formulations, including nanotechnology.Keywords: resveratrol; skin; topical; nanotechnology; bioactivity1. IntroductionThe skin is an essential mechanical barrier in protecting the human body from exter-nal undesirable environmental aggressions and is considered the largest human organ,Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68. https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics10030068 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cosmetics
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 2 of 28comprising three main layers: epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue [ 1,2]. The skinplays a key role in metabolism, thermoregulation, and electrolyte homeostasis [ 3]. Thus,anything that alters the integrity of the skin will have repercussions on the individual’shealth and well-being [ 4]. A change in skin permeability can lead to increased productionand release of proinflammatory cytokines, which may underlie inflammatory skin diseases,as well as increased penetration of pathogens into the skin [ 5]. The growing increase inskin cancer, primarily due to prolonged exposure to ultraviolet light and skin aging, isalso a concern [ 6]. Considering the relevance of the skin barrier in preventing variouscutaneous disorders, it is increasingly important to understand which active ingredientscan contribute more effectively to this functionality. The recent trend toward using nat-
ural ingredients is increasingly present, to the detriment of synthetic substances, as theyare cheaper, safer, and easier to obtain [ 5]. Resveratrol (RES) is one of the best-knownbioflavonoids, which is mostly found in red grapes, particularly in their skin and seeds [ 7].RES can also be found in other foods, such as peanuts, tomatoes, and beverages suchas champagne and wine. However, RES content may vary according to the part of theplant, soil type (chemical composition and environmental conditions), and the age of thebeverage [ 5]. In addition, RES is a polyphenol phytoalexin that has two isomeric forms,3,4′,5-trihydroxy-cis-stilbene and 3,4′, 5-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene, the latter of which is thebiologically active form [ 8]. When given orally, RES is rapidly absorbed and has a veryshort half-life. It essentially undergoes hepatic metabolization through phase II reactions,forming metabolites that are then eliminated through the urine. Thus, the pharmacokinetics
of RES compromise its efficacy due to its low bioavailability [ 9]. Despite the recognitionof the beneficial use of RES, namely in the cardiovascular system, this polyphenol hasalso been highlighted in other areas of interest due mainly to its antioxidant effect, butalso due to anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative, anti-angiogenic and even antimicrobialproperties [ 8]. In the field of dermo-pharmacy and cosmetics, RES has been gaining a lot ofinterest due to its easy penetration into the skin and lower degradation, when compared tooral administration, which allows its effect to be prolonged [ 9,10]. The greater penetrationof RES into the skin results from its physico-chemical properties, such as low molecularweight (228.25 Da); low degree of ionization (log P n-octanol/water = 3.32), which givesit high lipophilicity; and low polar surface area (60.69 Å2); additionally, the lowest degra-dation of the molecule is due to the least metabolization in the skin [ 8]. RES has been
shown to have several benefits for skin function. Some studies have found that RES inhibitskeratinocyte proliferation and contributes to the differentiation of keratinocytes, whichis key in determining skin permeability [ 11–14]. Moreover, data from various sourceshave reported effects of antioxidant defense, contributing to a decrease in aging and tothe prevention and treatment of various skin diseases [ 15–18] and mitigating the damagecaused by exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation, such as skin cancer, photoaging, andsunburns [ 19–21]. Studies have also reported anticancer properties, namely by inhibitingmelanocyte proliferation [ 13,18,22,23], anti-inflammation effects, contributing to a decreasein inflammatory dermatoses [ 24–29], and accelerated wound healing, through collagendeposition, neovascularization, and fibroblast maturation [30–34].Despite strong evidence of the effectiveness of RES when applied topically, debate con-
tinues about the best strategies for the management of this active ingredient. Thus, in order
Despite strong evidence of the effectiveness of RES when applied topically, debate con-tinues about the best strategies for the management of this active ingredient. Thus, in orderto improve its bioavailability and decrease its instability, some lipophilic RES derivativescan also be used in cosmetic formulations [ 35]. Moreover, technological systems, based onnanocarriers, have been developed in order to protect the trans-RES from isomerizationinto the cis-form, which results from the action of UV radiation. These nanocarriers alsoaim to increase bioavailability, facilitate skin penetration, and allow controlled release ofthe active ingredient at the intended site [ 9]. Although some research has been carriedout on new nanotechnology for skin RES delivery, their biocompatibility and toxicity inhumans have not yet been established.The main purpose of this manuscript is to develop an understanding of the skin
activities of RES and what mechanisms of action are involved, namely in its anti-aging,
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 3 of 28photoprotective, estrogen-like, skin-whitening, anti-acne, wound healing, anti-scarring,antimicrobial, and anti-skin cancer properties. Furthermore, this review aims to explorethe development of topical formulations containing resveratrol, using nanotechnologystrategies, to increase their efficacy while ensuring the safety of this active ingredient.2. Mechanisms of Action and Skin Effects of Resveratrol2.1. Mechanisms of ActionResveratrol has been extensively researched because of its renowned biological activi-ties, with important dermatological and cosmetic effects.RES plays a valuable role in thereduction in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and the prevention of anti-agingevents [ 20,30]. This molecule exhibits a photoprotection effect by upregulating HSP27expression, enhancing the Bcl-2/Bax ratio, inhibiting caspase-3 activity and p65 expres-sion [ 36], and partially lowering the activation of caspase-3, caspase-8, and caspase-9 in
RES-pretreated (human epidermal keratinocyte) HaCaT cells [ 37], as well as reducingultraviolet B (UVB) induced activation of the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF- κB) pathwayin human-derived cell lines (hTERT-RPE retinal pigment epithelial cells and CRL-11147melanoma cancer cells) [ 38]. The ability of RES to bind to estrogen receptors (both αandβwith comparable affinity) is also important in anti-aging cosmetology, as it can inhibit thecollagenase and elastin activity and inhibit matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [ 39–42]. Ithas been verified that tissues in which β-estrogen receptor expression is higher than that ofα-estrogen receptors could be more prone to RES as an agonist of estrogen receptors [ 39].In human keratinocytes, it prevented oxidative stress-induced injury [ 43], and in HaCaTcells, reduced UVB-induced [ 19] and inflammatory injury [ 25]. Regarding skin-whiteningactivity, RES decreases the post-transcription of the tyrosinase enzyme in melanocytes [ 44],
inhibits melanogenesis through the downregulation of microphthalmia-associated tran-scription factor and tyrosinase through the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)pathway, and forkhead box O 3a activation is involved in depigmenting effects [ 45]. On theother hand, due to its anti-keratogenesis, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial activities, itcould be used in keratinocyte hyperproliferation (basis of the follicular obstruction) andinflammatory processes involved in acne vulgaris [ 46]. Indeed, RES impacts inflammationas it regulates intracellular signaling cascades, converging with the activation of nuclearfactor-kB and activator protein-1, which act independently or in combination to regulate theexpression of target genes, including tumor necrosis factor- α(TNF α), interleukin (IL) -1 β(IL-1 β), and MMPs. Additionally, it inhibits Propionibacterium acnes (P . acnes ) growth [ 47],
and, on the other hand, inhibits the proliferation of sebocytes, and, thus, sebum produc-tion [ 48,49]. Cutaneous wound healing is another RES application, due to the stimulationof keratinocyte differentiation and antimicrobial peptide expression, cutaneous inflam-mation, and inhibition of melanogenesis [ 5]. RES activates sirtuin 1 and nuclear factorerythroid 2-related factor 2 and inhibits mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling [ 5].The anti-scarring effect has also been highlighted. RES has been noted as an effectiveanti-scarring agent due to its polyphenolic content. It retards the cell cycle by ultimatelyinhibiting the apoptosis process [ 50]. In hypertrophic scars, RES contributes to the initiationof the process of autophagy and suppression of Rheb. In addition, RES plays an impor-tant role as an antimicrobial agent. At a sublethal concentration dosage, RES can act as abacteriostatic or bactericidal agent. The action of RES leads to morphological changes in
the cell by activating ROS, thereby inhibiting the infection and ultimately protecting the
bacteriostatic or bactericidal agent. The action of RES leads to morphological changes inthe cell by activating ROS, thereby inhibiting the infection and ultimately protecting thecell [ 51]. With regard to viral infection, RES inhibits the reverse transcription process andblocks the expression of the protein; thus, it can also be regarded as an antiviral agent [ 52].At a particular dose, RES can serve as a protective shield against dermophytes, as thekeratinocytes divide into cornified cells that are taken up by the dermophytes [ 53]. In thecase of parasitic infection, RES inhibits the epimastigote’s growth, further causing histonedeacetylation and controlling the expression of the gene [54].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 4 of 28The topical application of RES on the skin inhibits photocarcinogenesis [ 55]. RES canreduce tyrosinase activity [ 56]. It has the potential to modulate diverse mechanisms thatparticipate in cell cycle regulation (cyclin kinase inhibitors, cyclins, and cyclin-dependentkinases); apoptosis (survivin, second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases/DirectIAP-binding protein with low pI (Smac/DIABLO), and p53); autophagy (light chain andRictor); ROS production (lipid peroxidation (LPO)); cell proliferation (proliferating cellnuclear antigen (PCNA), NF- κB, and Ki-67); and tumor promotion (cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC)). Thus, RES has an effective protective role againstUV radiation-induced skin cancer and may be used preventively and therapeutically in themanagement of UV radiation (UVR) induced skin carcinogenesis [57,58].Figures illustrating the main mechanisms of action presented can be observed in detail
in [5,20,43,45,52,55,57,58]. However, Figure 1 summarizes the main dermatological andcosmetic biological activities of resveratrol on the skin, which will be discussed in detail inthe following sections.Cosmetics 2023 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 29   dermophytes, as the kerati nocytes divide into corni ﬁed cells that are taken up by the der-mophytes [53]. In the case of parasitic infection, RES inhibits the epimastigote’s growth, further causing histone deacet ylation and controlling the expression of the gene [54]. The topical application of RES on the skin inhibits photocarcinogenesis [55]. RES can reduce tyrosinase activity [56] . It has the potential to modu late diverse mechanisms that participate in cell cycle regulation (cyclin kinase inhibitors, cyclins, and cyclin-dependent kinases); apoptosis (survivin, second mitoch ondria-derived activator of caspases/Direct IAP-binding protein with low pI (Smac/DIA BLO), and p53); autophagy (light chain and
Rictor); ROS production (lipid peroxidation (LPO)); cell proliferation (proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), NF- κB, and Ki-67); and tumor promotion (cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC)). Thus, RES has an e ﬀective protective role against UV radiation-induced skin cancer and may be used preventively and therapeuti-cally in the management of UV radiation (UVR) induced skin carcinogenesis [57,58]. Figures illustrating the main mechanisms of action presented can be observed in de-tail in [5,20,43,45,52,55,57,58]. However, Figure 1 summarizes the main dermatological and cosmetic biological activities of resveratrol on the skin, which will be discussed in detail in the following sections.  Figure 1. Main dermatological and cosmetic e ﬀects of resveratrol on the skin.    Figure 1. Main dermatological and cosmetic effects of resveratrol on the skin.2.2. Skin Effects2.2.1. Anti-Aging
2.2. Skin Effects2.2.1. Anti-AgingResveratrol has been investigated with regard to a group of distinct anti-aging effects,in particular due to its antioxidant effects [59,60].Miura et al. (2000) showed that RES had strong antioxidant activity, acting by in-hibiting iron-catalyzed and UV light-induced lipid peroxidation, and as a pro-oxidantof deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) by decreasing ADP-Fe3+in the presence of H 2O2[61].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 5 of 28The anti-aging potential use of the RES alone, and also of the binary systems of inclusioncomplexes RES/ β-cyclodextrin and RES/polyethylene glycol (PEG), was studied. Thecytotoxicity and inhibitory effects of ROS following hydrogen peroxide challenge in thepresence of RES, with or without excipients, were investigated on HaCaT cells. The RESalone significantly reduced hydrogen peroxide-induced ROS production, more so than thebinary system RES/PEG. Finally, the effect of a cream containing RES on different skinparameters was evaluated on human volunteers to assess their protective effect against pho-toaging injuries. A visible improvement in clinical conditions of all patients was observed,with a notable decrease in aging signs. These results indicated that different parametersof the skin, including hydration, luminosity, and skin elasticity improved with statistical
significance, demonstrating its clinical efficacy. In addition, this therapy was consideredsafe, and there were no reported adverse effects [62].Lephart et al. (2014) showed that RES can improve skin aging by influencing the geneexpression positively by stimulating sirtuin 1 (silent mating type information regulation 2homolog 1 (SIRT1)), extracellular matrix proteins (collagen and elastin), and antioxidants,and also by reducing inflammatory and dermal-aging biomarkers. RES anti-aging pro-tection mainly involved the enhancement of specific dermal biomarkers through severalmechanisms, and, therefore, demonstrates its capacity to improve human skin [63].The effect of RES on the recovery and rejuvenation of rat skin submitted to chemi-cal peeling was analyzed. It was observed that it led to increased epidermal thickness,suggesting that RES interfered with the epidermal renewal process, and increased dermal
thickness, which could be related with superior collagen formation, which could improveskin firmness and elasticity, and contribute to skin rejuvenation and wrinkle decrease [ 64].Another study demonstrated that RES controlled skin aging caused by UVB exposurethrough downregulation of the oxidative stress-mediated aging, inflammation-induced skinaging, and apoptosis-mediated skin aging, as well as wrinkle appearance. However, RESshowed normal toxicity to human dermal fibroblasts. The authors also used a geneticallyengineered vehicle for RES (rice), called RES-enriched rice, that did not have cellulartoxicity and elicited an additive effect to attenuate UVB-ROS-induced skin aging, andtherefore considered it a useful ingredient for the formulation of cosmectics for anti-agingpurposes [20].Abbas et al. (2018) prepared lipid Compritol®from Gattefoss è(Saint-Priest Cedex,France) ATO-based RES colloidal carriers. Following exposure to UV radiation, in vivo
investigations were conducted to evaluate the antioxidant markers catalase (CAT), loweredglutathione (GSH), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) (Figure 2(A1)); anti-inflammatorymarkers IL-6, IL-8, and rat NF- κB) (Figure 2(A2)); and anti-wrinkling and anti-photoagingmarkers MMP-1 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)(Figure 2(A3)). Rats who were pre-treated with the RES aqueous suspension displayed ameaningful improvement, as only a few wrinkles and scar traces were observed, and thelevels of biochemical markers were significantly different compared to the positive controlgroup’s levels (Figure 2(A1–A3)), despite the higher effect observed with colloidal carrierformulations. In addition, the considerable protective action on the skin was proved byvisual (Figure 2(B1,B2)) and histopathological analysis (Figure 2(C1,C2)) of the rats’ skin:in the group subjected to UVB radiation, serious wrinkling was verified in the external
surface of the epidermis related to acanthosis and prickle cell layer degeneration. The RESsuspension treatment resulted in moderate wrinkling in the outermost cell layer of the
surface of the epidermis related to acanthosis and prickle cell layer degeneration. The RESsuspension treatment resulted in moderate wrinkling in the outermost cell layer of theepidermis, and no signs of inflammation were observed [65].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 6 of 28Cosmetics 2023,  10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 29 The RES suspension treatment resulted in mode rate wrinkling in the outermost cell layer of the epidermis, and no signs of in ﬂammation were observed [65]. Figure 2. (A1) Antioxidant, ( A2) anti-in ﬂammatory, and ( A3) anti-aging activities  of RES suspension (T1), compared with the control groups (positive and negative). * Statistically signi ﬁcantly di ﬀerent from the normal control group (P  < 0.05) # Statistically signi ﬁcantly di ﬀerent from the T1 group (P < 0.05). Photographs of the rats’ dorsal skin: (B1 ) positive control group and ( B2) irradiated followed by topical pre-treatment with RES suspension. Histop athological observation of  the rats’ dorsal skin: (C1) positive control group and ( C2) irradiated followed by topica l pre-treatment with RES suspen-sion. Adapted from [65]. 2.2.2. Photoprotective Several studies have demonstrated the e ﬀects of UV radiation from the sun, speci ﬁ-
cally UVB radiation (280–320 nm), in various skin diseases, namely erythema, edema, hy-perplasia, hyperpigmentation, sunburn cells, immunosuppression, skin cancers, and premature skin aging and photoaging [66]. Th ese skin diseases occurred after chronic UV radiation and are caused by excessive in ﬂammation induction, oxidative stress and DNA damage, premature skin aging, and various e ﬀects on the immune system [37,67,68]. In a study in SKH-1 hairless mice, it was described that topical application of RES before UVB radiation decreased skin thickness and punch weight of the ear in comparison with controls [57]. Moreover, another study assessed the involvement of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family survivin during RES-mediated protection from various expo-sures of UVB radiation in the hairless mouse sk in. The results showed that previous topi-cal application of RES resulted in signi ﬁcant inhibition of enhanced cellular proliferation
provoked by UVB radiation, protein levels of epidermal COX-2 and ODC, recognized markers of tumor promotion, proteins, and me ssenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) levels of survivin, as well as phosphorylation of survivin  in hairless mice’s skin. Previous treatment with RES in mouse skin also caused the reve rsal of the UVB-mediated decline in Smac/DI-ABLO, and improvement in UVB-induced apoptosis [69]. Chen et al. (2006) evaluated the addition of RES immediately after UVA radiation of HaCaT cells, which resulted in complete protection against damages caused by UVA ex-posure in keratinocyte proliferation, and an increase in malondialdehyde concentration. Additionally, both SOD and glutathione peroxidase contents in keratinocytes exposed to UVA were equilibrated by dose-dependent therapy [70]. In another study, RES again demonstrated an increase in HaCaT cell viability after UVA radiation and protected them
Figure 2. (A1) Antioxidant, ( A2) anti-inflammatory, and ( A3) anti-aging activities of RES suspension(T1), compared with the control groups (positive and negative). * Statistically significantly differentfrom the normal control group ( p< 0.05) # Statistically significantly different from the T1 group(p< 0.05). Photographs of the rats’ dorsal skin: ( B1) positive control group and ( B2) irradiatedfollowed by topical pre-treatment with RES suspension. Histopathological observation of the rats’dorsal skin: ( C1) positive control group and ( C2) irradiated followed by topical pre-treatment withRES suspension. Adapted from [65].2.2.2. PhotoprotectiveSeveral studies have demonstrated the effects of UV radiation from the sun, specif-ically UVB radiation (280–320 nm), in various skin diseases, namely erythema, edema,hyperplasia, hyperpigmentation, sunburn cells, immunosuppression, skin cancers, and
premature skin aging and photoaging [ 66]. These skin diseases occurred after chronic UVradiation and are caused by excessive inflammation induction, oxidative stress and DNA
premature skin aging and photoaging [ 66]. These skin diseases occurred after chronic UVradiation and are caused by excessive inflammation induction, oxidative stress and DNAdamage, premature skin aging, and various effects on the immune system [37,67,68].In a study in SKH-1 hairless mice, it was described that topical application of RESbefore UVB radiation decreased skin thickness and punch weight of the ear in comparisonwith controls [ 57]. Moreover, another study assessed the involvement of the inhibitor ofapoptosis protein family survivin during RES-mediated protection from various exposuresof UVB radiation in the hairless mouse skin. The results showed that previous topicalapplication of RES resulted in significant inhibition of enhanced cellular proliferationprovoked by UVB radiation, protein levels of epidermal COX-2 and ODC, recognizedmarkers of tumor promotion, proteins, and messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) levels
of survivin, as well as phosphorylation of survivin in hairless mice’s skin. Previoustreatment with RES in mouse skin also caused the reversal of the UVB-mediated decline inSmac/DIABLO, and improvement in UVB-induced apoptosis [69].Chen et al. (2006) evaluated the addition of RES immediately after UVA radiationof HaCaT cells, which resulted in complete protection against damages caused by UVAexposure in keratinocyte proliferation, and an increase in malondialdehyde concentration.Additionally, both SOD and glutathione peroxidase contents in keratinocytes exposedto UVA were equilibrated by dose-dependent therapy [ 70]. In another study, RES againdemonstrated an increase in HaCaT cell viability after UVA radiation and protected themfrom the subsequent oxidative stress. However, in this study, the effects on the proteins andmRNA of nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (Nrf2) and Kelch-like-ECH-associated
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 7 of 28protein 1 (Keap1) were shown: after UVA exposure to the cells, RES increased the level ofNrf2 protein. In this study, it was found that a known repressor of Nrf2 in the cytoplasm(Keap1 protein) was diminished by treatment with RES, and the level of Keap1 mRNA wasstill enhanced. Thus, RES promotes the degradation of Keap1 protein and then increasesNrf2 stabilization and promotes its nucleus translocation, protecting HaCaT cells fromUVA-induced oxidative stress [71].Additionally, it was observed that HaCaT cells markedly decreased cell proliferationrates in a dose-dependent manner after UVB radiation. The pretreatment of RES on UVBradiation increased cell survival, which concomitantly reduced ROS formation, leadingto the mitigation of UV-induced DNA injury. Furthermore, the activations of caspase-3,-8, and -9 were partially decreased in RES-pretreated HaCaT cells, suggesting that the
attenuation of these caspases is involved in cell survival after UVB radiation [37].Pre-treatment with RES protected against UVB- and H 2O2-induced cell death andapoptosis in HaCaT cells through the activation of SIRT1, which is functionally expressedin cultured skin keratinocytes. These results suggest that SIRT1 might be a new target thatprotects against UV/ROS-induced cell damage on the skin conducive to photoaging andcancer of the skin [ 72]. Vitale et al. (2013) also found that HaCaT cells pre-treated with RESand subsequently exposed to UVB radiation showed a reduction in the induced UVB effectssuch as ROS formation and detrimental counteraction of HaCaT cell viability, as well asincreased caspase-8, Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage, and induced autophagy [ 19].Another study also showed that the viability of UVB-irradiated HaCaT cells pre-treated with RES was significantly increased. RES inhibited UVB-induced apoptosis by
upregulation of HSP27 expression and through intervention on the mitochondrial caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway, by decreasing the formation of proapoptotic proteins (p65,Bax, and cleaved caspase-3), and by promoting the expression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Although UVB radiation on HaCaT cells pretreated with RES resulted in the upregulationof Bax, downregulation of Bcl-2, and activation of p65 and caspase-3 after silencing of theHSP27 gene, it was pointed out that the inhibition of HSP27 expression may, in part, reversethe anti-apoptotic action of RES, and confirmed that RES can regulate HSP27, therebyregulating the activation of p65 and caspase-3 and, thus, preventing skin photoaging [36].In normal human epidermal keratinocytes, the contribution of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kB) was studied as the mechanism of chemoprevention of UV damage by RES. Itwas found that RES blocked the activation of NF-kB caused by UVB in a dose-dependent
and time-dependent manner [ 73]. Furthermore, treatment of normal human epidermalkeratinocytes with RES before UVA and UVB radiation reduced the expression of proin-flammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, and TNF- α) [24]. Likewise, the addition of RES after UVAand UVB radiation also decreased the expression of IL-1 βand IL-6 [ 74]. Lee et al. (2012)tested RES in two human-derived cell lines (hTERT-RPE and CRL-11147), which are in vitromodels of photooxidative stress caused by exposure to the UV-visible (VIS) broadband.Regarding untreated cells, UV-VIS broadband exposure caused a reduction in proliferativecapacity, an activation of NF- κB, and an enhancement of protein carbonyl adducts after24 h of exposure, while previous treatment of the cells with RES significantly lowered thephosphorylated NF- κB and reduced the burden of light-induced protein carbonyl adductsin exposed cells after 24 h of exposure. These results point out that RES modulates the
cellular response to photochemical stress by interplaying with particular cell-signaling
in exposed cells after 24 h of exposure. These results point out that RES modulates thecellular response to photochemical stress by interplaying with particular cell-signalingpathways [ 38]. More recently, in vivo rat studies were performed in order to investigatethe photoprotective action of RES suspension, or encapsulation in surfactant-based elasticvesicles (spanlastics). The application of RES in the suspension showed a protective effectfrom UVB radiation, namely from edema, erythema, and scars (inflammation signs) andirritation. It was observed in markers, namely an increase in antioxidants (CAT, GSH, andSOD), and a reduction in the anti-inflammatory (IL-6, IL-8, and NF- κB) and anti-wrinkling(MMP-1 and GM-CSF) markers in the group in the RES suspension, compared to thepositive control, which was exposed to UVB radiation. These results were also confirmedby histopathological examination: in the rats to which the RES suspension was applied,
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 8 of 28the effects caused by the UVB radiation were reduced, in that the hair follicles exhibitedslight epithelial hyperplasia with little cystic dilatation; meanwhile, in the rats of the pos-itive control group, epithelial hyperplasia, cystic dilatation, and central keratosis wereobserved [75].2.2.3. Estrogen-likeThe decline of 17 β-estradiol levels after menopause is associated with both general andskin-related health concerns, such as collagen loss, elastin, fibroblast function, vascularity,and enhanced MMP enzymatic effects, resulting in cellular and extracellular degradationthat contributes to dryness, wrinkles, atrophy, impaired wound healing/barrier func-tion, reduced antioxidant effects, attractiveness and psychological health, and improvedawareness of aging [ 76]. However, hormone replacement has been shown to increase thecontent of collagen, hydration, skin elasticity, and skin thickness, and also decrease skin
wrinkles [ 77,78]. RES is one polyphenolic/phytoestrogen compound that has an identicalchemical structure and some overlapping biological activities to 17 β-estradiol (Lephart,2017). RES presents mixed agonist/antagonist activity over the α- and β-estrogen receptorsand differentially influences the transcriptional effect of α- and β-estrogen receptors inan estrogen response element sequence-dependent way. The RES in tissues in which β-estrogen receptor expression is superior to that of α-estrogen receptors can be more proneto RES, as an agonist of estrogen receptors [ 39]. In previous work, it was also shown thatRES inhibited estradiol’s binding to the estrogen receptor and activated the transcription ofestrogen-responsive reporter genes at levels similar to those necessary for its additional bi-ological activities. This transcriptional activation was estrogen receptor-dependent, neededan estrogen-response component in the reporter gene, and was inhibited by specific antag-
onists of estrogen type [ 40]. Anti-estrogenic effects of RES have also been reported in thepresence of estradiol, which was associated with cancer chemoprevention effects [79].Furthermore, RES, on cultured skin fibroblast cells can inhibit the activity of collage-nase, increasing the production of collagen [ 41]. In addition, RES inhibited the β-estrogenreceptor by 210%, but caused no change in gene expression in the α-estrogen receptor.It was also noted that RES stimulated the collagen and elastin, and inhibited MMPs bystimulating tissue inhibitors of MMP-1, thus inhibiting the degradation of collagen andcausing anti-aging activity [ 63]. Despite the known involvement of the estrogen receptorson the skin, and that it is known that RES binds to the estrogen receptors, further studiesevaluating the action of RES specifically are lacking.2.2.4. Skin-WhiteningThe control of the formation of melanin is a relevant strategy to treat pigmentation dis-
orders. In particular, in the process of melanogenesis, it is essential to act directly/indirectlyon the enzyme tyrosinase and its related signaling pathways [80].Bernard and Berthon [ 81] evaluated the effect of RES on tyrosinase activity and re-ported that RES behaves as a substrate of tyrosinase and is biotransformed into an oxidatedform, becoming a powerful inhibitor of tyrosinase. In addition, Satooka et al. (2012) re-ported that oxidation of RES and inhibition of L-tyrosine oxidation suggested the inhibitoryactivities of metabolites of RES on tyrosinase through k(cat) inhibition. In in vitro studiesusing B16-F10 murine melanoma cells, melanin production was inhibited without cytotoxiceffects up to 200 µM. These results suggested the use of RES as a promising tyrosinaseinhibitor and a melanogenesis inhibitor [ 82]. In a previous study, it was reported that it wasnot due to alterations in microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, but was justified
inhibitor and a melanogenesis inhibitor [ 82]. In a previous study, it was reported that it wasnot due to alterations in microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, but was justifiedby both direct tyrosinase inhibition and post-transcriptional activity that decreased theamount of completely processed tyrosinase [44].Another study reported that RES inhibits tyrosinase activity and melanin synthesis inmurine melanoma B16 cells [ 83]. Similarly, Park et al. (2013) reported that RES inhibits thetyrosinase activity in transformed non-melanocytic human embryonic kidney 293 cells [ 84].Thereafter, the potent inhibition effects of RES against cellular melanin synthesis in B16/F10
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 9 of 28cells and human epidermal melanocytes was reported: it was found that RES also sup-pressed the protein expression of tyrosinase in human epidermal melanocytes stimulatedwith L-tyrosine. RES also suppressed L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine chrome tautomeraseand microphthalmia-associated transcription factor expression at 10 µM. Furthermore, theanti-melanogenic effects were evaluated in tissues using a 3D reconstituted skin model,MelanoDermTMfrom MatTek Corporation (Ashland, MA, USA), and a decrease in themelanin content using RES, in comparison with the vehicle control, was observed [85].In other studies, the effect of RES in the presence of exposure to UVB was evaluated.In a study using dark-skinned Yucatan swine, topical therapy with 1% RES over 8 weeksprovoked visible skin lightening without signs of irritation or additional undesired ef-fects [ 86]. In an additional study using light-skinned Yucatan swine, skin tanning was
promoted by exposing the animals to one minimal erythema dose of UVB, on three alternatedays. Treatment with 1% RES over 2 weeks, after each UVB exposure, and on non-UVBexposure days, diminished UVB-induced pigment deposition. Lee et al. (2014) evaluatedthe influence of RES on pigmentation in brownish guinea pig skin with UVB-inducedhyperpigmentation. In addition, the effects of RES in stimulated α-melanocyte-stimulatinghormone ( α-MSH) B16F10 mouse melanoma cells were also evaluated. The results showedthat RES reduced melanin production and the underlying mechanisms are the reducedexpressions of melanogenesis-related proteins tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related proteins (TRP)1 and -2 (TRP-2), and microphthalmia-associated transcription factors (MITF) in melanomacells (Figure 3(A1)). The expressions of tyrosinase, TRP-1 and TRP-2, and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor in the skin tissue of guinea pigs were also evaluated, showing
a reduction (Figure 3(A2)). Furthermore, the dorsal skin of brown guinea pigs of the UVB-negative group (Figure 3(B1)), UVB-positive group (Figure 3(B2)), and UVB+ and 1% RES(Figure 3(B3)) group treated for 2 weeks showed that the topical application of RES signifi-cantly decreases hyperpigmentation on UVB-stimulated guinea pig skin in vivo . Based onhistological results using Fontana-Masson stain for melanin in the skin of brown guineapigs from the UVB-negative group (Figure 3(C1)), UVB-positive group (Figure 3(C2)),and UVB+ and 1% RES (Figure 3(C3)) group treated for 2 weeks, RES inhibited melaninsynthesis, supporting RES as a depigmentation agent. Thus, these results showed that RESinhibits melanin synthesis in both models, and also supports the fact that RES could be apotential skin-whitening active ingredient [87].2.2.5. Anti-AcneThe main pathogenic factors concerned to acne vulgaris are ductal hyperkeratinization,
obstruction of sebaceous follicles, stimulation of sebaceous gland secretion by androgens,and microbial colonization of pilosebaceous units by P . acnes , which induces perifollicularinflammation [ 47]. Resveratrol also can limit acne vulgaris, due to its antibacterial effectsagainst P . acnes, and due to the ability to reduce sebum production [88].In a study, RES was incorporated into a carboxymethylcellulose-based hydrogel thatwas administered to 20 patients affected by acne vulgaris. The RES-containing formulationwas applied daily on one side of the face for 60 days, while the hydrogel vehicle wasadministered to the other side of the face (control). In the patients, the number and typeof lesions were recorded and compared using the Global Acne Grading System (GAGS)score initially and at the end of the investigation. Furthermore, with the recent methodof follicular biopsy, areas of acneic skin were prepared for histopathologic analysis. The
average area occupied by microcomedones at baseline was compared with that at the
of follicular biopsy, areas of acneic skin were prepared for histopathologic analysis. Theaverage area occupied by microcomedones at baseline was compared with that at thecompletion of therapy. The therapy was well tolerated, and no side effects were verified.An average 53.75% reduction in the GAGS score on the RES-treated sides of the face wasobserved, in comparison with the 6.10% on the vehicle-treated side. These results weresupported by histology, which depicted a 66.7% mean lowering in the average area ofmicrocomedones on the RES-treated sides of the face compared to a 9.7% reduction on thevehicle-treated side of the face. This study pointed to potential for the use of RES in acne
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 10 of 28and should be regarded as a starting point for further investigation of the efficiency of thiscompound [47].Cosmetics 2023 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 29    Figure 3. Eﬀects of RES on the expression of pr oteins involved in melanogenesis: ( A1) in B16F10 cells exposed to 1, 10, and 100 µM RES for 48 h; ( A2) in the skin of guinea pigs treated with 1% RES for 2 weeks. E ﬀects of RES on melanin synthesis after UVB exposure to induce skin pigmentation of brown guinea pigs: representative images of the dorsal skin of brown guinea pigs of ( B1) UVB-negative group (UVB); ( B2) UVB-positive group (UVB+); and ( B3) UVB+ and 1% RES group treated for 2 weeks. Results of Fontana-Masson stain for melanin in the skin of brown guinea pigs ( C1) UVB-, ( C2) UVB+, and ( C3) UVB+ and 1% RES treated group for 2 weeks (arrowheads indicate mel-anin). Adapted from [87]. 2.2.5. Anti-Acne
anin). Adapted from [87]. 2.2.5. Anti-Acne The main pathogenic factors concerned to acne vulgaris are ductal hyperkeratiniza-tion, obstruction of sebaceous follicles, stim ulation of sebaceous gland secretion by andro-gens, and microbial colonization of pilosebaceous units by P. acnes , which induces peri-follicular in ﬂammation [47]. Resveratrol also can limit acne vulgaris, due to its antibacte-rial eﬀects against P. acnes, and due to the ability to re duce sebum production [88]. In a study, RES was incorporated into a ca rboxymethylcellulose-based hydrogel that was administered to 20 patients a ﬀected by acne vulgaris. Th e RES-containing formula-tion was applied daily on one side of the fa ce for 60 days, while the hydrogel vehicle was administered to the other side of the face (c ontrol). In the patients, the number and type of lesions were recorded and compared usin g the Global Acne Grading System (GAGS)
score initially and at the end of the investigat ion. Furthermore, with the recent method of follicular biopsy, areas of acneic skin were prepared for histopathologic analysis. The av-erage area occupied by microcomedones at baseline was compared with that at the com-pletion of therapy. The therapy was well tolerated, and no side e ﬀects were veri ﬁed. An average 53.75% reduction in the GAGS score on  the RES-treated sides of the face was ob-served, in comparison with the 6.10% on the vehicle-treated side. These results were sup-ported by histology, which depicted a 66.7% mean lowering in the average area of Figure 3. Effects of RES on the expression of proteins involved in melanogenesis: ( A1) in B16F10cells exposed to 1, 10, and 100 µM RES for 48 h; ( A2) in the skin of guinea pigs treated with 1% RESfor2 weeks . Effects of RES on melanin synthesis after UVB exposure to induce skin pigmentation
of brown guinea pigs: representative images of the dorsal skin of brown guinea pigs of ( B1) UVB-negative group (UVB); ( B2) UVB-positive group (UVB+); and ( B3) UVB+ and 1% RES group treatedfor 2 weeks. Results of Fontana-Masson stain for melanin in the skin of brown guinea pigs ( C1) UVB-,(C2) UVB+, and ( C3) UVB+ and 1% RES treated group for 2 weeks (arrowheads indicate melanin).Adapted from [87].It was also observed that RES had strong and delayed antibacterial activity against P .acnes, whereas benzoyl peroxide, a commonly applied antibacterial drug for acne, exhibiteda short-term bactericidal response (effective initially, but not sustained beyond the first 24 hperiod). Low levels of bacteria were found when RES and benzoyl peroxide were combinedand, therefore, they may complement each other when used in combination treatmentin vivo , improving therapeutic results. Electron microscopy of P . acnes treated with RES
showed alterations in bacterial morphology, with a reduction in membrane definitionand in well-defined extracellular fimbrial structures. In addition, RES was significantlyless cytotoxic compared to benzoyl peroxide, which may translate to decreased irritationin vivo [89].
and in well-defined extracellular fimbrial structures. In addition, RES was significantlyless cytotoxic compared to benzoyl peroxide, which may translate to decreased irritationin vivo [89].The possible cellular pathways associated with RES on human SZ95 sebocytes werealso investigated. The results revealed that RES inhibited the proliferation of sebocytes,which was shown to be involved in the inactivation of ERK, Akt (protein kinase B), andperoxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)- γ. In order to investigate the antiprolif-erative effects of RES, the levels of cell cycle control proteins were evaluated. RES inhibitedcyclin D1 synthesis, whereas it stimulated p21 and p27 protein synthesis. Additionally, it
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 11 of 28was proved that the RES-mediated cell cycle arrest was caused by the inactivation of theAkt pathway. It was also found that RES blocked the linoleic acid-induced transcription ofPPAR- γand sebocyte lipogenesis [48].Dos Santos et al. (2019) evaluated the in vitro antimicrobial activities against P . acnesand the topical anti-edematogenic and anti-inflammatory activities of RES in vivo in micewith ear edema using several biochemical markers. Mice were challenged, by intradermalroute, with a suspension comprising P . acnes , after which groups of mice were diverselytreated with RES. The results were most pronounced in the chronic phase. Mice treatedwith RES produced a 40% reduction in edema, a 50% reduction in IL-1 β, and a 35%reduction in myeloperoxidase. In addition, it provoked an enhancement of GSH levels incomparison to the treatment with benzoyl peroxide and the control, and also evidenced
increased SOD activity compared to the control. In terms of CAT, none of the treatmentgroups evidenced any significant results. Compared to mice in the control group and onestreated with benzoyl peroxide, mice treated with RES showed lower levels of thiobarbituricacid-reactive substances [90].Wei et al. (2021) elucidated the involved mechanisms by which RES presents sebo-suppressive and anti-inflammatory activities on linoleic acid-induced lipogenesis andpeptidoglycan-induced inflammation in human SZ95 sebocytes, respectively. RES inhibitedthe lipogenesis-related pathway and NF- κB pathway in SZ95 sebocytes. It additionallydownregulated linoleic acid-induced lipogenesis, the expression of lipid-related proteins,and the concentrations of unsaturated fatty acids. Likewise, RES increased the expressionof SIRT1 and the deacetylation of the NF- κB p65 subunit, which decreased IL-1 βand IL-6secretion under peptidoglycan induction. Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (AMPK) inhibitor pretreatment eliminated RES-mediated sebo-suppressive and anti-inflammatory effects. Meanwhile, SIRT1 silencing abolished the anti-inflammatory abilityof RES. Thus, in SZ95 sebocytes, RES exhibited sebo-suppressive and anti-inflammatoryactivities partially via the activation of the AMPK signaling pathway, which may explainthe effect of RES in the therapy of acne vulgaris [49].2.2.6. Cutaneous Wound HealingWound healing is a dynamic and complex biological process: an organism’s natu-ral response, which involves interplay among cellular components, growth factors, cy-tokines, and the extracellular matrix [ 91]. It involves the repair of the tensile strength ofinjured/wounded skin and tissue repair following surgery [92].Wound healing is mostly divided into three phases: inflammation, proliferation, andremodeling [ 91]. During this process, several growth factors (GFs) and their receptors
are altered, namely platelet-derived GF, fibroblast GF, epidermal GF, tumor GF, vascularendothelial GF, hepatocyte GF, and keratinocyte GF [91]. Thus, cutaneous wound healingcomprises the proliferation of fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and collagen deposition [5].Open cutaneous wounds exhibit lesions that show the damaged parts in either theepidermis or the dermis (Bilgic et al., 2021). The disruption of the permeability of theepidermis leads to the release of cytokines (proinflammatory) in the skin and circulation(Ye et al., 2019). This further induces the penetration and activation of the inflammatory cellsin the skin, which further leads to the development of inflammatory dermatoses. Disruptionof the barrier affects homeostasis and involves epidermal proliferation, creating a risk of thepenetration of microbial pathogens into the skin (Wen et al., 2020). Resveratrol has severalbenefits for cutaneous functions, such as the stimulation of keratinocyte differentiation,
antimicrobial peptide expression, cutaneous inflammation, and inhibition of melanogenesis.
benefits for cutaneous functions, such as the stimulation of keratinocyte differentiation,antimicrobial peptide expression, cutaneous inflammation, and inhibition of melanogenesis.Resveratrol activates sirtuin 1 and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2, and blocksthe signaling of mitogen-activated protein kinase [5].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 12 of 28RES accelerates the wound healing process and vascularization in the aged group ofanimal models via the upregulation of SIRT1 and AMPK pathways and activation of antiox-idant enzymes (thioredoxin-1 and heme oxygenase-1) (Zhao et al., 2017) (Lakshmanan et al.,2019). Topical application of RES to the wound surface of diabetic animal models inhibitedthe apoptosis of the endothelial cells, which accelerated wound healing phenomenon andalso protected the endothelial cells from oxidative stress (Wen et al., 2020).The purpose of cutaneous wound healing involves the development and formation ofan unbroken permeability barrier that involves both the production of lipid productionand the differentiation of keratinocytes. RES accelerates cutaneous wound healing bystimulating keratinocyte differentiation and lipid production (Wen et al., 2020).A novel wound dressing that consists of chitosan-sodium hyaluronate-RES exhibited
benefits in cutaneous wound healing (Berce et al., 2018). According to a study, HaCaT cellsexposed to different doses of RES found that lower concentrations of RES exhibited lessimpact on the viability of the cell. Along with this, LPS (Lipopolysaccharide) treatment withRES depicted an LPS-induced improvement in keratinocyte injury (Liu et al., 2021). There-fore, RES plays a crucial role in the healing of the wounds by enhancing the proliferation ofkeratinocytes and their migration. A skin wound healing animal model is represented inFigure 4. The animals were categorized into four groups and treated with RES, consistingof negative control (NC) inhibitor or miR-212 inhibitor. Subsequently, the wounds weremeasured for a period of 10 days (days 0, 4, 7, and 10) (Figure 4(C1–C4)). Figure 3A depictsthe measurement of miR-212 and CASP8 with relative mRNA expressions and relativeprotein levels (Figure 4(B)) via qrt-PCR and western blot in both wound and normal tissues.
In wound tissues, miR-212 expressions were reduced as compared to the control group,whereas CASP8 activity enhanced abundantly. It was thus observed that treatment withRES significantly improved wound healing from days 7 to 10 (Figure 4(C2)) and this effectwas reversed with the miR-212 knockdown. On the final day, i.e., day 10, the woundedtissues were exposed to paraffin embedding and were sliced into 5 µm sections. Subse-quently, the tissues were hematoxylin and eosin stained and examined under a microscope(Figure 4(E1–E4)). A clear depiction of wound healing with RES treatment was observedon day 10 (Figure 4(E4)).RES assists in the regulation of wounds produced by diabetes through the SIRT1-FOXO1-c Myc signaling angiogenesis pathway (Huang et al., 2019). RES also promotes cellproliferation and migration in HaCaT cell lines by regulating miR-212/CASP8. This studydemonstrates a new mechanism of RES in wound healing. In human health, RES has a
protective and pro-apoptotic role at a low to moderate dose and high dose, respectively(Liu et al., 2021).
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 13 of 28Cosmetics 2023 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 29    Figure 4. The eﬀect of RES, RES + miR-212, and RES + in hibitor NC on mice wound healing: ( A) measure of miR-212 and CASP8 ranges wi th relative mRNA expressions; ( B) measure of miR-212 and CASP8 abundances with relative protein level.  Wound area was measured for 10 days in  (C1) control group; ( C2) RES-treated group; ( C3) Res + inhibitor NC-treated animal group; ( C4) Res + miR-212 inhibitor-treated animal group. ( D) Comparative analysis of all the treated groups deter-mining a relative wound area (%) over several days. ( E1) Wound tissues of the control group were stained with HE on day 10; ( E2) wound tissues of RES-treated group were stained with HE on day 10; ( E3) wound tissues of RES + inhibitor NC-treated group were stained with HE on day 10; ( E4) wound tissues of RES + miR-212-treated grou p were stained with HE on day 10. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.005). Adapted from [93].
0.005). Adapted from [93]. 2.2.7. Anti-Scarring Scarring is the process in which many di ﬀerent types of tissues, especially collagen-ous ones, combine with each other and renew the integrity of the structure such that the tensile strength is maintained, and its function is retained. Resveratrol has been studied as a famous anti-scarring agent due to its po lyphenolic content, and it possesses the ca-pacity to reduce the proliferat ion of cells by arresting the cell cycle and generating apop-tosis [50]. According to Zeng et al., (2013) RES has shown that hypertrophic scar-derived ﬁbroblasts inhibited and arrested the cell cy cle in a time- and dose-dependent manner [94]. The evidence of the phototrophic e ﬀect of RES through the regulation of heat shock proteins and an experimental set-up for the anti-apoptotic e ﬀect via inhibition of NF-kB and caspase was de ﬁned signi ﬁcantly [36]. In a recent study, RES was utilized in the form
of vehicle-enabling hydrogels (peptides) that inhibit scar formation. Resveratrol is re-leased slowly from the hydrogels, and peptide hydrogel-RES is commonly used in rat models to study wound healing, scar prevention, and in ﬂammation processes [95]. RES promotes inhibition of hypertrophic scars by  initiating autophagy with the help of miR-Figure 4. The effect of RES, RES + miR-212, and RES + inhibitor NC on mice wound healing:(A) measure of miR-212 and CASP8 ranges with relative mRNA expressions; ( B) measure of miR-212and CASP8 abundances with relative protein level. Wound area was measured for 10 days in ( C1)control group; ( C2) RES-treated group; ( C3) Res + inhibitor NC-treated animal group; ( C4) Res + miR-212 inhibitor-treated animal group. ( D) Comparative analysis of all the treated groups determininga relative wound area (%) over several days. ( E1) Wound tissues of the control group were stained
with HE on day 10; ( E2) wound tissues of RES-treated group were stained with HE on day 10;(E3) wound tissues of RES + inhibitor NC-treated group were stained with HE on day 10; ( E4) woundtissues of RES + miR-212-treated group were stained with HE on day 10. (* p< 0.05, ** p< 0.005).Adapted from [93].2.2.7. Anti-ScarringScarring is the process in which many different types of tissues, especially collagenousones, combine with each other and renew the integrity of the structure such that the tensilestrength is maintained, and its function is retained. Resveratrol has been studied as afamous anti-scarring agent due to its polyphenolic content, and it possesses the capacity toreduce the proliferation of cells by arresting the cell cycle and generating apoptosis [ 50].According to Zeng et al., (2013) RES has shown that hypertrophic scar-derived fibroblastsinhibited and arrested the cell cycle in a time- and dose-dependent manner [ 94]. The
evidence of the phototrophic effect of RES through the regulation of heat shock proteinsand an experimental set-up for the anti-apoptotic effect via inhibition of NF-kB and caspase
evidence of the phototrophic effect of RES through the regulation of heat shock proteinsand an experimental set-up for the anti-apoptotic effect via inhibition of NF-kB and caspasewas defined significantly [ 36]. In a recent study, RES was utilized in the form of vehicle-enabling hydrogels (peptides) that inhibit scar formation. Resveratrol is released slowlyfrom the hydrogels, and peptide hydrogel-RES is commonly used in rat models to studywound healing, scar prevention, and inflammation processes [ 95]. RES promotes inhibitionof hypertrophic scars by initiating autophagy with the help of miR-4645, and suppresses
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 14 of 28Rheb by binding to the 3′domain (untranslated) region. Autophagy in this process wasfound to be a decline in dose in cell viability studies [ 50]. Recently, there have been variousdrug delivery vehicles utilized, such as RES-loaded cellulose acetate butyrate nanoparticles.These act as biodegradable, biocompatible, and non-toxic materials. These are embeddedin a wafer and evaluated in animal models [ 96]. RES may act as an important and potentanti-scarring agent in fibroblasts, such as keloid and burn-related scarring. The mechanismbehind this property has also highlighted the signaling pathway of Shh through SIRT1mediation; thereby, the transcriptional activity of Gli-1 cells is enhanced [ 97]. RES utilizationas an anti-scarring agent has a promising role in cesarian section surgery, where the uterusundergoes the process of scarring. RES has provided a significant contribution in the
formation of the endometrium and in the development of epithelial tissue. Accordingto a study [ 98], RES has been potent in reducing scarring in the majority of the patients,approximately 87.3%, as compared to the control. In the case of pathological scar formation,especially in fibroblasts, the expression levels of the mechanistic target of rapamycin(mTOR), Akt, and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) molecules in the mTOR signalingpathway enhanced in the case of scar formation of fibroblasts, as compared to the control.With the treatment by RES, a dose-dependent relationship was followed and expressionquantity for the protein decreased as compared to the control. This may suggest the roleof RES in the inhibition of molecules in the signaling pathway and downregulating of theexpressional levels [ 99]. The effect of RES in the case of pathological scars has a greaterimpact on its mTOR signaling pathway. Expression of Akt and PI3K molecules is enhanced
with different RES concentrations in the mTOR signaling pathway [ 99]. RES has also beenused in combination with a drug such as praziquantel to treat major parasitic diseasesincluding schistosomiasis. This disease may include abdominal pain, diarrhea, joint pain,and even changes in internal organ tissues. Histological examination of the mouse modelssuffering from the disease exhibited damage in mitochondria and changes in the expressionlevel of fibrosis related to collagen. The treatment with these drugs has improved scars,further elevated the expression levels of mitochondrial genes as compared to the control,and also upregulated the biogenesis process [ 100]. Resveratrol decreases TGF- β1, collagenin keloid-derived factors from the proliferation of fibroblasts, and thereby induces theapoptosis process, but on the other hand, RES does not have a similar type of effect onsmooth muscle cells and collagen if the fibroblast present is normal [101].2.2.8. Antimicrobial
2.2.8. AntimicrobialResveratrol has played a significant role as an antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, andantiparasitic compound. Recently, this compound exhibited its usage both on its ownand with antibiotics. At a sublethal concentration, RES can inhibit the virulent effect ofpathogenic bacteria and can pave an inhibition in biofilm. The antioxidant effect of RESmakes it an ideal candidate against many topical agents. Trans-RES, an isoform of RES, hasbeen identified as a phytoalexin, and its minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) is activeagainst a broad range of microorganisms.AntibacterialResveratrol has been studied profoundly for its antibacterial activity. For a limitednumber of bacterial species, RES exhibits a MIC of less than 100 µg/mL. MIC ranged be-tween 100 and 200 µg/mL for gram-positive pathogenic bacteria and less than 200µg/mLfor gram-negative bacteria, [ 102]. The main mechanism that has been studied in the case of
gram-negative bacteria is the lower penetration power of RES and, subsequently, expulsion
for gram-negative bacteria, [ 102]. The main mechanism that has been studied in the case ofgram-negative bacteria is the lower penetration power of RES and, subsequently, expulsiondue to the efflux system. A similar mechanism was also supported by Paulo et al., (2010)showing that the presence of RES exhibits a decline in growth, whereas in the case ofgram-positive bacteria, there was a halt in growth. Resveratrol exhibits the binding ofadenosine tri-phosphate synthase in facultative aerobic bacteria, and also activates DNAfragmentation, as well as the stress response, in E. coli [103]. Several studies related to thebacteriostatic ability of RES, rather than bactericidal effects [ 51]. The action of RES also led
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 15 of 28to changes in the morphology of the bacteria, activating SOD and subsequently inhibitingthe cell [ 104]. In an experimental culture utilizing E. coli and Staphylococcus as a model,with RES in the culture medium along with antimicrobials, ROS levels were reduced tosub-lethal in the mutagenic culture. Meanwhile, in the absence of RES, the ROS levelsbecame elevated to their maximum levels, thereby predicting the role of antioxidants in theantimicrobial species [105].AntiviralThe specific potential antiviral activity of RES has been studied in several viruses, suchas the major family Reoviridae. A study with Caco-2 cells was incubated with differentvarying concentrations of RES ranging between 20 and 80 µg/mL. This protocol [ 52] wasutilized with different incubation times. The cytotoxicity assays in this study exhibited asignificant decline in the concentration of RES, suggesting that RES was highly effective
in inhibiting Reoviridae infection by blocking the viral protein expressions and genomicexpressions.The potential active interaction of Zika virus with natural compounds such as RES mayplay a significant role in intercellular signaling and inhibit the Zika virus cytopathy effect.A dose-dependent inhibition is the usual trend, and the mechanism involves inhibitoryactivity of pathways such as NF-kB, activator protein-1, protein synthesis inhibition, and adecrease in ROS production. During viral infection, a consequent regulatory response isan inflammation that can act as tumor development and proliferation [ 106]. Resveratrolhas been active against Epstein virus, rotavirus, and vesicular stomatitis virus, and leadsto a mechanistic role in blocking protein synthesis, decreasing the level of ROS, therebyinducing activation of transcription factors and, thus, affecting replication [ 107]. It has
been reported that low doses of RES can inhibit or even block HIV infection by causinginterference in the reverse transcription process [108].AntifungalResveratrol exhibited a superior antifungal effect as compared to other antifungalagents. Specific antifungal agents available on the market, such as imidazoles and ampho-tericin, follow the ergosterol pathway of the cell membrane of fungus, while RES inhibitsthe cell cycle and follows the NF-kB pathway. Concerning the specific concentration, i.e.,25–50 µg/mL of RES on specific fungus strains Saccharomyces ,Candida , and Trichodermacould inhibit the dermophytes. In the epidermis, keratinocytes differentiate into cornifiedcells that synthesize keratin, which is used by the dermatophytes [ 53]. In fungal infec-tions with Aspergillus , RES inhibits the fungal growth within the skin and protects fromthe infection of invasive aspergillosis. Using scanning electron microscopy, cells in the
absence of RES exhibited the sleek shape of hyphal growth, whereas in the presence ofRES, the morphology was changed and they started disaggregating. Subsequently, at anultrastructural level, nuclear and mitochondrial membranes are affected foremost, leadingto the disorganization of cell organelles and the cell membrane. There are some alterationsin the cell of the fungus: (a) production of the secondary and tertiary germ tubes, (b) curvedgerm tubes, and (c) granulation of conidia in hyphal cells. The two compounds that arebest utilized in anticandidal activities are cis- and trans-RES.The use of RES allows for decreasing the dosage of ketoconazole and itraconazoleagainst Candida albicans infections (Wang et al., 2021). A concentration range from 50to4000 µg/ ml was utilized for both (cis and trans), and was compared to the control.Trans-RES exhibited a better role in treating fungal strains. The utilization of a combination
of RES and azoles can decrease the dosage of specific azoles, and can be used in clinicaltreatments alone [109].AntiparasiticToxoplasma gondi is a single-celled obligate parasite that causes severe toxoplasmosis.
treatments alone [109].AntiparasiticToxoplasma gondi is a single-celled obligate parasite that causes severe toxoplasmosis.This is treated by several courses of drugs, including a combination of sulfadiazine and
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 16 of 28pyrimethamine, which exhibit elevated side effects with resistance mechanisms. Therefore,the options for natural therapy, including the utilization of RES, were much needed. Theproperties of RES as an anti-toxoplasma inhibit the extracellular and intracellular parasitesby interrupting redox activities, further assisting macrophages by removing tachyzoites(intracellularly) via apoptotic and autophagic pathways [ 110]. Resveratrol reduces theinfection rate and maintains homeostasis induced by parasitic infection. Leishmaniasisis one of the global problems caused by the parasite Leishmania, and there have beenstudies for treating this parasitic infection with RES. Trypanosomiasis is a parasitic infec-tious disease, Chagas disease. This parasite develops in the host cell, mainly in two forms:proliferative (epimastigote) and infective (promastigote) forms. A range of 0.4–40 µM of
RES was utilized to treat infections caused by Trypanosoma cruzi (Figure 5). Figure 5(A1)represents epimastigotes incubated for 48 h, a linear graph depicting a growth with varyingconcentrations of TSA (trichostatin), as compared to the control, i.e., without any infection;similarly, Figure 5(A2) depicts the growth curve of parasites with different sirtinol concen-trations; Figure 5(A3) shows a prediction of the growth curve with varying concentration ofRES; Figure 5(B) shows that IC50 (inhibitory medium concentration) values were calculatedby counting live parasites; in Figure 5(C1), the incubation of parasites with TSA (Tricho-statin) exhibits varying concentrations of the compound, which displayed a significantrise (around 10–20%); a similar condition was observed in Figure 5(C2), where sirtinolalso showed significant elevation; with RES, conversely (Figure 5(C3), parasitic infectiondeclined as compared to the control. Therefore, this compound inhibits epimastigotes’
growth and in vitro infection. Regarding the mechanism of action, trichostatin and sirtinolinhibitors cause histone deacetylation, whereas the RES compound regulated the control ofgene expression and transcript level [54].2.2.9. Anti-Skin CancerEnvironmental elements can accumulate in the skin and cause stress that leads toskin carcinogenesis through a multi-step process: initiation, promotion, and progressionleading to skin cancer [ 111]. There are two major groups of skin cancer: (1) keratinocytecancers, or non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs), the most usual groups of which comprisebasal cell carcinoma (BCC) and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma/squamous cell carci-noma (SSC); and (2) melanoma, which can be classified into cutaneous and non-cutaneousforms [ 112]. There are also other rarer skin tumors: Merkel cell carcinoma, Kaposi sarcoma,and cutaneous lymphoma [113].Due to skin exposure to UV radiation, carcinogenic photons are released, which results
in reactive oxidative stresses [ 114] and, in the formation of thymine dimers in the nucleus,causes DNA damage, directly/indirectly leading to skin cell inflammation, causing skincancer [111].Resveratrol inhibits UVB-induced lipid peroxidase or blocks UV-mediated activationof NF-kB. It decreases ROS production and inhibits DNA polymerase and deoxyribonu-cleotide synthesis, stopping the cell cycle [ 55,115]. The effectiveness of RES in combinationtherapy with other compounds shows a significant improvement on skin/skin cells [ 13,56].Imran, et al. (2021) used nanostructured lipid carrier (NLC) gel and demonstrated thatit might be suitable as a potential delivery carrier for quercetin & RES into deeper layersof the skin [ 116]. This demonstrated enhanced antitumor activity, based on cytotoxicity,stopping the cell cycle, and apoptosis tests, and served as a promising combination for skincancer treatment [114,116].
cancer treatment [114,116].Additionally, topical treatment of RES on the skin of hairless animal models before
cancer treatment [114,116].Additionally, topical treatment of RES on the skin of hairless animal models beforeUVB exposure resulted in a substantial suppression of UVB-mediated upregulation of bothcell proliferation-Ki-67 and tumor promotion of the markers COX-2 and ODC [58].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 17 of 28Cosmetics 2023 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 29    Figure 5. Values expressed as a percentage of trypomas tigotes and epimastigotes, with varying con-centrations of each compound to treat the parasitic infection. ( A1) represents epimastigotes incu-bated for 48 h, a linear graph depicting a growth wi th varying concentrations of TSA (trichostatin); (A2) depicts the growth curve of parasites with di ﬀerent sirtinol concentrations; ( A3) shows a pre-diction of the growth curve with varying concentration of RES; ( B) shows that IC50 (inhibitory me-dium concentration) values were calc ulated by counting live parasites; ( C1) the incubation of para-sites with TSA (Trichostatin) exhibits varying co ncentrations of the comp ound, which displayed a signi ﬁcant rise (around 10–20%); ( C2) sirtinol showed signi ﬁcant elevation; ( C3) with RES, parasitic infection declined as compared to the cont rol. The values exhibited statistical signi ﬁcance when
compared to the control (** p < 0.005). Adapted from [54]. 2.2.9. Anti-Skin Cancer Environmental elements can accumulate in the skin and cause stress that leads to skin carcinogenesis through a multi-step process: initiation, promotion, and progression leading to skin cancer [111]. There are two major groups of skin cancer: (1) keratinocyte cancers, or non-melanoma skin cancers (NMS Cs), the most usual groups of which com-prise basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma/squamous cell carcinoma (SSC); and (2) melanoma, which can be classi ﬁed into cutaneous and non-cu-taneous forms [112]. There are also other rare r skin tumors: Merkel cell carcinoma, Kaposi sarcoma, and cutaneous lymphoma [113]. Due to skin exposure to UV radiation, carcinogenic photons are released, which re-sults in reactive oxidative st resses [114] and, in the formation of thymine dimers in the
nucleus, causes DNA damage, directly/indirectly leading to skin cell in ﬂammation, caus-ing skin cancer [111]. Resveratrol inhibits UVB-induced lipid peroxidase or blocks UV-mediated activation of NF-kB. It decreases ROS production and inhibits DNA polymerase and deoxyribonu-cleotide synthesis, stopping the cell cycle [115] [55]. The e ﬀectiveness of RES in Figure 5. Values expressed as a percentage of trypomastigotes and epimastigotes, with varyingconcentrations of each compound to treat the parasitic infection. ( A1) represents epimastigotesincubated for 48 h, a linear graph depicting a growth with varying concentrations of TSA (trichostatin);(A2) depicts the growth curve of parasites with different sirtinol concentrations; ( A3) shows aprediction of the growth curve with varying concentration of RES; ( B) shows that IC50 (inhibitorymedium concentration) values were calculated by counting live parasites; ( C1) the incubation of
parasites with TSA (Trichostatin) exhibits varying concentrations of the compound, which displayeda significant rise (around 10–20%); ( C2) sirtinol showed significant elevation; ( C3) with RES, parasiticinfection declined as compared to the control. The values exhibited statistical significance whencompared to the control (** p< 0.005). Adapted from [54].Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer (NMSC)The origin of NMSC is in the keratinocytes, hence termed keratinocyte carcino-mas/cancers [ 112]. There has been a 5.5% increase in NMSC per year in the last four deca des.NMSCs have a low mortality rate [ 112,117,118]. BCC prevails in 70% of the population,whereas SCC comprises 25% [112].1. Basal cell carcinoma (BCC)BCC/basal cell epithelioma is the most common and least lethal skin cancer. BCC hasdifferent subtypes, and the most typical are nodular, micronodular, superficial, morpheaform, infiltrative, and fibroepithelial (fibroepithelioma of Pinkus). However, combinations
of these subtypes can also occur [119].On UVB-mediated photocarcinogenesis and UVB-induced skin hyperplasia in animal
of these subtypes can also occur [119].On UVB-mediated photocarcinogenesis and UVB-induced skin hyperplasia in animalmodels, there was a topical application of RES for a few weeks. Resveratrol preventedthe onset of skin tumors: there was an increase in apoptosis, p53, Bax, cytochrome C, andapoptotic protease activation factor, and there was a decline in COX-2 inhibitors, lipidperoxidation, ODC, hyperplasia, mRNA, and protein. The topical application of RES onthe skin inhibits photocarcinogenesis [55].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 18 of 28The topical treatment with RES before and after exposure to UVB inhibited the devel-opment of skin tumors in an animal model study (Ko et al., 2017). A key regulator, calledsurvivin, is involved in the survival and death of cells, and is over-expressed in skin can-cer [120]. The mechanism depicted in the animal model explains that the topical applicationof RES protects against UVB exposure via inhibition of survivin-phosphorylation at Thr34.Thereby, a decrease in survivin leads to the upregulation of proapoptotic Smac/DIABLO(mitochondrial protein) in skin tumors and the cascade of events that leads to apoptoticdeath of premalignant/malignant cells (Aziz, Reagan-Shaw, et al., 2005).Another importance of RES exhibiting chemopreventive effects on UVB-mediated skintumorigenesis in animal models was determined. Topical application of RES either pre- orpost-UVB inhibits the onset of tumorigenesis. In a similar kind of chemical carcinogenesis
report, utilization of a two-stage (DMBA-initiated and TPA-promoted) model of skin cancerdepicted a 98% decrease in skin tumors and a 60% reduction in papillomas (Athar et al.,2007). This confirms the RES cytotoxic and free radical scavenging activities. Hence,RES imparts a strong chemopreventive effect against exposure to UVB-mediated skincancers [69,121].2. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)In SSC, cancer originates from the malignant spread of the keratinocytes from theepidermis [ 13,122]. In a study, the HaCaT and human A431 epidermoid carcinoma cellswere treated with the combination therapy of aminolevulinic acid photodynamic therapy(ALA-PDT) and RES [ 13]. RES enhanced the ALA-PDT effect on apoptosis and A431cell proliferation. The p-ERK, p-p38, p53, and caspase-3 expressions were raised [ 13].RES increases p53 expression, which induces skin cancer cell apoptosis via stimulationof the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ERK pathway [ 123]. The inhibitory and
apoptotic activities of RES on the development of two different human melanoma cells wereinvestigated [ 123]. There was a rise in cell viability, arrest in the G1 phase, and apoptoticrates (in a concentration-dependent manner). The expression of Bcl-2 was reduced, butthe expressions of Bax, p53, caspase-3, and caspase-9 were noticeably increased whencompared to the control [123].RES plays an important role in photochemoprevention by inducing autophagy [ 57,58].Autophagy is the catabolic process that ensures the timely removal of damaged andpotentially carcinogenic cells. It plays a protective role that causes the recycling anddegradation of organelles and macromolecules in response to stress [ 58]. Light chain (LC) 3protein is an important marker of autophagy. According to a study by Vitale et al., in 2013,the pre-treatment of RES in the HaCaT cell lines ( in vitro ) enhanced the conversion of LC3-
I to LC3- II, and autophagosome–lysosome fusion led, consequently, to the degradation ofLC3. The results of the study suggested that RES influences autophagic flux due to increasedLC3 degradation which established its photochemopreventive properties [19,58,124].RES boosts premature senescence in human A431 SCC cells [ 58]. Furthermore, REStreatment lessened both the levels of S473 Akt1 phosphorylation and the mTOR signalingcomponents, as well as rictor in the A431 cells. RES showed downregulation of rictor(a constituent of mTORC2) that led to a decrease in RhoA-GTPase and a change in thecytoskeleton of actin; it showed an increase in senescence-associated β-gal expression andits activity. Thus, RES-mediated downregulation of rictor decreases the autophagic processand prevents UV-induced skin carcinogenesis Thus, the rictor downregulation mediated byRES decreases the autophagic process and abolishes UV-induced skin carcinogenesis [ 124].
According to a study, A431 cells were subjected to treatment with varying amounts
RES decreases the autophagic process and abolishes UV-induced skin carcinogenesis [ 124].According to a study, A431 cells were subjected to treatment with varying amountsof RES (0.1–0.3 mg/mL). This study depicted the morphological changes in the cells andRES inhibited cell proliferation. The hTERT protein and the activity of telomerase wereinhibited with RES. Therefore, it could be one of the significant impacts of RES to inhibittelomerase activity [125].
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 19 of 28Melanoma Skin CancerThe deadliest type of skin cancer [ 111,117], melanoma originates from unusual melanin-producing cells (melanocytes) with extreme proliferation that leads to metastatic effects.Melanocytes produce melanin within melanosomes, which regulate skin pigmentationand safeguard from UV radiation [ 112]. Tyrosinase is an important enzyme for melaninproduction. Tyrosinase enzyme-inhibiting activity is very effective in controlling melanomacell growth. Application of RES in vivo reduces tyrosinase activity by 30 to 45%, thusreducing skin damage and skin cancer rates [56].It was seen that, in B16-F10 cells, RES treatment upregulated beclin 1 and LC3 ex-pression and downregulated p62 level expression. RES stopped the in vitro growth ofmelanoma via an autophagy-mediated manner through PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis inhibi-tion [ 126]. Wu et al. (2015) incubated A375 and SK-MEL-31 cells for 24 h with vary-
ing amounts of RES (Figure 6). The cell viability was determined through a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide test and these cells wereanalyzed by flow cytometric analysis ( Figure 6(B) ). RES inhibited the proliferation ofthese cells (for 48 h), which was observed under the microscope with x100 magnification(Figure 6(A1,A2) ). Resveratrol induced the cell cycle expression and apoptotic-related pro-teins in A375 cells and SK-MEL-31; in the G1 phase, it was observed that the cell populationin A375 cells increased to 78–93%, and in Sk-MEL-31 cells, the cell population increasedto 78–94%, along with a reduction in cells in the S phase. Figure 6(C1,C2), thus, showinhibited proliferation of these cells through inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest, leading toapoptosis [115].Studies in vivo and in vitro showed that RES inhibited survivin, a pro-apoptosisprotein (which is part of the inhibitor of the apoptosis-IAP gene family) which resulted in
upregulation of Smac/DIABLO. This study proposed that the downregulation of survivinreduced carcinogenesis. Hence, the modulations in survivin and its related events canbe considered as one of the mechanisms for the chemopreventive effects of RES in UVB-mediated melanoma [ 58]. In an in vitro study, RES was found to sensitize cell lines to UVA-induced apoptosis through extreme oxidative stress that leads to decreased mitochondrialmembrane potential, resulting in an opening of mitochondrial pores, which ultimatelyleads to apoptosis [ 127]. Thus, in UVR-induced skin cancer, RES acts as a pro-apoptoticagent that promotes programmed cell death, safeguarding normal cells [58,127].The inhibitory and apoptotic promoting activities of RES on the proliferation oftwo hum an melanoma cells have been determined in vitro [123]. There was an incrementin cell viability, arrest in the G1 phase, and apoptotic rates (in a concentration-dependent
manner). The expression of Bcl-2 was lowered, but the expressions of Bax, p53, caspase-3,and caspase-9 were noticeably improved when compared to the control [ 123]. p53 expres-sion was increased, and induced the apoptosis of skin cancer cells via the activation of theMAPK/ERK pathway [ 123]. Thus, RES inhibits tumor progression by suppressing variousgrowth factors, cell signaling pathways, and cell cycle arrest [56].In an in vitro study, when SK-Mel-28 and Colo-38 human melanoma cell lines receivedRES treatment, there was an arrest in the G1/S phase and downregulation of Bcl-xL proteins,and there was also inhibition of the NF-kB signaling pathway [ 128]. On providing REStreatment to A375 human melanoma cell lines ( in vitro ),there was an arrest of the S-phaseand a decrease in the G2/M phase, and inhibition of cell division was also observed [ 129].There was an escalation in necrotic area, as well as an inflammatory infiltration of melanoma
tumors when B16-F10 (animal cell lines) in vitro were treated with RES [130].
There was an escalation in necrotic area, as well as an inflammatory infiltration of melanomatumors when B16-F10 (animal cell lines) in vitro were treated with RES [130].RES plays an important role in skin cancers. These also have an important role incell cycle regulation and modulate various mechanisms, including the activity of cyclinkinase inhibitors, cyclins, and cyclin-dependent kinases. RES also contributes to regulatingmechanisms of apoptosis that consist of key regulators, such as survivin, Smac/DIABLO,and p53 (Aziz &Aziz, 2018). These also have an important property of analyzing ROS andchecking cell proliferation (Pavel et al., 2020). The key regulators, such as E-Cadherin and
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 20 of 28other cascade molecules, together with RES regulate in the gene expression for cancer (Liuet al., 2017) (Aziz & Aziz, 2018).Cosmetics 2023 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 29    Figure 6. RES with di ﬀerent concentrations inducing decrea sed cell viability in A375 and SK-MEL-31 cells. ( A1) A375 cells are treated with varying concen trations of RES, which shows RES-induced inhibitory cell proliferation; ( A2) SK-MEL-31 cells are treated with varying concentrations of RES, which shows RES-induced inhibitory cell proliferation; ( B) inhibition rate (%) vs. RES of A375 and SK-MEL-31 cells; ( C1) the A375 cells incubated for 48 h with growing RES amounts; ( C2) the SK-MEL-31 cells incubated for 48 h with growing concentration of RES. Adapted from [115]. Studies in vivo and in vitro showed that RES inhibited survivin, a pro-apoptosis pro-
tein (which is part of the inhibitor of the apoptosis-IAP gene family) which resulted in upregulation of Smac/DIABLO. This study prop osed that the downregulation of survivin reduced carcinogenesis. Hence, the modulations in survivin and its related events can be considered as one of the mechanisms for the chemopreventive e ﬀects of RES in UVB-me-diated melanoma [58]. In an in vitro study, RES was found to sensitize cell lines to UVA-induced apoptosis through extreme oxidative st ress that leads to decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, resulting in an opening of mitochondrial pores, which ultimately leads to apoptosis [127]. Thus, in UVR-induced skin cancer, RES acts as a pro-apoptotic agent that promotes programmed cell death, safeguarding normal cells [58,127]. The inhibitory and apoptotic promoting activi ties of RES on the proliferation of two human melanoma cells have been determined in vitro [123]. There was an increment in
cell viability, arrest in the G1 phase, and apoptotic rates (in a concentration-dependent manner). The expression of Bcl-2 was lowered, but the expressions of Bax, p53, caspase-3, and caspase-9 were noticeably improved when compared to the control [123]. p53 expres-sion was increased, and induced the apoptosis of  skin cancer cells via the activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway [123]. Thus, RES inhibits tumor progression by suppressing various growth factors, cell signaling path ways, and cell cycle arrest [56]. In an in vitro study, when SK-Mel-28 and Colo-38 human melanoma cell lines re-ceived RES treatment, there was an arrest in  the G1/S phase and downregulation of Bcl-xL proteins, and there was also inhibition of the NF-kB signaling pathway [128]. On providing RES treatment to A375 hu man melanoma cell lines (in vitro) , there was an arrest Figure 6. RES with different concentrations inducing decreased cell viability in A375 and SK-MEL-31
cells. ( A1) A375 cells are treated with varying concentrations of RES, which shows RES-inducedinhibitory cell proliferation; ( A2) SK-MEL-31 cells are treated with varying concentrations of RES,which shows RES-induced inhibitory cell proliferation; ( B) inhibition rate (%) vs. RES of A375and SK-MEL-31 cells; ( C1) the A375 cells incubated for 48 h with growing RES amounts; ( C2) theSK-MEL-31 cells incubated for 48 h with growing concentration of RES. Adapted from [115].3. Boosting the Efficacy of Resveratrol-Based T opical Formulations Using NanotechnologyConsidering the different pharmacological activities of RES in the skin already dulyestablished, research studies are currently being conducted to improve its efficacy whenincorporated into dermo-formulations, in order to overcome its main limitations, amongthem its low solubility, bioavailability, and chemical stability. (Moyano-Mendez et al., 2014).
As noted previously, when administered orally, RES is rapidly absorbed and metabolized,which decreases its bioavailability. Thus, the topical application becomes an appealing
As noted previously, when administered orally, RES is rapidly absorbed and metabolized,which decreases its bioavailability. Thus, the topical application becomes an appealingway to apply RES, particularly in the field of skin diseases, for its efficacy, but also for itscomfort and because it is a non-invasive method. In addition to its low aqueous solubility,this molecule faces some challenges, such as its instability in the face of UV , pH, andtemperature changes. Thus, concerning its topical use, several technological strategieshave been designed to overcome these difficulties and improve its effectiveness. The useof micro- and nanotechnology has proven to be a great weapon for the development andsuccess of RES-based topical formulations.In vitro studies indicate that the use of RES-loaded nanoemulsions allows a significantincrease in both the transdermal amount and deposition in the skin when compared to the
use of the RES-saturated solution, and that this increase is inversely proportional to the sizeof the nanoemulsion. It also appears that the smaller the amount of surfactant used in the
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 21 of 28preparation of the nanoemulsion the greater its permeation capacity. In vivo , there is anincrease in the relative bioavailability of RES when administered topically compared to oraladministration, as well as a lower skin irritation effect with the RES-loaded nanoemulsion.It is also noteworthy that these nanoemulsions, when subjected to thermodynamic stabilitytesting, showed good physical stability, therefore highlighting good strategies for topicalRES-based formulations [ 131]. The use of microemulsions has also been studied. Thesetechnological systems are characterized by being thermodynamically stable and have alonger shelf-life than emulsions or even nanoemulsions. Microemulsions increase thesolubility of substances that are poorly soluble in water, and are being studied with interestfor the delivery of RES to the skin. Microemulsions using two oils—tea tree oil and medium-
chain triglycerides—in different ratios, along with surfactant/co-surfactant combinations,were developed. The composition of the microemulsions was found to influence notonly their stability, but also the release and permeation of RES, in vitro , into the skin.Microemulsions are being viewed as a promising alternative for the delivery of activeingredients into the skin [ 132]. A RES-loaded NLC hydrogel (RES-NLC gel) for enhancingthe anti-UV radiation and antioxidant efficacy was developed. These effects were confirmeddue to the ability of RES-NLC gel, in vivo , to inhibit ROS formation, thus protectingkeratinocytes from UV radiation, and also increasing the antioxidant activity of enzymessuch as peroxidase, catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione. Furthermore, it hasbeen shown that NLC gel increases the stability of RES when subjected to UV radiationand that, in vivo , the efficacy of sunscreen against UV-induced erythema increases in the
presence of a higher RES content in RES-NLC gel. This anti-UV radiation effect resultsfrom the high affinity between NLC and the constituent lipids of the stratum corneum ,which decreases the percutaneous absorption of NLC, and also from the possibility ofhaving a reorganization of the NLC structure that will prevent its penetration throughthestratum corneum . In addition, the size of the particles also conditions their penetrationinto the keratinocytes (the RES-NLC gel prepared was larger than the intercellular sizeof the keratinocytes). In this study, the strategy also considered the charges of both thekeratinocyte membranes (negative) and the RES-NLC gel (also negatively charged), whichprevent the penetration of the particle into the cell [ 133]. In order to overcome the lowsolubility and stability of RES while avoiding the use of aggressive organic solvents andoils harmful to humans and the environment, recent studies have proposed the use of
multifunctional dendrimers. The proposal is to formulate a dendrimer with RES, considereda water-based “green” formulation that is safe for both the environment and the skin. Thisdendrimer not only confers greater solubility and stability to RES, but allows for increasedRES content, as well as its penetration through the skin. This product has also been shownto be feasible at scale-up for the preparation of anti-aging creams with an innovative,effective, and safe system [ 134]. The use of transfersomes to encapsulate RES has also beentested. The presence of non-ionic edge activators in transfersomes gives them propertiesof increased flexibility and ultradeformability, which allows them to better penetrate thedrugs into the skin. In terms of antioxidant activity, no advantages were found, but anincrease in the transdermal delivery of RES, and a decrease in cytotoxicity, was foundin vitro . Transfersomes may also be a good alternative, as they increase the solubility and
stability of RES, as well as its safety. In general, the literature highlights that nanotechnology
in vitro . Transfersomes may also be a good alternative, as they increase the solubility andstability of RES, as well as its safety. In general, the literature highlights that nanotechnologystrategies are effective and safe in overcoming the limitations associated with the use ofRES, in various applications on the skin. However, we also verified the lack of in vivostudies, mainly in clinical trials in this area of interest. Given the evidence of the efficacyof RES in combating various skin disorders and, on the other hand, the demonstratedimportance of nanosystems for the encapsulation of this molecule, it becomes imperativeat this moment for the transposition of this nanotechnology to the human scale, with solidstudies, for further development and commercialization of RES-based topical formulationsin the dermatological and cosmetic area.
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 22 of 284. ConclusionsResveratrol is a natural component, found mainly in red grapes and some berries. Itsgrowing research interest has demonstrated its biological activity in several fields. Theantioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-aging, photoprotective, estrogen-like, skin-whitening,anti-acne, cutaneous wound healing, anti-scarring, antimicrobial, and anti-skin cancereffects have been explored for the use of RES in cosmetic and dermatological applications,with clear results of efficacy in these fields. However, its instability requires the develop-ment of therapeutic strategies that maintain its integrity, and consequent bioactivity, forits effective and safe use. In this sense, nanotechnology-based formulations have beendeveloped to increase its bioavailability, facilitate its penetration into the skin, and allowcontrolled release. Although the results are quite consistent and promising, the lack of
in vivo studies is a limitation to the implementation of these nanosystems in formulationsfor human use. As there is no doubt about the added value of RES, not only for its intrinsicproperties, but also as a sustainable alternative for the management of several skin disor-ders, it is imperative to develop ex vivo tests and clinical trials that confirm the safety andefficacy of these nanosystems, allowing the evaluation of their feasibility when transposedto the industrial scale. If the promising results of the trials are confirmed, both in terms ofthe biological activity of RES and in terms of the benefit of the use of nanosystems, this maybe, along with other natural molecules, an alternative with great impact on the therapeuticoutcomes of patients, along with an undeniable contribution to the sustainability of thecosmetic industry.Author Contributions: F.M.-M.: Supervision, Writing—Original Draft, Review & Editing, Conceptual-
ization; A.R.T.S.A.: Writing—Original Draft; M.R.: Writing—Original Draft; A.M.: Writing—OriginalDraft; M.B.S.G.: Writing—Original Draft; K.T.: Writing—Original Draft; F.H.: Writing—Review &Editing, Software; F.N.: Writing—Review & Editing, Software; A.R.: Writing—Review & Editing,Software; P .G.M.: Supervision, Writing—Review & Editing, Conceptualization; F.V .: Supervision,Writing—Review & Editing, Conceptualization; A.C.P .-S.: Supervision, Writing—Review & Editing,Conceptualization. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.AbbreviationsAkt protein kinase BALA-PDT aminolevulinic acid-photodynamic therapyAMPK adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase pathway
BCC basal cell carcinomaCAT catalaseCOX-2 cyclooxygenase-2DNA deoxyribonucleic acidERK extracellular signal-regulated kinaseGAGS Global Acne Grading SystemGF Growth factorGM-CSF granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factorGSH reduced glutathioneHaCaT human epidermal keratinocyteHE hematoxylin and eosinIL interleukin
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 23 of 28LC light chainLPO lipid peroxidationLPS lipopolysaccharideMAPK mitogen-activated protein kinaseMIC minimum inhibitory concentrationMMP matrix metalloproteinasemRNA messenger ribonucleic acidα-MSH α-melanocyte-stimulating hormonemTOR mechanistic target of rapamycinNC negative controlNF-kB nuclear factor kappa BNLC nanostructured lipid carrierNMSC non-melanoma skin cancerODC ornithine decarboxylasePCNA proliferating cell nuclear antigenPEG polyethylene glycolPI3K phosphoinositide 3-kinasePPAR- γ peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorRES resveratrolROS reactive oxygen speciesSIRT1 sirtuin 1 (silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog 1)Smac/DIABLOsecond mitochondria-derived activator of caspases/Direct IAP-bindingprotein with low pISOD superoxide dismutaseSSC squamous cell carcinomaTBARS thiobarbituric acid reactive substancesTGF tumor growth factorTNFα tumor necrosis factor- αTRP tyrosinase-related protein
TRP tyrosinase-related proteinUV ultravioletUV-VIS ultraviolet-visibleReferences1. Bouwstra, J.A.; Honeywell-Nguyen, P .L.; Gooris, G.S.; Ponec, M. Structure of the skin barrier and its modulation by vesicularformulations. Prog. Lipid Res. 2003 ,42, 1–36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Szulc-Musioł, B.; Sarecka-Hujar, B. The Use of Micro- and Nanocarriers for Resveratrol Delivery into and across the Skin inDifferent Skin Diseases-A Literature Review. Pharmaceutics 2021 ,13, 451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Lai-Cheong, J.E.; McGrath, J.A. Structure and function of skin, hair and nails. Medicine 2017 ,45, 347–351. [CrossRef]4. Ndiaye, M.; Philippe, C.; Mukhtar, H.; Ahmad, N. The grape antioxidant resveratrol for skin disorders: Promise, prospects, andchallenges. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2011 ,508, 164–170. [CrossRef]5. Wen, S.; Zhang, J.; Yang, B.; Elias, P .M.; Man, M.-Q. Role of Resveratrol in Regulating Cutaneous Functions. Evid.-Based Complement.
Altern. Med. 2020 ,2020 , 2416837. [CrossRef]6. Craythorne, E.; Nicholson, P . Diagnosis and management of skin cancer. Medicine 2021 ,49, 435–440. [CrossRef]7. Baur, J.A.; Sinclair, D.A. Therapeutic potential of resveratrol: The in vivo evidence. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2006 ,5, 493–506.[CrossRef]8. Ratz-Łyko, A.; Arct, J. Resveratrol as an active ingredient for cosmetic and dermatological applications: A review. J. Cosmet. LaserTher. 2019 ,21, 84–90. [CrossRef]9. Gugleva, V .; Zasheva, S.; Hristova, M.; Andonova, V . Topical use of resveratrol: Technological aspects. Pharmacia 2020 ,67, 89–94.[CrossRef]10. Edwards, J.A.; Beck, M.; Riegger, C.; Bausch, J. Safety of resveratrol with examples for high purity, trans-resveratrol, resVida(®).Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2011 ,1215 , 131–137. [CrossRef]11. Wu, Z.; Uchi, H.; Morino-Koga, S.; Shi, W.; Furue, M. Resveratrol inhibition of human keratinocyte proliferation via
SIRT1/ARNT/ERK dependent downregulation of aquaporin 3. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2014 ,75, 16–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]12. Pastore, S.; Lulli, D.; Maurelli, R.; Dellambra, E.; De Luca, C.; Korkina, L.G. Resveratrol induces long-lasting IL-8 expression andpeculiar EGFR activation/distribution in human keratinocytes: Mechanisms and implications for skin administration. PLoS ONE2013 ,8, e59632. [CrossRef]13. Zhang, X.; Liu, X.; Kang, S.; Liu, C.; Hao, Y. Resveratrol enhances the effects of ALA-PDT on skin squamous cells A431 throughp38/ MAPK signaling pathway. Cancer Biomark. 2018 ,21, 797–803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 24 of 2814. Arun, S.N.; Xie, D.; Dodd, M.E.; Zhong, X.; Bollag, W.B. The potential use of protein kinase D inhibitors for prevention/treatmentof epidermal tumors. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2010 ,60, 29–39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Soeur, J.; Eilstein, J.; L éreaux, G.; Jones, C.; Marrot, L. Skin resistance to oxidative stress induced by resveratrol: From Nrf2activation to GSH biosynthesis. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2015 ,78, 213–223. [CrossRef]16. Bastianetto, S.; Dumont, Y.; Duranton, A.; Vercauteren, F.; Breton, L.; Quirion, R. Protective action of resveratrol in human skin:Possible involvement of specific receptor binding sites. PLoS ONE 2010 ,5, e12935. [CrossRef]17. Sticozzi, C.; Belmonte, G.; Cervellati, F.; Muresan, X.M.; Pessina, F.; Lim, Y.; Forman, H.J.; Valacchi, G. Resveratrol protects SR-B1levels in keratinocytes exposed to cigarette smoke. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2014 ,69, 50–57. [CrossRef]
18. Alonso, C.; Mart í, M.; Barba, C.; Carrer, V .; Rubio, L.; Coderch, L. Skin permeation and antioxidant efficacy of topically appliedresveratrol. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2017 ,309, 423–431. [CrossRef]19. Vitale, N.; Kisslinger, A.; Paladino, S.; Procaccini, C.; Matarese, G.; Pierantoni, G.M.; Mancini, F.P .; Tramontano, D. Resveratrolcouples apoptosis with autophagy in UVB-irradiated HaCaT cells. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e80728. [CrossRef]20. Subedi, L.; Lee, T.H.; Wahedi, H.M.; Baek, S.H.; Kim, S.Y. Resveratrol-Enriched Rice Attenuates UVB-ROS-Induced Skin Agingvia Downregulation of Inflammatory Cascades. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017 ,2017 , 8379539. [CrossRef]21. Sirerol, J.A.; Feddi, F.; Mena, S.; Rodriguez, M.L.; Sirera, P .; Aup í, M.; P érez, S.; Asensi, M.; Ortega, A.; Estrela, J.M. Topicaltreatment with pterostilbene, a natural phytoalexin, effectively protects hairless mice against UVB radiation-induced skin damage
and carcinogenesis. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2015 ,85, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Kim, A.L.; Zhu, Y.; Zhu, H.; Han, L.; Kopelovich, L.; Bickers, D.R.; Athar, M. Resveratrol inhibits proliferation of humanepidermoid carcinoma A431 cells by modulating MEK1 and AP-1 signalling pathways. Exp. Dermatol. 2006 ,15, 538–546.[CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Tyagi, A.; Gu, M.; Takahata, T.; Frederick, B.; Agarwal, C.; Siriwardana, S.; Agarwal, R.; Sclafani, R.A. Resveratrol selectivelyinduces DNA Damage, independent of Smad4 expression, in its efficacy against human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.Clin. Cancer Res. 2011 ,17, 5402–5411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Potapovich, A.I.; Lulli, D.; Fidanza, P .; Kostyuk, V .A.; De Luca, C.; Pastore, S.; Korkina, L.G. Plant polyphenols differentiallymodulate inflammatory responses of human keratinocytes by interfering with activation of transcription factors NF κB and AhRand EGFR-ERK pathway. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2011 ,255, 138–149. [CrossRef]
25. Wang, X.; Zhang, Y. Resveratrol alleviates LPS-induced injury in human keratinocyte cell line HaCaT by up-regulation of miR-17.Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2018 ,501, 106–112. [CrossRef]26. Carbone, M.L.; Lulli, D.; Passarelli, F.; Pastore, S. Topical Plant Polyphenols Prevent Type I Interferon Signaling in the Skin andSuppress Contact Hypersensitivity. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 ,19, 2652. [CrossRef]27. Kang, M.C.; Cho, K.; Lee, J.H.; Subedi, L.; Yumnam, S.; Kim, S.Y. Effect of Resveratrol-Enriched Rice on Skin Inflammation andPruritus in the NC/Nga Mouse Model of Atopic Dermatitis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 1428. [CrossRef]28. Karuppagounder, V .; Arumugam, S.; Thandavarayan, R.A.; Pitchaimani, V .; Sreedhar, R.; Afrin, R.; Harima, M.; Suzuki, H.;Nomoto, M.; Miyashita, S.; et al. Resveratrol attenuates HMGB1 signaling and inflammation in house dust mite-induced atopicdermatitis in mice. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2014 ,23, 617–623. [CrossRef]
29. Kjær, T.N.; Thorsen, K.; Jessen, N.; Stenderup, K.; Pedersen, S.B. Resveratrol ameliorates imiquimod-induced psoriasis-like skin
29. Kjær, T.N.; Thorsen, K.; Jessen, N.; Stenderup, K.; Pedersen, S.B. Resveratrol ameliorates imiquimod-induced psoriasis-like skininflammation in mice. PLoS ONE 2015 ,10, e0126599. [CrossRef]30. Zhao, P .; Sui, B.D.; Liu, N.; Lv, Y.J.; Zheng, C.X.; Lu, Y.B.; Huang, W.T.; Zhou, C.H.; Chen, J.; Pang, D.L.; et al. Anti-agingpharmacology in cutaneous wound healing: Effects of metformin, resveratrol, and rapamycin by local application. Aging Cell2017 ,16, 1083–1093. [CrossRef]31. Berce, C.; Muresan, M.S.; Soritau, O.; Petrushev, B.; Tefas, L.; Rigo, I.; Ungureanu, G.; Catoi, C.; Irimie, A.; Tomuleasa, C.Cutaneous wound healing using polymeric surgical dressings based on chitosan, sodium hyaluronate and resveratrol. Apreclinical experimental study. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2018 ,163, 155–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Lakshmanan, R.; Campbell, J.; Ukani, G.; O’Reilly Beringhs, A.; Selvaraju, V .; Thirunavukkarasu, M.; Lu, X.; Palesty, J.A.; Maulik,
N. Evaluation of dermal tissue regeneration using resveratrol loaded fibrous matrix in a preclinical mouse model of full-thicknessischemic wound. Int. J. Pharm. 2019 ,558, 177–186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Huang, X.; Sun, J.; Chen, G.; Niu, C.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, C.; Sun, J.; Huang, H.; Huang, S.; Liang, Y.; et al. Resveratrol PromotesDiabetic Wound Healing via SIRT1-FOXO1-c-Myc Signaling Pathway-Mediated Angiogenesis. Front. Pharmacol. 2019 ,10, 421.[CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Gokce, E.H.; Tuncay Tanrıverdi, S.; Eroglu, I.; Tsapis, N.; Gokce, G.; Tekmen, I.; Fattal, E.; Ozer, O. Wound healing effects ofcollagen-laminin dermal matrix impregnated with resveratrol loaded hyaluronic acid-DPPC microparticles in diabetic rats. Eur. J.Pharm. Biopharm. 2017 ,119, 17–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Lephart, E.D.; Andrus, M.B. Human skin gene expression: Natural (trans) resveratrol versus five resveratrol analogs for dermalapplications. Exp. Biol. Med. 2017 ,242, 1482–1489. [CrossRef]
36. Zhou, F.; Huang, X.; Pan, Y.; Cao, D.; Liu, C.; Liu, Y.; Chen, A. Resveratrol protects HaCaT cells from ultraviolet B-inducedphotoaging via upregulation of HSP27 and modulation of mitochondrial caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway. Biochem. Biophys.Res. Commun. 2018 ,499, 662–668. [CrossRef]37. Park, K.; Lee, J.H. Protective effects of resveratrol on UVB-irradiated HaCaT cells through attenuation of the caspase pathway.Oncol. Rep. 2008 ,19, 413–417. [CrossRef]
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 25 of 2838. Lee, Y.H.; Kumar, N.C.; Glickman, R.D. Modulation of photochemical damage in normal and malignant cells by naturallyoccurring compounds. Photochem. Photobiol. 2012 ,88, 1385–1395. [CrossRef]39. Bowers, J.L.; Tyulmenkov, V .V .; Jernigan, S.C.; Klinge, C.M. Resveratrol acts as a mixed agonist/antagonist for estrogen receptorsalpha and beta. Endocrinology 2000 ,141, 3657–3667. [CrossRef]40. Gehm, B.D.; McAndrews, J.M.; Chien, P .Y.; Jameson, J.L. Resveratrol, a polyphenolic compound found in grapes and wine, is anagonist for the estrogen receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1997 ,94, 14138–14143. [CrossRef]41. Giardina, S.; Michelotti, A.; Zavattini, G.; Finzi, S.; Ghisalberti, C.; Marzatico, F. Efficacy study in vitro : Assessment of theproperties of resveratrol and resveratrol + N-acetyl-cysteine on proliferation and inhibition of collagen activity. Minerva Ginecol.2010 ,62, 195–201. [PubMed]
2010 ,62, 195–201. [PubMed]42. Lephart, E.D. Resveratrol, 4′Acetoxy Resveratrol, R-equol, Racemic Equol or S-equol as Cosmeceuticals to Improve DermalHealth. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Sticozzi, C.; Cervellati, F.; Muresan, X.M.; Cervellati, C.; Valacchi, G. Resveratrol prevents cigarette smoke-induced keratinocytesdamage. Food Funct. 2014 ,5, 2348–2356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Newton, R.A.; Cook, A.L.; Roberts, D.W.; Leonard, J.H.; Sturm, R.A. Post-transcriptional regulation of melanin biosyntheticenzymes by cAMP and resveratrol in human melanocytes. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2007 ,127, 2216–2227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Kwon, S.H.; Choi, H.R.; Kang, Y.A.; Park, K.C. Depigmenting Effect of Resveratrol Is Dependent on FOXO3a Activation withoutSIRT1 Activation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Angellotti, G.; Murgia, D.; Presentato, A.; D’Oca, M.C.; Scarpaci, A.G.; Alduina, R.; Raimondi, M.V .; De Caro, V . Antibacterial
PEGylated Solid Lipid Microparticles for Cosmeceutical Purpose: Formulation, Characterization, and Efficacy Evaluation.Materials 2020 ,13, 2073. [CrossRef]47. Fabbrocini, G.; Staibano, S.; De Rosa, G.; Battimiello, V .; Fardella, N.; Ilardi, G.; La Rotonda, M.I.; Longobardi, A.; Mazzella, M.;Siano, M.; et al. Resveratrol-containing gel for the treatment of acne vulgaris: A single-blind, vehicle-controlled, pilot study. Am.J. Clin. Dermatol. 2011 ,12, 133–141. [CrossRef]48. Kim, S.Y.; Hyun, M.Y.; Go, K.C.; Zouboulis, C.C.; Kim, B.J. Resveratrol exerts growth inhibitory effects on human SZ95 sebocytesthrough the inactivation of the PI3-K/Akt pathway. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2015 ,35, 1042–1050. [CrossRef]49. Wei, Z.; Chen, G.; Hu, T.; Mo, X.; Hou, X.; Cao, K.; Wang, L.; Pan, Z.; Wu, Q.; Li, X.; et al. Resveratrol ameliorates lipidaccumulation and inflammation in human SZ95 sebocytes via the AMPK signaling pathways in vitro .J. Dermatol. Sci. 2021 ,103,156–166. [CrossRef]
156–166. [CrossRef]50. Pang, K.; Li, B.; Tang, Z.; Yang, W.; Hao, L.; Shi, Z.; Zhang, J.; Cai, L.; Li, R.; Liu, Y.; et al. Resveratrol inhibits hypertrophic scarsformation by activating autophagy via the miR-4654/Rheb axis. Mol. Med. Rep. 2020 ,22, 3440–3452. [CrossRef]51. Nawrocki, E.M.; Bedell, H.W.; Humphreys, T.L. Resveratrol is cidal to both classes of Haemophilus ducreyi. Int. J. Antimicrob.Agents 2013 ,41, 477–479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Huang, H.; Liao, D.; Zhou, G.; Zhu, Z.; Cui, Y.; Pu, R. Antiviral activities of resveratrol against rotavirus in vitro and in vivo .Phytomedicine 2020 ,77, 153230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Chan, M.M. Antimicrobial effect of resveratrol on dermatophytes and bacterial pathogens of the skin. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2002 ,63, 99–104. [CrossRef]54. Campo, V .A. Comparative effects of histone deacetylases inhibitors and resveratrol on Trypanosoma cruzi replication, differentia-
tion, infectivity and gene expression. Int. J. Parasitol. Drugs Drug Resist. 2017 ,7, 23–33. [CrossRef]
tion, infectivity and gene expression. Int. J. Parasitol. Drugs Drug Resist. 2017 ,7, 23–33. [CrossRef]55. Ko, J.H.; Sethi, G.; Um, J.Y.; Shanmugam, M.K.; Arfuso, F.; Kumar, A.P .; Bishayee, A.; Ahn, K.S. The Role of Resveratrol in CancerTherapy. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 2589. [CrossRef]56. Annaji, M.; Poudel, I.; Boddu, S.H.S.; Arnold, R.D.; Tiwari, A.K.; Babu, R.J. Resveratrol-loaded nanomedicines for cancerapplications. Cancer Rep. 2021 ,4, e1353. [CrossRef]57. Afaq, F.; Adhami, V .M.; Ahmad, N. Prevention of short-term ultraviolet B radiation-mediated damages by resveratrol in SKH-1hairless mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2003 ,186, 28–37. [CrossRef]58. Aziz, S.W.; Aziz, M.H. Protective molecular mechanisms of resveratrol in UVR-induced Skin carcinogenesis. Photodermatol.Photoimmunol. Photomed. 2018 ,34, 35–41. [CrossRef]59. Baxter, R.A. Anti-aging properties of resveratrol: Review and report of a potent new antioxidant skin care formulation. J. Cosmet.
Dermatol. 2008 ,7, 2–7. [CrossRef]60. Farris, P .; Krutmann, J.; Li, Y.H.; McDaniel, D.; Krol, Y. Resveratrol: A unique antioxidant offering a multi-mechanistic approachfor treating aging skin. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2013 ,12, 1389–1394.61. Miura, T.; Muraoka, S.; Ikeda, N.; Watanabe, M.; Fujimoto, Y. Antioxidative and prooxidative action of stilbene derivatives.Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2000 ,86, 203–208. [CrossRef]62. Moyano-Mendez, J.R.; Fabbrocini, G.; De Stefano, D.; Mazzella, C.; Mayol, L.; Scognamiglio, I.; Carnuccio, R.; Ayala, F.; LaRotonda, M.I.; De Rosa, G. Enhanced antioxidant effect of trans-resveratrol: Potential of binary systems with polyethylene glycoland cyclodextrin. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2014 ,40, 1300–1307. [CrossRef]63. Lephart, E.D.; Sommerfeldt, J.M.; Andrus, M.B. Resveratrol: Influences on gene expression in human skin. J. Funct. Foods 2014 ,10,377–384. [CrossRef]
377–384. [CrossRef]64. Gonçalves, G.; Barros, P .; da Silva, G.; dos Santos, E.; Minutti, A. Formulations Containing Curcumin or Trans-ResveratrolIncrease Dermal Thickness in Rats Submitted to Chemical Peeling. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. Sci. Appl. 2017 ,7, 14–26. [CrossRef]
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 26 of 2865. Abbas, H.; Kamel, R.; El-Sayed, N. Dermal anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-aging effects of Compritol ATO-basedResveratrol colloidal carriers prepared using mixed surfactants. Int. J. Pharm. 2018 ,541, 37–47. [CrossRef]66. Afaq, F.; Mukhtar, H. Botanical antioxidants in the prevention of photocarcinogenesis and photoaging. Exp. Dermatol. 2006 ,15,678–684. [CrossRef]67. Afaq, F.; Katiyar, S.K. Polyphenols: Skin photoprotection and inhibition of photocarcinogenesis. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2011 ,11,1200–1215. [CrossRef]68. Nichols, J.A.; Katiyar, S.K. Skin photoprotection by natural polyphenols: Anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and DNA repairmechanisms. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2010 ,302, 71–83. [CrossRef]69. Aziz, M.H.; Afaq, F.; Ahmad, N. Prevention of ultraviolet-B radiation damage by resveratrol in mouse skin is mediated viamodulation in survivin. Photochem. Photobiol. 2005 ,81, 25–31. [CrossRef]
70. Chen, M.L.; Li, J.; Xiao, W.R.; Sun, L.; Tang, H.; Wang, L.; Wu, L.Y.; Chen, X.; Xie, H.F. Protective effect of resveratrol againstoxidative damage of UVA irradiated HaCaT cells. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 2006 ,31, 635–639.71. Liu, Y.; Chan, F.; Sun, H.; Yan, J.; Fan, D.; Zhao, D.; An, J.; Zhou, D. Resveratrol protects human keratinocytes HaCaT cells fromUVA-induced oxidative stress damage by downregulating Keap1 expression. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2011 ,650, 130–137. [CrossRef]72. Cao, C.; Lu, S.; Kivlin, R.; Wallin, B.; Card, E.; Bagdasarian, A.; Tamakloe, T.; Wang, W.J.; Song, X.; Chu, W.M.; et al. SIRT1 confersprotection against UVB- and H2O2-induced cell death via modulation of p53 and JNK in cultured skin keratinocytes. J. Cell. Mol.Med. 2009 ,13, 3632–3643. [CrossRef]73. Adhami, V .M.; Afaq, F.; Ahmad, N. Suppression of ultraviolet B exposure-mediated activation of NF-kappaB in normal humankeratinocytes by resveratrol. Neoplasia 2003 ,5, 74–82. [CrossRef]
74. Potapovich, A.I.; Kostyuk, V .A.; Kostyuk, T.V .; de Luca, C.; Korkina, L.G. Effects of pre- and post-treatment with plant polyphenolson human keratinocyte responses to solar UV . Inflamm. Res. 2013 ,62, 773–780. [CrossRef]75. Abbas, H.; Kamel, R. Potential role of resveratrol-loaded elastic sorbitan monostearate nanovesicles for the prevention ofUV-induced skin damage. J. Liposome Res. 2020 ,30, 45–53. [CrossRef]76. Lephart, E.D.; Naftolin, F. Menopause and the Skin: Old Favorites and New Innovations in Cosmeceuticals for Estrogen-DeficientSkin. Dermatol. Ther. 2021 ,11, 53–69. [CrossRef]77. Stevenson, S.; Thornton, J. Effect of estrogens on skin aging and the potential role of SERMs. Clin. Interv. Aging 2007 ,2, 283–297.[CrossRef]78. Verdier-S évrain, S. Effect of estrogens on skin aging and the potential role of selective estrogen receptor modulators. Climacteric2007 ,10, 289–297. [CrossRef]
2007 ,10, 289–297. [CrossRef]79. Ruotolo, R.; Calani, L.; Fietta, E.; Brighenti, F.; Crozier, A.; Meda, C.; Maggi, A.; Ottonello, S.; Del Rio, D. Anti-estrogenic activityof a human resveratrol metabolite. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2013 ,23, 1086–1092. [CrossRef]80. Pillaiyar, T.; Namasivayam, V .; Manickam, M.; Jung, S.H. Inhibitors of Melanogenesis: An Updated Review. J. Med. Chem. 2018 ,61, 7395–7418. [CrossRef]81. Bernard, P .; Berthon, J.Y. Resveratrol: An original mechanism on tyrosinase inhibition. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2000 ,22, 219–226.[CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Satooka, H.; Kubo, I. Resveratrol as a kcat type inhibitor for tyrosinase: Potentiated melanogenesis inhibitor. Bioorg. Med. Chem.2012 ,20, 1090–1099. [CrossRef] [PubMed]83. Yanagihara, M.; Yoshimatsu, M.; Inoue, A.; Kanno, T.; Tatefuji, T.; Hashimoto, K. Inhibitory effect of gnetin C, a resveratrol dimer
from melinjo ( Gnetum gnemon ), on tyrosinase activity and melanin biosynthesis. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2012 ,35, 993–996. [CrossRef][PubMed]
from melinjo ( Gnetum gnemon ), on tyrosinase activity and melanin biosynthesis. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2012 ,35, 993–996. [CrossRef][PubMed]84. Park, J.; Boo, Y.C. Isolation of resveratrol from vitis viniferae caulis and its potent inhibition of human tyrosinase. Evid. BasedComplement. Alternat. Med. 2013 ,2013 , 645257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Park, J.; Park, J.H.; Suh, H.J.; Lee, I.C.; Koh, J.; Boo, Y.C. Effects of resveratrol, oxyresveratrol, and their acetylated derivatives oncellular melanogenesis. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2014 ,306, 475–487. [CrossRef]86. Lin, C.B.; Babiarz, L.; Liebel, F.; Roydon Price, E.; Kizoulis, M.; Gendimenico, G.J.; Fisher, D.E.; Seiberg, M. Modulation ofmicrophthalmia-associated transcription factor gene expression alters skin pigmentation. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2002 ,119,1330–1340. [CrossRef]87. Lee, T.H.; Seo, J.O.; Baek, S.H.; Kim, S.Y. Inhibitory effects of resveratrol on melanin synthesis in ultraviolet B-induced pigmenta-
tion in Guinea pig skin. Biomol. Ther. 2014 ,22, 35–40. [CrossRef]88. Docherty, J.J.; McEwen, H.A.; Sweet, T.J.; Bailey, E.; Booth, T.D. Resveratrol inhibition of Propionibacterium acnes. J. Antimicrob.Chemother. 2007 ,59, 1182–1184. [CrossRef]89. Taylor, E.J.; Yu, Y.; Champer, J.; Kim, J. Resveratrol Demonstrates Antimicrobial Effects Against Propionibacterium acnes In Vitro.Dermatol. Ther. 2014 ,4, 249–257. [CrossRef]90. Dos Santos, Z.M.Q.; Dos Santos, M.Q.; Zancanaro, V .; Bellaver, E.H.; Nardi, G.M.; Gelinski, J.M.L.; Locatelli, C. Topical applicationof phenolic compounds suppresses Propionibacterium acnes-induced inflammatory responses in mice with ear edema. NaunynSchmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 2019 ,392, 529–540. [CrossRef]91. Prakoeswa, C.R.S.; Rindiastuti, Y.; Wirohadidjojo, Y.W.; Komaratih, E.; Nurwasis; Dinaryati, A.; Lestari, N.M.I.; Rantam, F.A.
Resveratrol promotes secretion of wound healing related growth factors of mesenchymal stem cells originated from adult andfetal tissues. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2020 ,48, 1160–1167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 27 of 2892. Bilgic, T. Comparison of the Effect of Local and Systemic Injection of Resveratrol on Cutaneous Wound Healing in Rats. Int. J.Low Extrem. Wounds 2021 ,20, 55–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]93. Liu, Y.; Xiong, W.; Wang, C.W.; Shi, J.P .; Shi, Z.Q.; Zhou, J.D. Resveratrol promotes skin wound healing by regulating themiR-212/CASP8 axis. Lab. Investig. 2021 ,101, 1363–1370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]94. Zeng, G.; Zhong, F.; Li, J.; Luo, S.; Zhang, P . Resveratrol-mediated reduction of collagen by inhibiting proliferation and producingapoptosis in human hypertrophic scar fibroblasts. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2013 ,77, 2389–2396. [CrossRef]95. Zhao, C.C.; Zhu, L.; Wu, Z.; Yang, R.; Xu, N.; Liang, L. Resveratrol-loaded peptide-hydrogels inhibit scar formation in woundhealing through suppressing inflammation. Regen. Biomater. 2020 ,7, 99–107. [CrossRef]
96. Amanat, S.; Taymouri, S.; Varshosaz, J.; Minaiyan, M.; Talebi, A. Carboxymethyl cellulose-based wafer enriched with resveratrol-loaded nanoparticles for enhanced wound healing. Drug Deliv. Transl. Res. 2020 ,10, 1241–1254. [CrossRef]97. Guo, S.; Liao, H.; Liu, J.; Liu, J.; Tang, F.; He, Z.; Li, Y.; Yang, Q. Resveratrol Activated Sonic Hedgehog Signaling to EnhanceViability of NIH3T3 Cells In Vitro via Regulation of Sirt1. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 2018 ,50, 1346–1360. [CrossRef]98. Ma, H.; Qiao, Z. Analysis of the efficacy of resveratrol treatment in patients with scarred uterus. Exp. Ther. Med. 2018 ,15,5410–5414. [CrossRef]99. Tang, Z.; Ding, J.C.; Zhai, X.X. Effects of resveratrol on the expression of molecules related to the mTOR signaling pathway inpathological scar fibroblasts. G. Ital. Dermatol. Venereol. 2020 ,155, 161–167. [CrossRef]
100. Chen, T.T.; Peng, S.; Wang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Shen, Y.; Xu, Y.; Yin, J.; Liu, C.; Cao, J. Improvement of Mitochondrial Activity and Fibrosisby Resveratrol Treatment in Mice with Schistosoma japonicum Infection. Biomolecules 2019 ,9, 658. [CrossRef]101. Ikeda, K.; Torigoe, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Fujita, T.; Sato, N.; Yotsuyanagi, T. Resveratrol inhibits fibrogenesis and induces apoptosisin keloid fibroblasts. Wound Repair Regen. 2013 ,21, 616–623. [CrossRef] [PubMed]102. Sun, D.; Hurdle, J.G.; Lee, R.; Lee, R.; Cushman, M.; Pezzuto, J.M. Evaluation of flavonoid and resveratrol chemical librariesreveals abyssinone II as a promising antibacterial lead. ChemMedChem 2012 ,7, 1541–1545. [CrossRef]103. Paulo, L.; Ferreira, S.; Gallardo, E.; Queiroz, J.A.; Domingues, F. Antimicrobial Activity and Effects of Resveratrol on HumanPathogenic Bacteria. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010 ,26, 1533–1538. [CrossRef]
104. Hwang, D.; Lim, Y.H. Resveratrol antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli is mediated by Z-ring formation inhibition viasuppression of FtsZ expression. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 10029. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Liu, Y.; Zhou, J.; Qu, Y.; Yang, X.; Shi, G.; Wang, X.; Hong, Y.; Drlica, K.; Zhao, X. Resveratrol Antagonizes Antimicrobial Lethalityand Stimulates Recovery of Bacterial Mutants. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0153023. [CrossRef]106. Li, Q.; Verma, I.M. NF-kappaB regulation in the immune system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002 ,2, 725–734. [CrossRef]107. De Leo, A.; Arena, G.; Lacanna, E.; Oliviero, G.; Colavita, F.; Mattia, E. Resveratrol inhibits Epstein Barr Virus lytic cycle inBurkitt’s lymphoma cells by affecting multiple molecular targets. Antiviral Res. 2012 ,96, 196–202. [CrossRef]108. Chan, C.N.; Trinit é, B.; Levy, D.N. Potent Inhibition of HIV-1 Replication in Resting CD4 T Cells by Resveratrol and Pterostilbene.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2017 ,61, e00408–e00417. [CrossRef]109. Wang, J.; Zhang, X.; Gao, L.; Wang, L.; Song, F.; Zhang, L.; Wan, Y. The synergistic antifungal activity of resveratrol with azolesagainst Candida albicans. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2021 ,72, 688–697. [CrossRef]
against Candida albicans. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2021 ,72, 688–697. [CrossRef]110. Chen, Q.-W.; Dong, K.; Qin, H.-X.; Yang, Y.-K.; He, J.-L.; Li, J.; Zheng, Z.-W.; Chen, D.-L.; Chen, J.-P . Direct and IndirectInhibition Effects of Resveratrol against Toxoplasma gondii Tachyzoites In Vitro. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2019 ,63, e01233-18.[CrossRef]111. Zi, C.; Gan, C.; Xu, H.; Sheng, J.; Wang, X. Recent Advances on Anti-skin Cancer Activity of Phytochemicals and UnderlyingMolecular Mechanisms. Med. Res. 2021 ,5, 210006.112. Kaur, H.; Kesharwani, P . Advanced nanomedicine approaches applied for treatment of skin carcinoma. J. Control. Release 2021 ,337, 589–611. [CrossRef] [PubMed]113. Cullen, J.K.; Simmons, J.L.; Parsons, P .G.; Boyle, G.M. Topical treatments for skin cancer. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2020 ,153, 54–64.[CrossRef] [PubMed]114. Imran, M.; Iqubal, M.K.; Imtiyaz, K.; Saleem, S.; Mittal, S.; Rizvi, M.M.A.; Ali, J.; Baboota, S. Topical nanostructured lipid carrier
gel of quercetin and resveratrol: Formulation, optimization, in vitro and ex vivo study for the treatment of skin cancer. Int. J.Pharm. 2020 ,587, 119705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Wu, Z.; Liu, B.; Liu, J.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, J.; Chen, N.; Chen, R.; Zhu, R. Resveratrol inhibits the proliferation of human melanomacells by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mol. Med. Rep. 2015 ,11, 400–404. [CrossRef]116. Ravikumar, P .; Katariya, M.; Patil, S.; Tatke, P .; Pillai, R. Skin delivery of resveratrol encapsulated lipidic formulation for melanomachemoprevention. J. Microencapsul. 2019 ,36, 535–551. [CrossRef]117. Mahamat-Saleh, Y.; Aune, D.; Schlesinger, S. 25-Hydroxyvitamin D status, vitamin D intake, and skin cancer risk: A systematicreview and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 13151. [CrossRef]118. Pavel, T.I.; Chircov, C.; R ădulescu, M.; Grumezescu, A.M. Regenerative Wound Dressings for Skin Cancer. Cancers 2020 ,12, 2954.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]119. McDaniel, B.; Badri, T.; Steele, R.B. Basal Cell Carcinoma. In StatPearls ; StatPearls Publishing LLC.: Treasure Island, FL, US A, 20 22.120. Aziz, M.H.; Reagan-Shaw, S.; Wu, J.; Longley, B.J.; Ahmad, N. Chemoprevention of skin cancer by grape constituent resveratrol:Relevance to human disease? FASEB J. 2005 ,19, 1193–1195. [CrossRef]
Cosmetics 2023 ,10, 68 28 of 28121. Athar, M.; Back, J.H.; Tang, X.; Kim, K.H.; Kopelovich, L.; Bickers, D.R.; Kim, A.L. Resveratrol: A review of preclinical studies forhuman cancer prevention. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2007 ,224, 274–283. [CrossRef]122. Liu, Z.L.; Li, H.; Liu, J.; Wu, M.L.; Chen, X.Y.; Liu, L.H.; Wang, Q. Inactivated Wnt signaling in resveratrol-treated epidermalsquamous cancer cells and its biological implication. Oncol. Lett. 2017 ,14, 2239–2243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]123. Hao, Y.; Huang, W.; Liao, M.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, H.; Hao, C.; Liu, G.; Zhang, G.; Feng, H.; Ning, X.; et al. The inhibition of resveratrol tohuman skin squamous cell carcinoma A431 xenografts in nude mice. Fitoterapia 2013 ,86, 84–91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]124. Back, J.H.; Zhu, Y.; Calabro, A.; Queenan, C.; Kim, A.S.; Arbesman, J.; Kim, A.L. Resveratrol-mediated downregulation of
Rictor attenuates autophagic process and suppresses UV-induced skin carcinogenesis. Photochem. Photobiol. 2012 ,88, 1165–1172.[CrossRef] [PubMed]125. Zhai, X.X.; Ding, J.C.; Tang, Z.M.; Li, J.G.; Li, Y.C.; Yan, Y.H.; Sun, J.C.; Zhang, C.X. Effects of resveratrol on the proliferation,apoptosis and telomerase ability of human A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells. Oncol. Lett. 2016 ,11, 3015–3018. [CrossRef]126. Gong, C.; Xia, H. Resveratrol suppresses melanoma growth by promoting autophagy through inhibiting the PI3K/AKT/mTORsignaling pathway. Exp. Ther. Med. 2020 ,19, 1878–1886. [CrossRef]127. Boyer, J.Z.; Jandova, J.; Janda, J.; Vleugels, F.R.; Elliott, D.A.; Sligh, J.E. Resveratrol-sensitized UVA induced apoptosis in humankeratinocytes through mitochondrial oxidative stress and pore opening. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 2012 ,113, 42–50. [CrossRef]128. Cosco, D.; Paolino, D.; Maiuolo, J.; Marzio, L.D.; Carafa, M.; Ventura, C.A.; Fresta, M. Ultradeformable liposomes as multidrug
carrier of resveratrol and 5-fluorouracil for their topical delivery. Int. J. Pharm. 2015 ,489, 1–10. [CrossRef]129. Wang, W.; Tang, Q.; Yu, T.; Li, X.; Gao, Y.; Li, J.; Liu, Y.; Rong, L.; Wang, Z.; Sun, H.; et al. Surfactant-Free Preparation ofAu@Resveratrol Hollow Nanoparticles with Photothermal Performance and Antioxidant Activity. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2017 ,9, 3376–3387. [CrossRef]130. Carletto, B.; Berton, J.; Ferreira, T.N.; Dalmolin, L.F.; Paludo, K.S.; Mainardes, R.M.; Farago, P .V .; Favero, G.M. Resveratrol-loadednanocapsules inhibit murine melanoma tumor growth. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2016 ,144, 65–72. [CrossRef]131. Tsai, M.J.; Lu, I.J.; Fu, Y.S.; Fang, Y.P .; Huang, Y.B.; Wu, P .C. Nanocarriers enhance the transdermal bioavailability of resveratrol:In-vitro and in-vivo study. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2016 ,148, 650–656. [CrossRef]
132. Das, S.; Lee, S.H.; Chow, P .S.; Macbeath, C. Microemulsion composed of combination of skin beneficial oils as vehicle: Develop-ment of resveratrol-loaded microemulsion based formulations for skin care applications. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2020 ,194,111161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]133. Miao, L.; Daozhou, L.; Ying, C.; Qibing, M.; Siyuan, Z. A resveratrol-loaded nanostructured lipid carrier hydrogel to enhance theanti-UV irradiation and anti-oxidant efficacy. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2021 ,204, 111786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]134. Pentek, T.; Newenhouse, E.; O’Brien, B.; Chauhan, A.S. Development of a Topical Resveratrol Formulation for CommercialApplications Using Dendrimer Nanotechnology. Molecules 2017 ,22, 137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury topeople or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
