Exosome- based candidates move into the clinicExosomes — small extracellular vesicles that are shed by cells — have long offered promise as drug delivery systems for small molecules, DNA, RNA and other biologic payloads. The first of these are now in the clinic.Nearly 50 years ago, scientists noticed that cells in culture ‘exfoliated’ small sacs of then unknown function. Subsequent work has shown that these structures, now known as extracellular vesicles or exosomes, can contain RNA, proteins and other molecules, packaged up by parent cells and sent over to their neighbours. Cells seem to use them to communicate with each other.Once considered a quirky biological phenomenon, exosomes have recently drawn the attention of drug developers as possible drug delivery vehicles. While Raghu Kalluri, a cancer researcher at MD Anderson Cancer Center, was trying to unravel the biology of exosomes, he also began thinking about how to engineer and develop these as therapeutic
to engineer and develop these as therapeutic products. “Everybody in the field agrees: they love entering cells efficiently, and they can dump their cargo inside, ” he says. The race is now on to figure out how to best harness them. While most of the early applications are focused on the delivery of nucleotide- based therapeutics, which are notoriously difficult to deliver, exosomes may yet have broader capabilities.Codiak Biosciences, which Kalluri co- founded in 2015, is the first to start a human trial of an engineered exosome-based therapeutic. The company’s exoSTING consists of an exosome engineered to  contain a small- molecule stimulator of interferon genes (STING) agonist in its lumen. In October, the company launched  a phase I/II clinic al trial of this agent in advanced solid tumours. Codiak’s exoIL-12,  an exosome engineered to display pro- inflammatory IL-12 on its surface, is also now in a p hase I trial in patients with
early- stage cutaneous T cell lymphoma.Other biotechs are taking other approaches, experimenting with different sources of exosomes, different engineering techniques and different payloads (Table  1). Increasingly, they are attracting pharma-ceutical partners. For example, Evox Therapeutics, led by Tony De Fougerolles, set up exosome- based partnerships in 2020 with Takeda, for rare diseases, and with E li Lilly, for neurological targets.PureTech was collaborating with Roche to study milk- isolated exosomes as a means of orally delivering nucleotide- based therapies, but that 2- year partnership ended in 2020. PureTech is now going it alone to see if its delivery system can turn gastrointestinal cells into mini drug factories.The COVID-19 pandemic is also opening up new doors. Both Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech use lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) — spherical vesicles consisting of a lipid bilayer surrounding an aqueous lumen — to deliver mRNA- based COVID-19 vaccines.
deliver mRNA- based COVID-19 vaccines. But Capricor Therapeutics believes that exosome- based mRNA delivery may fare better. It is also developing a vaccine that consists of an exosome decorated with viral proteins on the outside. “The vaccine is just a first- in- class, ” says Linda Marbán, Capricor’s CEO. When the Covid pandemic hit, Capricor was just about to launch its exosome- mRNA platform and wanted a project in which even low levels of protein production would elicit a measurable biological response. “Vaccinology is relatively easy to use as a proof of concept, ” Marbán says.All of this opportunity reminds De Fougerolles of the RNA interference (RNAi) field in around 2004, when those therapies were gaining traction in vivo. “If you think of all the things that we feel we can do with exosomes — extrahepatic delivery of small interfering (siRNA), safe repeat delivery of mRNA, gene editing, repeat dosing of adeno- associated virus (AAV) vectors — all
of those things could completely transform those fields. And we can deliver proteins to  a range of cells, ” he says.Existing exosomes
of those things could completely transform those fields. And we can deliver proteins to  a range of cells, ” he says.Existing exosomesScientists have been optimizing drug delivery systems since the 1970s. Delivery platforms such as LNPs (formerly called liposomes), polymeric nanoparticles and inorganic nanoparticles — collectively known as nanomedicines — deliver drugs to specific cells or organs. More than 20 nanomedicines are now FDA- approved for myriad diseases including cancer, hepatitis C and haemophilia. These carry various payloads, but much of the success of nanomedicines has been with chemotherapies and other small molecules.Exosomes are similar in size to nanoparticles (~30–150nm) and bigger than the AAVs, which come in at the low end of that size range for delivery vehicles.Bob Langer, a chemical engineer at MIT who has been investigating and developing drug delivery platforms for decades, highlights three key characteristics that
highlights three key characteristics that could give exosomes the edge over existing platforms: they may be less immunogenic, less toxic and more able to cross biological barriers such as the blood–brain barrier (BBB). “Exosomes are at an early stage, but I think they’re exciting, ” says Langer.Because exosomes are less immunogenic, they might be particularly useful for repeat drug dosing. Repeat dosing with gene therapies that are delivered by viral vectors such as AAVs can result in an immune response against the virus, and preclinical work suggests that there is a finite number of doses that patients can receive. The same is true for nanoparticles, which the body eventually recognizes as foreign.Delivery vehicles that can c ross the BBB are also a big deal. In a 2011 paper in Nature Biotechnology , University of Oxford’s Matthew Wood and colleagues showed that intravenously delivered exosomes tagged Table 1 | Selected engineered exosomes in development
Sponsor Exosome source Cargo Potential targets and useMolecules in phase I clinical trialsCodiak Biosciences Cultured cells IL-12aImmune activation in cancerCodiak Biosciences Cultured cells STING agonist Immune activation in cancerMD Anderson Cancer CenterCultured cells KRAS- G12D siRNACancer cells with KRASG12D mutationsMolecules in preclinical developmentAnjarium Biosciences Exosome–LNP hybrid RNA or DNA Cancer and genetic diseasesCapricor Therapeutics Cultured cells RNA Genetic diseases, vaccinesEvox Therapeutics Cultured cells RNA or enzymes Protein replacement or gene therapyPureTech Cow’s milk RNA or DNA Expression in intestinal cells for systemic releaseLNP , lipid nanoparticle; STING, stimulator of interferon genes. aOn the exosome’s surface.Megan Cully6 | January 2021 | volume 20 www.nature.com/nrdNews & ANAlysis
with neuron- homing peptides could cross the BBB in mice and deliver enough siRNA to dramatically reduce the expression of BACE , a potential Alzheimer disease target. Wood co- founded Evox on these data. Evox is currently modifying exosomes to increase their capacity to deliver siRNA across the BBB. “ A certain percentage of exosomes get across regardless, but you can improve that by several fold via targeting, ” says De Fougerolles. Evox is also optimizing the exosomal delivery of proteins or mRNA for rare diseases, both within the CNS and other organs.The flexibility of the exosome platform and the capacity to optimize carriers for different applications is key for Doug Williams, Codiak’s CEO. “There is a design element up front — all right, what  do I want this exosome to do? — and then  I can build it with the features it needs to do more than one thing, ” notes Williams. Codiak
more than one thing, ” notes Williams. Codiak has engineered its exosomes to be taken up by antigen- presenting cells in tumours, to be retained at the site of injection and to avoid uptake by the reticuloenodothelial system.Both of Codiak’s lead clinical candidates aim to reinvigorate the immune system to recognize and kill cancer cells, but by using different therapeutic modalities. ExoSTING, like most of the exosomes being investigated, carries its payload in the lumen. By contrast, exoIL-12 has pro- inflammatory IL-12 tethered to the outside of the exosome and elicits its effects extracellularly. The company also has other immune- modulatory exosomes in preclinical development, as well as a SARS- CoV-2 vaccine.Kalluri has now focused on using exosomes to target R AS, one of the most frequently altered proteins in cancer. Whereas the RAS front- runners are small molecules that act on the G12C mutant of the oncogene, Kalluri has set his sights on the G12D mutant.
Kalluri has set his sights on the G12D mutant. This mutation is often found in pancreatic cancer. It turns out that the pancreas is particularly good at taking up intravenously delivered exosomes, and Kalluri’s RASG12D siRNA- containing exosomes improved survival in a model of pancreatic cancer. A phase I clinical trial, run by MD Anderson, is set to start shortly.PureTech takes a different approach. Its goal is to use orally delivered exosomes to smuggle expression vectors into cells in the gastrointestinal tract. Those cells will then manufacture therapeutic proteins in situ, following the blueprint of a non- integrating mRNA or DNA construct, and release these into circulation via the lymphatic system. For Joe Bolen, an ex- Moderna CSO who is now PureTech’s CSO, the simplicity of oral delivery is attractive and is likely to increase patient compliance of any resulting drugs. But the delivery of exosomes to cells in the
But the delivery of exosomes to cells in the gastrointestinal tract has another advantage. “There are no immune cells between us and our target cell, ” he says. By contrast, most of any intravenously delivered nanomedicine is taken up and destroyed by phagocytic cells in the liver before it can reach other target cells.Delivery of more complex cargo such as proteins and antibodies may also be within reach. Evox is loading exosomes with therapeutic proteins to compensate for genetic deficiencies in rare metabolic diseases such as the urea cycle disorders.In the nanoparticle world, applications that seemed impossible back in the 1970s are now approved therapies. Langer sees a similar potential path for exosomes. “I could think of all kinds of things that people might do: some of them might be completely new and innovative, and some of it might be what people have done with lipids, ” he says.Existential manufacturing
Existential manufacturingAs a novel platform, exosomes face not only scientific but also practical challenges. “Whenever technology is young, there are more issues to work on, ” says Langer.Manufacturing, for instance, was poised to throw a spanner in the works from the get- go.
Manufacturing, for instance, was poised to throw a spanner in the works from the get- go. Historically, scientists have purified exosomes using ultracentrifugation, a process that is too labour- intensive and time- consuming to be used in large- scale manufacturing. “We’ve had the mindset from the beginning that if you can’t make it [at scale], it’s not a drug, ” says Williams. Codiak hired a head of manufacturing before it hired a head of R&D. “I think the strategy we employed — of focusing on manufacturing a lot earlier than other startup biotech companies do — has paid dividends for us, ” says Williams. Codiak has replaced ultracentrifugation with techniques based on chromatography and filtration. “ All the things that regulators would expect with a modern day biologics process have been incorporated purposely from the outset, ” says Williams. He credits this approach with getting his leads into phase I trials quickly.Similarly, PureTech looked for
Similarly, PureTech looked for manufacturing solutions early on. It too has developed a simple method of purification that can produce enough exosomes to be clinically useful. PureTech was isolating about 1014 exosomes per week using ultracen-trifugation in the early days. Its proprietary purification method now produces about 1017 exosomes in about 3 days. Bolen estimates that patients will need about 1013 exosomes per dose in the clinic. “We’ve really overcome that manufacturing hurdle, ” he says.PureTech’s platform uses milk- isolated exosomes, purified from whey, an often-   discarded by- product of cheese manufacturing, rather than expensive mammalian cell cultures from bioreactors. “The cost of goods here is trivial, ” says Bolen.Using milk- purified exosomes gives PureTech comfort on safety too. “I mean, they’re edible — they’re safe, ” says Bolen.Systemic delivery of other types of
Systemic delivery of other types of exosome is also likely safe, adds Marbán. “If you’ve ever had a blood transfusion or some other type of biofluid, you received hundreds of millions if not billions of exosomes, ” she says. “Clearly, people are not rejecting those. ”All eyes are on Codiak and its first exosome- based therapies to see whether this holds up in the clinic, or whether the engineering process itself could give exosomes immune- stimulating properties. If Codiak’s candidates do prove to be safe,  the exosome field will breathe a collective sigh of relief. Attention will then turn to other factors, including efficacy, tissue selectivity and payload priorities.“I think exosomes will work, ” predicts Langer. “The question is will they work better than anything else for the same thing?”Most of the first approved nanoparticles carried chemotherapeutics, and their edge was mainly in terms of pharmacokinetic
was mainly in terms of pharmacokinetic properties. Exosome developers are primarily taking on a different task: if exosomes can deliver nucleotide- based therapies efficiently to specific tissues, these platforms could usher in a new era of genetic medicine, which has so far been held back by delivery issues.Viruses can also theoretically be packaged into exosomes, shielding AAVs from the immune system and enabling repeat dosing of large pieces of integrating or non- integrating DNA to particular tissues. Antibodies that target intracellular proteins could even, in theory, be packaged into exosomes, which would expand the number of modalities for intracellular targeting.“ At the moment, the sky’s the limit, ” says Kalluri. In reality, the community will find its limits through experiments and trials in the coming years, he notes, but it will also find new opportunities.  volume 20 | January 2021 | 7nature reviews | Drug DiSCovEryNews & ANAlysis
