cellsReviewOverview of Extracellular Vesicles, Their Origin,Composition, Purpose, and Methods for ExosomeIsolation and AnalysisLaura M. Doyle and Michael Zhuo Wang *Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA*Correspondence: michael.wang@ku.edu; Tel.: +1-785-864-5736Received: 10 May 2019; Accepted: 12 July 2019; Published: 15 July 2019/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: The use of extracellular vesicles, speciﬁcally exosomes, as carriers of biomarkers inextracellular spaces has been well demonstrated. Despite their promising potential, the use ofexosomes in the clinical setting is restricted due to the lack of standardization in exosome isolationand analysis methods. The purpose of this review is to not only introduce the di ﬀerent types of
extracellular vesicles but also to summarize their di ﬀerences and similarities, and discuss di ﬀerentmethods of exosome isolation and analysis currently used. A thorough understanding of the isolationand analysis methods currently being used could lead to some standardization in the ﬁeld of exosomalresearch, allowing the use of exosomes in the clinical setting to become a reality.Keywords: exosomes; isolation; analysis; exosomal marker protein; microvesicles1. IntroductionExtracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bound vesicles secreted by cells into the extracellularspace [ 1,2]. The three main subtypes of EVs are microvesicles (MVs), exosomes, and apoptoticbodies, which are di ﬀerentiated based upon their biogenesis, release pathways, size, content, andfunction [ 1–3]. The content, or cargo, of EVs consists of lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins—speciﬁcallyproteins associated with the plasma membrane, cytosol, and those involved in lipid metabolism [ 1,4].
The primary focus of this review will be on the protein content of EVs, however, the nucleic acidand lipid composition of EVs is well described in [ 1,2,5] and [ 6–8], respectively. While no speciﬁcprotein markers have been identiﬁed to distinguish between the di ﬀerent types of EVs, MVs, exosomes,and apoptotic bodies have di ﬀerent protein proﬁles due to their di ﬀerent routes of formation [ 9–11].However, substantial overlap of protein proﬁles is often observed, due in part to the lack of standardizedisolation and analysis methods of EVs [ 2,12]. Further, it has been demonstrated that the proteomicproﬁles of EVs from the same source are dependent on their isolation method [ 2]. The ﬁeld of EVs hasled to much understanding in the area of cell–cell communication and cancer metastasis, and their usein the clinical setting as carriers of biomarkers for diagnostic purposes has been demonstrated [ 13–28],
however, standardized methods for EV isolation and analysis must be developed in order for them tobecome tools that can truly be used in the clinical setting.1.1. ExosomesExosomes, also referred to as intraluminal vesicles (ILVs), are enclosed within a single outermembrane, and are secreted by all cell types and have been found in plasma, urine, semen, saliva,bronchial ﬂuid, cerebral spinal ﬂuid (CSF), breast milk, serum, amniotic ﬂuid, synovial ﬂuid, tears,lymph, bile, and gastric acid [18,22–24,29–39].Cells 2019 ,8, 727; doi:10.3390 /cells8070727 www.mdpi.com /journal /cells
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 2 of 241.1.1. Origin and SizeExosomes are a subtype of EV formed by an endosomal route and are typically 30–150 nm indiameter [ 1,3–5]. Speciﬁcally, exosomal vesicles form by inward budding of the limiting membraneof early endosomes, which mature into multivesicular bodies (MVBs) during the process [ 2,4,5].Early endosomes, which originate from inward budding of the cell’s plasma membrane, and MVBsare involved in the endocytic and tra ﬃcking functions of the cell’s material [ 3]. Speciﬁcally, theyare involved in protein sorting, recycling, storage, transport, and release [ 3]. MVBs are eventuallyeither sent to the lysosome to be degraded along with all of its components or fused with the cell’splasma membrane to release its content, including exosomes, into the extracellular space [ 4,40–42].The factors that determine the fate of a speciﬁc MVB are not well understood [ 5]. However, studies
have been done to demonstrate that the fate of a particular MVB depends on the level of cholesterol inthe MVB. Speciﬁcally, a cholesterol rich vesicle was secreted while a morphologically identical vesiclethat lacked cholesterol was sent to the lysosome for degradation [ 43]. The regulation of MVB andexosome formation and release is through the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport(ESCRT) pathway [ 44,45]. While the exact mechanism is still not fully understood, it appears theformation of MVBs can be stimulated by growth factors and the cell adjusts its exosome productionaccording to its needs [29,46].1.1.2. CompositionThe biogenesis of exosomes can be used to understand the proteome of the vesicles. Becauseexosomal formation and MVB transportation are regulated by ESCRT proteins, these proteins andits accessory proteins (Alix, TSG101, HSC70, and HSP90 β) are expected to be found in exosomes
regardless of the type of cell from which they originate [10,47–50]. Thus, this set of proteins are oftentermed “exosomal marker proteins.” Some studies indicate there is another mechanism, an ESCRTindependent mechanism, by which some cells release exosomes into the extracellular space [ 51]. In suchcases, exosome release is thought to depend on sphingomyelinase enzyme instead of ESCRT, sincecells depleted of the ESCRT machinery still produced CD63 positive exosomes [ 52–55]. The CD63,along with CD9 and CD81, are proteins in the tetraspanin family. These transmembrane proteins,and other proteins associated with the plasma membrane, are commonly found in exosomes andare often enriched in the vesicles compared to the cell lysate [ 56,57]. Originally, it was thoughtthat tetraspanin proteins were speciﬁc markers of exosomes, however, these proteins have sincebeen identiﬁed in MVs and apoptotic bodies [ 58,59]. Exosomes tend to be enriched in glycoproteins
compared to the secreting cells, however, MVs (discussed in Section 1.2) are thought to containproteins with higher levels of posttranslational modiﬁcations (PTMs), such as glycosylation andphosphorylation, compared to exosomes, which is a potential way to distinguish the vesicles basedon content rather than size [ 12,57,60]. Finally, a recent study [ 61] reported interorganelle tra ﬃckingbetween mitochondria and the endolysosomal system, which challenges the untested dogma thatproteins speciﬁcally associated with organelles such as mitochondria and the nucleus are not expectedto be observed in the exosomal vesicles. Proteins associated with the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmicreticulum, however, are thought to be present at low levels since early endosomes can interact withthese organelles. Nonetheless, such proteins are typically still considered to be non-exosomal markerproteins since they are at lower levels in the exosomes compared to the lysate.1.1.3. Biological Purpose
1.1.3. Biological PurposeExosomes were originally thought to be a source of cellular dumping, or a way for cells to get
1.1.3. Biological PurposeExosomes were originally thought to be a source of cellular dumping, or a way for cells to getrid of unneeded or unwanted material, however, it has since been found that exosomes participatein cell–cell communication, cell maintenance, and tumor progression, as discussed in Section 1.2.3.In addition, exosomes have been found to stimulate immune responses by acting as antigen-presentingvesicles [ 62,63]. In the nervous system, exosomes haven been found to help promote myelin formation,
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 3 of 24neurite growth, and neuronal survival, thus playing a role in tissue repair and regeneration [ 64–68].At the same time, exosomes in the central nervous system (CNS) have been found to contain pathogenicproteins, such as beta amyloid peptide, superoxide dismutase, and alpha synuclein that may aid indisease progression [69–72].1.1.4. Applications and UsesA common interest in exosomal research is in studying their ability to act as carriers of biomarkersfor diseases. For example, exosomes in both plasma and CSF have been found to contain alphasynuclein, a protein associated with Parkinson’s disease [ 73–75]. A recent review has focused onEVs as markers of glioblastoma [ 76]. Exosomes isolated from urine have demonstrated the abilityto reﬂect acute kidney injury [ 14]. There has also been success in ﬁnding markers for pancreaticcancer and lung cancer in exosomes as well [ 28,77]. The use of exosomes as carriers of biomarkers
is ideal because these vesicles are found in bodily ﬂuids, such as blood and urine, which allows forminimally to non-invasive “liquid biopsy” type methods to diagnose and even monitor a patient’sresponse to treatment. The ability of exosomes to monitor a patient’s response is yet another potentialapplication of these vesicles in the clinical setting [ 13]. If the disease marker directly correlates todisease state, and if the patient’s treatment is working, one should observe a change in the presenceof the biomarker as the patient undergoes treatment. Others have suggested that exosomes can beused in vaccine development and for other immunological purposes [ 62,63]. Because exosomes actinherently as antigen presenting vesicles, it may be possible to capitalize on this inherent property.Further, exosomes have a long circulating half-life, are well tolerated by the human body, and capable
of not only penetrating cellular membranes but also potentially targeting speciﬁc cell types, whichmakes them an even better candidate for such immunological applications [ 78]. Also, because of theseinherent advantages of exosomes, they are also ideal for the development of drug delivery systems [ 79].While methods are still being developed for introduction of RNA and protein to exosomes, and to targetthese exosomes to a speciﬁc region of the body, the ability to load both protein and genetic material intoexosomes is yet another advantage making exosomes an attractive drug delivery system [ 78]. Finally,it has been demonstrated that the mesenchymal stem cell exosomes themselves can act as a therapeuticentity to help reduce tissue injury [ 80–84]. While there is a broad range of potential applications anduses of exosomes in the clinical setting, more standardized methods for exosome isolation and analysis
are needed in order to meet the regulatory requirements of the FDA and other regulatory agencies touse exosomes as biomarkers, vaccines, drug delivery devices, and therapeutic tools [5].1.2. Microvesicles1.2.1. Origin and SizeMVs are EVs that form by direct outward budding, or pinching, of the cell’s plasma membrane.The size of MVs typically range from 100 nm up to 1 µm in diameter [ 1–5]. The route of MV formationis not well understood, however, it is thought to require cytoskeleton components, such as actin andmicrotubules, along with molecular motors (kinesins and myosins), and fusion machinery (SNAREsand tethering factors) [ 85]. The number of MVs produced depends on the donor cell’s physiologicalstate and microenvironment [ 1]. Likewise, it has been previously demonstrated that the numberof MVs consumed depends on the physiological state and microenvironment of recipient cells [ 1].
Further, the uptake of MVs is likely an energy dependent process, as uptake is suppressed at lowertemperatures [60,86,87].1.2.2. CompositionWhile the proteomic proﬁles of MVs are heavily dependent on the isolation method, there is a
temperatures [60,86,87].1.2.2. CompositionWhile the proteomic proﬁles of MVs are heavily dependent on the isolation method, there is acategory of proteins termed “marker proteins”, which are proteins found in MVs, regardless of cellorigin, as a result of their biogenesis process [ 88]. Because MVs form by an outward budding of
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 4 of 24the cell’s plasma membrane, it is easily understood that MVs contain mainly cytosolic and plasmamembrane associated proteins, especially proteins known to cluster at the plasma membrane surface,such as tetraspanins [ 89,90]. It has been reported that such proteins can have 100-fold higherconcentration in MVs compared to the cell lysate [ 89,90]. Other proteins commonly identiﬁed in MVsinclude cytoskeletal proteins, heat shock proteins, integrins, and proteins containing post translationalmodiﬁcations, such as glycosylation and phosphorylation [ 91–93]. Interestingly, the glycan bindingproteins on the surface of MVs maybe a key factor in understanding how MVs are targeted to, andinteract with, other cells. The focus of this review will remain on the proteome of MVs, however,the glycome of MVs is thoroughly discussed in [ 2]. The presence of cytosolic and plasma membrane
proteins can be understood based on the biogenesis of MVs, similarly, it can be understood that proteinsspeciﬁcally associated with di ﬀerent organelles such as the mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, nucleus,and endoplasmic reticulum should be depleted in MVs, especially compared to the cell’s lysate, asthese organelles are not involved in the biogenesis of MVs [ 57,87]. However, speciﬁc markers are stilllacking to distinguish MVs from exosomes [11].1.2.3. Biological PurposeOriginally, it was thought that, like exosomes, MVs were a cellular dumping or maintenancemechanism, by which the cell would get rid of unwanted material [ 2]. However, it has since beenunderstood that MVs (and exosomes) are involved in cell–cell communication between local and distantcells. The ability of these EVs to alter the recipient cell has been well demonstrated [ 94,95]. These newdiscoveries in biological purpose of EVs have spurred a global interest in fully understanding EVs and
the diagnostic and therapeutic potential. Other forms of cell–cell communication, such as hormones,growth factors, cytokines, and direct interaction are better understood and play an important role asto how multi-cellular organisms are able to function as a single system [ 2]. The uniqueness of EVsis that they have the ability to package active cargo (proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids) and deliverit to another cell, neighboring or distant, and alter the recipient cell’s functions with its delivery [ 1].While such forms of communication occur between physiologically healthy cells, one could understandthat diseased cells, such as cancer cells, package their active machinery in EVs, transport it to otherwisehealthy cells, thus playing a role in cancer metastasis [ 96,97]. Perhaps a better understanding of MVand exosomal formation and regulation could lead to new options for cancer therapies, since theyappear to play a critical role in cancer development and progression.
1.2.4. Applications and UsesThe applications of and uses of MVs in the clinical setting are similar to those of exosomes (1.1.4).1.3. Apoptotic Bodies1.3.1. Origin and SizeApoptotic bodies are released by dying cells into the extracellular space. They are reported torange in size from 50 nm up to 5000 nm in diameter, with the size of most apoptotic bodies tending tobe on the larger side [ 3]. These bodies form by a separation of the cell’s plasma membrane from thecytoskeleton as a result of increased hydrostatic pressure after the cell contracts [98].1.3.2. CompositionThe composition of apoptotic bodies is in direct contrast with exosomes and MVs. Unlike exosomesand MVs, apoptotic bodies contain intact organelles, chromatin, and small amounts of glycosylatedproteins [ 3,48,60,99]. Thus, one would expect to observe higher levels of proteins associated with thenucleus (i.e., histones), mitochondria (i.e., HSP60), Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum (i.e.,
GRP78). Further, the proteomic proﬁles of apoptotic bodies and cell lysate are quite similar, whereas
GRP78). Further, the proteomic proﬁles of apoptotic bodies and cell lysate are quite similar, whereasthere are stark di ﬀerences in the proteomic proﬁles between exosomes and cell lysate.
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 5 of 242. Isolation MethodsThe potential beneﬁts and uses of exosomes and other EVs in the clinical setting have beendescribed above, however, a major hindrance in bringing exosomes into the clinical setting is the lack ofstandardization in isolation methods. Exosomes were originally isolated by ultracentrifugation-basedmethods, and while these methods remain the gold standard, other methods have been developedto address the challenges associated with ultracentrifugation [ 100,101]. These alternative methodshave been developed based on isolation by size, immunoa ﬃnity capture, and precipitation ofexosomes, however, even these methods fail to exclusively isolate exosomes, and typically result incomplex mixtures of EVs and other components of the extracellular space [ 1,2]. This is due to thecomplexity of biological ﬂuids from which exosomes are being isolated from, the drastic overlap in the
physiochemical and biochemical properties between exosomes and di ﬀerent EVs, and the heterogeneityamong exosomes themselves [ 102,103]. Thus, the challenge remains to develop isolation techniquesthat can di ﬀerentiate the di ﬀerent types of EVs in the extracellular matrix and do so rapidly, e ﬃciently,reproducibly, and in a clinically friendly manner [ 5]. Further, the use of multiple isolation methodsconsecutively has been used to further enrich the exosomal content of a particular isolation, however,this also leads to increased cost, time, and technical training making it less clinically friendly [ 104].An overview of some methods described in this review can be seen in Table 1.Table 1. Comparison of exosomal isolation techniques based on recovery, purity, required samplevolume, and time required for isolation.Isolation Technique Recovery Purity Sample Volume Time Required ReferenceUltracentrifugation 5–25% Low 100s of mLs 8 h [10]
Density Gradient Higher than UC Similar to UC up to 1 mL 20 h [105]Precipitation Kits N /A Low >100µL Overnight [106]ExoChip N /A N /A <400µL <2 h [107]Immunoprecipitation >99% bead recovery Higher than UC up to 1 mL Overnight [10]ExoSearch Chip 42–97% Higher than UC 20 µL 40 min [108]Acoustic Nanoﬁlter >80% High 50 µL <30 min [109]N/A: not available.2.1. Ultracentrifugation Techniques2.1.1. Di ﬀerential UltracentrifugationDiﬀerential ultracentrifugation was the ﬁrst method used for exosome isolation and remainsthe gold standard for exosome isolation to date [ 100,110,111]. As is the case with all centrifugationmethods, the separation of exosomes and other EVs from the extracellular matrix depends on density,size, and shape, with larger and more dense particles sedimenting out ﬁrst [ 112]. A sample protocolfor exosome isolation by di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation is represented in the diagram in Figure 1.
The 500 ×gstep helps to pellet-out cellular debris and larger particles from the matrix. The 0.22 µmﬁltration and 10,000 ×gsteps further purify the matrix, removing larger EVs and apoptotic bodies.Finally, the exosomes are pelleted out and washed in the 100,000 ×gcentrifugation steps. The exosomalyield can be increased by using longer centrifugation times during the 100,000 ×gspins, however, it hasbeen demonstrated that if >4 h is used, there is signiﬁcant mechanical damage to the exosomes andhigher levels of soluble protein contamination in the ﬁnal preparation [ 106,113]. Even when less than4 h is used during the 100,000 ×gspins, di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation only results in an enrichment ofexosomes, not a complete separation of exosomes from other components in the extracellular space [ 1].In addition, di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation is time consuming and requires large starting volumes
(100s of mLs) of sample, making it di ﬃcult to process several biological samples in a short amount oftime [ 1]. At the same time, however, di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation requires little technical expertise,
time [ 1]. At the same time, however, di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation requires little technical expertise,little to no sample pretreatment, and a ﬀordability over time since only one ultracentrifuge is neededfor long term use [101].
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 6 of 24Cells 2019 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24   Figure 1. Workflow of differential ultracen trifugation for exosome isolation. The 500× g step helps to pellet-out cellular debris and larger particles from the matrix. The 0.22 μm filtration and 10,000× g steps further purify the matrix, remo ving larger EVs and apoptotic bodies. Finally, the exosomes are pellet ed out and washed in the 100,000× g centrifugation steps. The exosomal yield can be increased by using long er centrifugation times during the 100,000× g spins, however, it has been demonstrated that if >4 h is us ed, there is significant mechanical damage to the exosomes and higher levels of so luble protein contamination in the final preparation [106,113]. Even when less than 4 h is used during the 100,000× g spins, differential ultracentrifugation only results in an enrichment of exosomes, not a complete separa tion of exosomes from other components in the
extracellular space [1]. In addition, differential ultracentrifugation is time consuming and requires large starting volumes (100s of mLs) of sample, making it difficult to process several biological samples in a short amount of time [1]. At the sa me time, however, differential ultracentrifugation requires little technical expertise, little to no sample pretreatment, and affordability over time since only one ultracentrifuge is needed for long term use [101]. 2.1.2. Density Gradient Centrifugation Density gradient centrifugation is another ultracentrifugation method that is commonly employed in research settings. Like differential ultracentrifugation, separation is still based on size and density, however in density gradient centri fugation this occurs in the presence of a preconstructed density gradient, typically made of  sucrose or iodoxinol, in the centrifuge tube
[101,104]. The sample is placed at the top of the gradient, and when centrifugal force is applied, the particles in the sample pass through the gradient, which increases in density from top to bottom, at unique rates to allow for separation. The exosomes can then be collected by fractionation collection, typically in the density range of 1.1 and 1.2 g/mL [101,104]. Density gradient ultracentrifugation is very effective in separating EVs, including exos omes, from protein aggregates and non-membranous particles and is particularly useful for separating exosomes and other EVs from bodily fluids. However, like differential ultracentrifugation, it suffers from low exosome recovery [10,40,89,114]. Previous studies have demonstrated the coupling of di fferential ultracentrifug ation with either Rate-Zonal Centrifugation or Isopycnic Centrifugation (2  types of density gradient ultracentrifugation)
can drastically improve the purity and quality of  the isolated exosomes, however, it requires additional time for gradient preparation and extra care during the acceleration and deceleration to prevent damage to the gradient [115]. Cell Culture Medium (CCM)300-500 g, 10 minPellet (lifted cells)DiscardSupernatant0.22 μm filterClarified CCM10,000 g, 30 minPellet (debris, large vesicles)DiscardSupernatant100,000 g, 60-90 min, twiceExosome pelletRe-suspendFigure 1. Workﬂow of di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation for exosome isolation.2.1.2. Density Gradient CentrifugationDensity gradient centrifugation is another ultracentrifugation method that is commonly employedin research settings. Like di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation, separation is still based on size and density,however in density gradient centrifugation this occurs in the presence of a preconstructed density
gradient, typically made of sucrose or iodoxinol, in the centrifuge tube [ 101,104]. The sample is placedat the top of the gradient, and when centrifugal force is applied, the particles in the sample pass throughthe gradient, which increases in density from top to bottom, at unique rates to allow for separation.
the gradient, which increases in density from top to bottom, at unique rates to allow for separation.The exosomes can then be collected by fractionation collection, typically in the density range of 1.1 and1.2 g/mL [ 101,104]. Density gradient ultracentrifugation is very e ﬀective in separating EVs, includingexosomes, from protein aggregates and non-membranous particles and is particularly useful forseparating exosomes and other EVs from bodily ﬂuids. However, like di ﬀerential ultracentrifugation,it suﬀers from low exosome recovery [ 10,40,89,114]. Previous studies have demonstrated the couplingof diﬀerential ultracentrifugation with either Rate-Zonal Centrifugation or Isopycnic Centrifugation(2 types of density gradient ultracentrifugation) can drastically improve the purity and quality of theisolated exosomes, however, it requires additional time for gradient preparation and extra care duringthe acceleration and deceleration to prevent damage to the gradient [115].
Rate-Zonal CentrifugationRate-Zonal centrifugation allows for separation of particles based primarily on their sedimentationrate [ 115]. The sample containing EVs is placed on top of a shallow gradient and upon centrifugationthe sample particles will separate into di ﬀerent zones based on their sedimentation rate as theymove through a gradient with increasing density towards the bottom of the ultracentrifuge tube.The more dense particles will travel more quickly to the bottom of the tube as they can pass throughthe more dense layers easier than the smaller particles [ 115]. It is important to control the duration ofcentrifugation because eventually, since the particles are denser than the gradient, they will pellet atthe bottom of the ultracentrifugation tube.Isopycnic CentrifugationIn isopycnic centrifugation, particles sediment into the fraction of a steep density gradient with
the same density, also known as the isopycnic position [ 115]. At this position, the gradient density is
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 7 of 24equal to the buoyant density of the particles, and the particles therefore remain in the given portionof the gradient [ 115]. In this method, the exosomes will remain at their unique isopycnic positionand will not pellet out, no matter how long the centrifugation time lasts [ 115], which di ﬀers fromRate-Zonal centrifugation where particles will eventually pellet out due to the shallow density gradientused. Since apoptotic bodies, microvesicles, exosomes, and soluble proteins have di ﬀerent densities,their isopycnic positions will be at di ﬀerent levels of the gradient, providing a separation between theextracellular components.2.2. Size Based Techniques2.2.1. UltraﬁltrationUltraﬁltration is one of the most common size-based techniques used for exosome isolation; theidea behind this method is the same as with conventional membrane ﬁltration, where the separation
of particles is based on the size and molecular weight cut o ﬀ(MWCO) of the membrane beingused [ 104]. That is, particles larger than the MWCO of the particular ﬁlter are retained by the ﬁlter andparticles smaller than the MWCO of the ﬁlter are passed through the ﬁlter into the ﬁltrate [ 101,104].One challenge with ultraﬁltration is the clogging and trapping of vesicles (and therefore loss ofexosomes) on the ﬁlter unit [ 116]. While this can be minimized by starting with larger MWCO ﬁltersand moving to smaller ones, it leads to low isolation e ﬃciency, and the exosomes lost on the membranecannot be used in downstream analysis [ 101]. While ultraﬁltration is less time consuming thanultracentrifugation and requires no special instrumentation, it can still lead to particle deformationand lysis of exosomes due to the shear force, though this can be reduced by monitoring and regulatingtransmembrane pressure [106].2.2.2. Exosome Isolation Kit
2.2.2. Exosome Isolation KitA commercially available isolation kit, the ExoMir Kit (Bioo Scientiﬁc; Austin, TX, USA) has beendeveloped to isolate exosomes based on size. Essentially, two membranes (200 nm and 20 nm) areplaced into a syringe with the 200 nm ﬁlter at the top and the 20 nm ﬁlter at the bottom. The sample istypically pretreated with a low speed centrifugation, to pellet cells and cellular debris, and proteinaseK, to help breakdown larger particles and prevent the membrane from clogging. After pretreatment,the sample is passed through the syringe where the larger vesicles ( >200 nm) remain above the ﬁrstﬁlter, the smaller vesicles ( <200 nm and >20 nm) remain between the two ﬁlters in the syringe, and thesmallest vesicles ( <20 nm) are passed through the syringe and discarded. Other methods relying onthe same general principle have also been developed, such as the ExoTIC technology, in order to make
the isolation of exosomes a more clinically friendly procedure [117].2.2.3. Sequential FiltrationThe idea behind sequential ﬁltration for exosome isolation is similar to the ExoMir Kit or ExoTICmethods discussed in Section 2.2.2, in that it relies on a series of ﬁltration steps for exosome enrichment.In sequential ﬁltration, the initial steps involves ﬁltration with a 100 nm ﬁlter to eliminate cells, cellulardebris, and large rigid particles [ 118]. Particles that are larger than 100 nm in diameter, such as exosomesand microvesicles, are able to pass through the 100 nm ﬁlter as long as they are soft and ﬂexible [ 118].However, the more rigid components associated with cellular debris are ﬁltered away [ 118]. The ﬁltratethen undergoes tangential ﬂow ﬁltration with a 500 kDa MWCO membrane to remove soluble proteinsand other contaminants [ 118]. Finally, concentrated retentate is then ﬁltered with a 100 nm track-etch
ﬁlter for exosome enrichment [ 118]. The primary advantages of this methodology are that it can isolateexosomes from 150 mL of media within a day, is automatable, and produces intact and biologicallyactive exosome material, some of which have been used in clinical trials [118–120].
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 8 of 242.2.4. Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)The use of size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to isolate exosomes from other EVs based on sizeis performed the same way as if one wanted to separate proteins of di ﬀerent sizes. That is, a columnis packed with a porous stationary phase in which small particles can penetrate. This penetrationslows down the movement of the smaller particles through the tube, causing them to elute later in thegradient, after the larger particles. Typically, size exclusion is used in parallel to ultracentrifugationmethods, where the exosome pellet is re-suspended after enrichment by ultracentrifugation and thenfurther puriﬁed using SEC [ 121,122]. While SEC methods preserve vesicle structure, integrity, andbiological activity, they require run times of several hours, are not easily scalable, and cannot be usedfor high throughput applications [ 122]. However, iZON science has produced a qEV Exosome Isolation
Kit, which allows for rapid, cost e ﬀective, high precision exosome isolation within 15 min based onthe SEC methodology [ 123]. Their products allow for exosome isolation from <150µL up to 10 mLvolume of starting material with porous resins of 35 nm or 75 nm for optimal exosome isolation [ 123].Development of such methodologies may bring about standardization in the area of exosome isolation,making the use of exosomes in the clinical setting more realistic.2.2.5. Flow Field-Flow Fractionation (FFFF)Flow Field-Flow Fractionation (FFFF) is a new technique used to isolate exosomes based on size.In this method, the sample is injected into a chamber and subjected to parabolic ﬂow as it is pusheddown the length of the chamber [ 124]. At the same time, a crossﬂow (a ﬂow perpendicular to theparabolic ﬂow) is used to create the separation of the particles in the sample [ 124]. Larger particles
are more a ﬀected by the crossﬂow, so they are pushed closer to the walls of the chamber, where theparabolic ﬂow is slower [ 124]. Thus, the larger particles elute after the smaller particles, which are lessaﬀected by the crossﬂow, remain in the center of the parabolic ﬂow, and elute earlier [124].2.2.6. Hydrostatic Filtration Dialysis (HFD)In traditional dialysis, separation of particles in the sample is achieved by di ﬀusion of particlesacross a porous membrane. The selectivity of the separation is dependent on the MWCO of the givenmembrane; particles smaller than the MWCO of the membrane will di ﬀuse across the membrane, andparticles larger than the MWCO of the membrane will remain on the starting side of the membrane.In HFD, the sample is forced through a dialysis tube with a MWCO of 1000 kDa by hydrostatic pressure.The solvent and small solutes pass easily through the tube and the larger particles, such as exosomes
and other EVs, remain in the tube, where they can be collected [ 125]. Typically, ultracentrifugationmethods are used after HFD isolation to further separate exosomes from other EVs retained in thedialysis tube [125].2.3. Immunoa ﬃnity Capture-Based TechniquesImmunoa ﬃnity capture-based techniques rely on the use of an antibody to capture exosomesbased on the expression of the antigen on the surface of the exosome. Antibodies for a speciﬁcantigen of interest can be attached to plate (ex. ELISA, see Section 2.3.1 below), magnetic beads(see Section 2.3.2 below), resins, and microﬂuidic devices (see Section 2.5 below) [ 101]. A majorbeneﬁt of these techniques over others is that it allows for isolation of exosomes derived froma speciﬁc source [ 10,126,127]. For example, a well-established hepatocellular protein marker isAsialoglycoprotein receptor 1 (ASGR1). The presence of this protein has been established in hepatocyte
derived exosomes [ 128], and therefore has the ability to be used as a marker to isolate liver derivedexosomes. Not only do immunoa ﬃnity methods have the potential to aid in the isolation of a speciﬁc
exosomes. Not only do immunoa ﬃnity methods have the potential to aid in the isolation of a speciﬁcsub-set of exosomes from a complex mixture, they also have the potential to separate exosomes fromother types of EVs, should a speciﬁc marker for exosomes be identiﬁed and agreed upon [ 106]. The mainlimitation in developing this method is that the protein /antigen used to capture the exosomes must be
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 9 of 24expressed on the surface of exosomes, since the antibody will not be able to capture an antigen enclosedwithin the vesicle [ 104]. In addition, the speciﬁcity of the assay is limited to the speciﬁcity of the antibodyused, however, it has been well demonstrated that immunoa ﬃnity methods result in lower yield ofisolated exosomes with higher purity than methods that isolate exosomes based on other properties [ 129].Due to the complexity of biological ﬂuids, such as plasma, immunoa ﬃnity capture-based techniquesare often used after exosomal enrichment by ultracentrifugation or ultraﬁltration [126].2.3.1. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)An ELISA based assay, in which an antibody against an antigen of interest is immobilized on thesurface of a microplate, is one type of immunoa ﬃnity capture-based technique that is used to isolateexosomes from a sample. The exosome sample is exposed to the well containing the immobilized
antibody, and the exosomes expressing the antigen are now immobilized onto the plate due to theantibody-antigen interaction. The un-captured exosomes and sample contents are washed away, andthe immobilized exosomes can be detected using another antibody containing an absorbent tag. In theEV ﬁeld, ELISA has been used to isolate exosomes from urine, plasma, and serum, and can evenbe quantitative when standards (of known exosome amounts) are used to create a calibration curve.This method has been around for many years and is currently used in the clinical setting to test apatient’s blood for di ﬀerent antibodies against di ﬀerent infectious diseases, such as HIV , Zika, LymeDisease, and others [ 130]. However, it is yet to be used in the clinical setting for exosome applicationsdue to the required sample pretreatment by ultracentrifugation or ultraﬁltration.2.3.2. Magneto-Immunoprecipitation
2.3.2. Magneto-ImmunoprecipitationIn the case of magneto-immunocapture, a biotinylated antibody against the antigen of interestis attached to the surface of streptavidin coated magnetic beads. The antibody coated beads arethen incubated with the sample from which exosomes are to be isolated from. The major beneﬁtof this method over ELISA is that the beads provide a larger surface area for capturing exosomes,leading to higher isolation e ﬃciency. Additionally, there is no upper limit of sample startingvolume when using the magnetic beads, whereas the microplate-based ELISA assay has a maximumsample volume of 100 µL that can be held within the well of a typical 96-well microplate. Not onlydoes magneto-immunocapture provide better isolation e ﬃciency and is capable of handling largesample volumes, the exosomes captured on the beads can be eluted and used for downstreamanalysis. When comparing magneto-immunocapture to the gold standard exosome isolation method,
ultracentrifugation, magneto-immunocapture leads to a more pure exosome preparation, is quicker, andrequires no advanced or expensive instrumentation [ 104]. Additionally, the magneto-immunocapturemethodology is better for preserving the activity of exosomal proteins than other isolation methods,such as ultracentrifugation or ultraﬁltration [131].2.4. Exosome Precipitation2.4.1. Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) PrecipitationPrecipitation of exosomal vesicles is typically done by introducing a water excluding polymer, suchas polyethylene glycol (PEG), into the sample. The PEG polymer then “ties-up” the water molecules,causing other particles, such as exosomes to precipitate out of solution [ 106]. The precipitated vesiclescan then be pelleted by centrifugation and used for di ﬀerent downstream analysis [ 106]. This isolationmethod is quick, simple, requiring little technical expertise or expensive equipment [101,104] .
Additionally, it can be used for a variety of starting volumes (from 100 µL up to several mLs)and therefore is suitable for use in various research and clinical settings [ 101,104]. However, the major
and therefore is suitable for use in various research and clinical settings [ 101,104]. However, the majordrawback with this methodology, and the reason it cannot be immediately employed in the clinicalsetting is due to the lack of selectivity [ 106,129]. Not only do the PEG polymers cause precipitation ofexosomal vesicles, they also causes precipitation of other extracellular vesicles, extracellular proteins,
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 10 of 24and protein aggregates [ 100]. Therefore, it is important to include some sample pretreatment, suchas ﬁltration and /or ultracentrifugation, before using such methods in order to reduce contaminationof ﬁnal exosomal preparation [ 104]. Several commercially available kits have been produced basedon exosome precipitation for isolation of exosomes from cell culture medium and a variety of bodilyﬂuids, e.g., ExoQuick by System Biosciences (Palo Alto, CA, USA) and Total Exosome Isolation Kit byThermo Fisher Scientiﬁc [132].2.4.2. Lectin Induced AgglutinationAn alternative to PEG precipitation is lectin precipitation. Lectins are a family of proteins thatbind carbohydrate moieties of other particles at a very high speciﬁcity. This is able to aid in exosomeisolation when lectins bind to carbohydrates on the surface of exosomes. When lectins bind to thecarbohydrates on the surface of exosomes, it alters their solubility, causing them to precipitate out of
solution. Typically, the sample is pretreated by ultracentrifugation to remove any cellular debris orother components that may also contain carbohydrates. The sample is then incubated overnight withthe lectin, for example Concanavalin A or Phytohemagglutinin at 1 mg /L, and the precipitated exosomescan then be pelleted using centrifugation [ 133]. Like PEG precipitation methods, the lectin precipitationmethods are straightforward requiring little time and expertise, however the co-precipitation of othersoluble components is negligible unless they are highly glycosylated.2.5. Microﬂuidic Based Isolation TechniquesMicroﬂuidic based exosome isolation methods have been developed in order to address issueswith more traditional methods, and make the use of exosomes in the clinical setting more feasible.The primary advantage of microﬂuidic techniques is that they have the ability to isolate exosomes
based on their physical and biochemical properties simultaneously [ 104]. Additionally, microﬂuidicisolation methods typically are rapid, e ﬃcient, require small starting volumes (10 s–100 s of µL), andallow for the development of innovative separation mechanisms such as acoustic, electrophoretic, andelectromagnetic properties of the exosomal vesicles [109,134].2.5.1. Acoustic NanoﬁlterAcoustic nanoﬁlter is a microﬂuidic isolation technique in which exosomes and other EVs areseparated from the matrix based on size. The matrix, containing exosomes, EVs, and other extracellularcomponents is injected into a chamber where it is exposed to ultrasound waves. These waves exertradiation forces onto the particles, and the particle’s response to these forces is dependent upon itssize and density [ 109]. Speciﬁcally, larger particles experience stronger radiation forces and thereforemigrate faster towards the pressure nodes [ 109]. The ultrasonic waves can be tuned in such a way to
separate particles above and below any desired size [ 109]. While this speciﬁc methodology is still indevelopment stages, its simplicity, quickness, tunability, and low starting volume (50 µL) of materialmake it a promising tool for potential use in the clinical setting.2.5.2. Immuno-Based Microﬂuidic IsolationThe principles behind immuno-based microﬂuidic isolation techniques are very similar to thoseof ELISA (Section 2.3.1). The isolation of exosomes is based on an interaction between a membranebound protein on the exosomal vesicle and an antibody against the protein which is immobilizedon a microﬂuidic chip. The primary advantage of this technique over ELISA is that exosomes havebeen isolated from as little as 10 s–100 s of µL of serum in 60 min, whereas ELISA assays require priorisolation of exosomes (via ultracentrifugation, ultraﬁltration etc.) from the plasma or serum [ 108,135].
Much like ELISA, the speciﬁcity of the assay is dependent on the speciﬁcity of the antibody used.
Much like ELISA, the speciﬁcity of the assay is dependent on the speciﬁcity of the antibody used.A commercially available product, ExoChip, has been developed for isolation of exosomes usingthe microﬂuidic technology. This product has an anti-CD63 antibody immobilized on the surfaceof the chip. The CD63 protein is considered an exosomal marker protein and has been found to be
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 11 of 24expressed in exosomes from many cell types, and thus allows for isolation of exosomes from a samplematrix regardless of the cell source [ 107]. Other microﬂuidic based isolation methodologies have beendeveloped, for example the ExoSearch Chip, which has demonstrated the ability to isolate exosomesfrom as little at 20 µL of plasma in 40 min [ 108]. Unlike the ExoChip, the ExoSearch Chip allowsfor isolation of speciﬁc subpopulations of exosomes of interest, assuming that the antigen used todiﬀerentiate the subpopulation of exosomes is expressed on the surface of the exosomes, and can berecognized by the immobilized antibody on the beads [ 108]. The development of the microﬂuidicbased technologies is essential to bringing the diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic capabilities ofexosomes to the clinical setting because in comparison to all other isolation methods, these methods
require the smallest amounts of plasma /serum, least amount of time, and are most cost e ﬃcient andrequire minimal expertise and training.3. Analysis of ExosomesInitially, isolated extracellular vesicles were characterized primarily by their proteinconcentration [ 1]. However, the protein concentration of isolated EVs is typically overestimateddue to contamination, and does not take into consideration the di ﬀerent protein proﬁles that can varybetween di ﬀerent subtypes of EVs [ 1]. Thus, as the uses of EVs became more prevalent and of interest,they were studied by more sophisticated methods. Today, there are typically two di ﬀerent types ofanalysis performed on the isolated vesicles, that is physical and chemical /biochemical /compositionalanalysis. Physical analysis, which gives insight to particle size and /or concentration, is done usingnanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), dynamic light scattering (DLS), electron microscopy, and tunable
resistive pulse sensing (tRPS). The chemical /biochemical /compositional analysis is typically done viastaining, immunoblotting, or proteomic analysis, and gives information regarding the content of theisolated vesicles. A major challenge in this area is developing methodologies that can di ﬀerentiate thediﬀerent types of EVs, are easily standardized, and well multiplexed. What makes this the most di ﬃcultis the fact that the proteomic proﬁles of exosomes are changed when di ﬀerent isolation methods areused to isolate exosomes from the same cell line [ 2]. This section is an overview of the current methodsused for exosomal protein analysis and, unless otherwise noted, required some sort of isolation orenrichment of exosomal vesicles (see Section 2 of this paper) prior to analysis.3.1. Physical Analysis3.1.1. Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA)Nanoparticle tracking analysis, or NTA, allows for the determination of both particle size and
concentration. The size of the particles is estimated using the Stokes–Einstein equation, where thediﬀusion coe ﬃcient is based on the Brownian motion of particles within the chamber. The laser lightis scattered as it interacts with the particles (under Brownian motion) within the chamber, and thescattered light is collected by a microscope that has a camera mounted to it [ 136]. The camera ontop of the microscope captures the movement of particles in a video, and then the NTA softwareuses the movement of the particles in the video to estimate the particle size and concentration [ 136].NTA is capable of determining particle size between 10 and 1000 nm in diameter, which is withinthe size of exosomes which are known to be between 50–150 nm [ 5,137]. The challenge with NTA,however, is that it requires sample volumes of ~0.5 mL, and optimization of data collection and analysisparameters [138,139].3.1.2. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)
3.1.2. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)Like NTA, dynamic light scattering, or DLS, uses the scattered light due to Brownian motion of
parameters [138,139].3.1.2. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)Like NTA, dynamic light scattering, or DLS, uses the scattered light due to Brownian motion ofparticles to estimate particle size and concentration. However, instead of using the scattered light todetermine the particle’s di ﬀusion coe ﬃcient, DLS uses the ﬂuctuations in the intensity of the scatteredlight to estimate the particle’s size [ 138–140]. Unlike NTA, DLS requires very little sample volume
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 12 of 24(70µL) and is easy to use, with few parameters needed for optimization [ 138,139]. While DLS hasits beneﬁts over NTA, its major drawback is in the analysis of heterogenous mixtures. Speciﬁcally,the intensity of scattered light is proportional to the sixth power of particle diameter, making thescattered light due to smaller particles harder to detect, thus it often produces data that is skewedtowards larger particle sizes when there is a mixture of particle sizes present in the suspension [ 138,139].Therefore, NTA is best for di ﬀerentiation of heterogenous populations of particles [139].3.1.3. Electron MicroscopyThe two common types of electron microscopy used to assess the morphology of exosomal vesiclesare transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Both SEM andTEM produce high resolution images of submicron particles using a beam of electrons. The di ﬀerence
between the two is which electrons are detected. Simply put, in SEM, the scattered electrons aredetected, and in TEM, the electrons that pass through the sample are detected [ 141]. More speciﬁcally,in SEM, the electrons are scattered when they interact with the particles in the sample. The scatteredelectrons are then captured and detected, which produces this image of particles. In TEM, however,the electrons that do not interact with the particles pass through the sample and are detected usinga ﬂuorescent screen. The particles of the sample create dark areas, or shadows, on the ﬂuorescentscreen thus producing an image [ 141]. In the case of exosomes, both TEM and SEM demonstratesimilar size distribution of particles but slightly di ﬀerent morphologies [ 142]. That is, in TEM and SEM,the exosomal vesicles typically have a divot in their center. This is likely due to the drying processassociated with the sample preparation required for TEM and SEM [142].
3.1.4. Tunable Resistive Pulse Sensing (tRPS)Tunable resistive pulse sensing, or tRPS, is another technique that can be used in order to get thesize distribution and concentration of particles in a sample. Essentially, a ﬂuid cell is divided in half bya non-conductive nano-membrane [ 143]. One half of the cell contains the suspension and the other halfcontains a particle free electrolyte [ 143]. A potential is applied across the two cells and the particlesthen ﬂow from their half, through the nano-membrane, and to the other half. As the particles cross themembrane, however, it causes a disruption, or resistive pulse, in the current across the two di ﬀerentcells [ 143]. The length of the resistive pulse can be correlated to the size of the particle producing thatparticular resistive pulse, if a series of standards with known diameters are used to build the calibrationcurve [ 143]. In addition, the number of resistive pulses can be measured over a given time (the rate of
resistive pulses), which reveals information regarding particle concentration within a sample [143].3.2. Chemical, Biochemical, and Compositional Analysis3.2.1. Immunodetection MethodsImmunodetection methods are analysis methods that rely on the recognition of a polyclonal,or monoclonal, antibody to its antigen in the sample. Such methods are commonly employed inbiomedical research laboratories and are often used to establish the purity of isolated EVs by observingthe presence or absence of marker proteins, as well as detecting target proteins of interest.Flow CytometryFlow cytometry is often considered a physical form of analysis since it allows for visual observationof exosomes, however, it requires some knowledge regarding the protein composition of the exosomalvesicles in order for the vesicles to be detected, thus is also considered a form of compositional analysis.While the ﬂow cytometry technology is quickly advancing, with newer instruments having detection
While the ﬂow cytometry technology is quickly advancing, with newer instruments having detectionlimits as low as 100–200 nm, most instruments have a 300–500 nm limit of detection, which is muchlarger than the size of exosomal vesicles [ 144,145]. The challenge of ﬂow cytometry in the ﬁeld ofEVs is that, despite the recent advances, it requires a single particle suspension which can be very
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 13 of 24challenging to achieve when the exosomal concentration is high, or if aggregation of exosomal vesiclesoccurs during the isolation process [ 145]. Aggregation of vesicles results in the observation of multipleparticles at a single time which results in inaccurate data [ 145]. Thus, it requires the immobilizationof exosomes on the surface of beads (either by immunocapture or covalent conjugation) in order tobe observed by the ﬂow cytometer. Once exosomes are immobilized on the surface of the beads,the exosomal vesicles are exposed to a ﬂuorescently conjugated antibody against an antigen that isknown /expected to be expressed on the exosomal surface [ 145]. The exosomal vesicles conjugated tothe beads and the ﬂuorescent antibody can be viewed under an epiﬂuorescent microscope (EPI) prior toﬂow cytometry. Then, as the sample passes through the laser of the ﬂow cytometer, it emits a ﬂuorescent
signal which is detected [ 144,145]. Not only does this allow for high throughput analysis of exosomes,it also allows for quantiﬁcation or classiﬁcation of exosomes based on the antigen expression [145].Western BlottingThe principles behind immunoblotting, or Western blotting, involve the a ﬃnity binding of anantigen (target proteins) and an antibody that speciﬁcally recognized the antigen. Unlike ﬂow cytometry,Western blotting does not allow for observation of intact vesicles, rather, the vesicles are lysed andthe proteins are denatured and reduced during the sample preparation [ 146]. After denaturation, theproteins are separated by SDS-PAGE and then transferred to a nitrocellulose or polyvinylidene ﬂuoride(PVDF) membrane. The remaining open pores on the membrane are ﬁlled with protein (from non-fatmilk) and /or detergent and then exposed to an antibody against an antigen of interest. The antibody
ideally speciﬁcally recognizes the antigen on the surface of the membrane. The membrane is thenexposed to a secondary antibody, which is an antibody against the species of the initial (primary)antibody used to recognize the antigen. The secondary antibody is detected due to its ﬂuorescenttag, or by the horseradish peroxidase /alkaline phosphatase group coupled to the secondary antibody.The Western blotting methodology is among the most commonly used analysis methods for analysis ofexosomes due to its ease of use, wide accessibility, and the ability to detect exosomal surface proteinsand internal proteins. The primary pitfall, however, is that it is not well multiplexed and the speciﬁcityand reproducibility are limited by the quality of the antibody used. The lack of multiplicity resultsin the use of a large amount of exosomal protein used to gain a minimal amount of information.
Since the collection and isolation of exosomes is often a time-consuming process with low yield, moremultiplexed analysis methods would be highly beneﬁcial.Integrated Immuno-Isolation and Protein Analysis of ExosomesA novel microﬂuidic assay has been developed that allows for not only isolation, but also forprotein analysis of exosomal vesicles. As discussed above in Section 2.5 (immuno-based microﬂuidicisolation) microﬂuidic devices are a developing technology, which may be key to bringing exosomesto use in the clinical setting. Many of the existing microﬂuidic techniques allow for detection ofexosomes using ﬂuorescent antibodies against an antigen of interest on the surface of exosomes, thistime taking place on the surface of a chip rather than a membrane or magnetic bead. However, thenovel device described in [ 135] allows for isolation of the exosomal vesicles, on a microﬂuidic chip, but
then introduces a lysis bu ﬀer to lyse the captured exosomal vesicles. The lysate is then eluted from themicroﬂuidic chip, and the biomarkers of interest can be probed for, independent of whether or not thebiomarker is contained within the vesicles or on the surface of the exosomal vesicle. This allows for a
biomarker is contained within the vesicles or on the surface of the exosomal vesicle. This allows for abroader spectrum of antigens to be detected and allows for the development of biomarkers withinexosomes to be used rather than those only on the exosome surface.3.2.2. Thermophoretic ProﬁlingThis methodology is similar to the integrated immune-isolation discussed above (3.2.1 IntegratedImmuno-Isolation and Protein Analysis of Exosomes), in that it isolates, or enriches, the vesicleswhile giving some compositional information at the same time. The di ﬀerence in thermophoretic
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 14 of 24proﬁling compared to the integrated immune-isolation, is that is does not rely on the use of antibodies.Instead, <1µL of serum is diluted 10 ×into phosphate bu ﬀered saline (PBS) and incubated with sevendiﬀerent ﬂuorescently conjugated nucleotide aptamers, which speciﬁcally target di ﬀerent proteins onthe surface of exosomes in the serum [ 147]. The aptamer-exosome incubation takes place for 2 h atroom temperature, at which point the chamber is exposed to a 1480 nm laser for 10 min. This processdrives the exosomal vesicles to the center of the laser point, leading to accumulation of the vesicles,which can then be investigated for presence /absence of speciﬁc proteins based on the ﬂuorescentdetection of the EV conjugated aptamers. The authors demonstrated lack of ﬂuorescent signal withoutthe laser heating, and also that free aptamers and small serum proteins could not be enriched when
exposed to the laser [ 147]. Such methodologies, which use very little serum, do not require any samplepretreatment or time-consuming exosome isolation, are reliable, reproducible, speciﬁc, do not requirehigh technical expertise or training, and give information regarding the presence of cancer biomarkersin the EVs within hours, are methods that could make the use of exosomes in the clinical settinga reality.3.2.3. Mass Spectrometry (MS)-Based Proteomic AnalysisGlobal Proteomic ApproachesGlobal proteomics is a method used to identify as many proteins as possible within a sample.This can be done two di ﬀerent ways, via data dependent acquisition (DDA) or data independentacquisition (DIA), with DDA being used more commonly than DIA [ 148]. In DDA experiments,a survey MS spectrum is collected, and the most abundant ions are then selected for fragmentationand MS /MS analysis. Thus, the data depend on the abundance of the ion in the survey MS spectrum
relative to other ions eluting at the same retention time in the same MS spectrum. The tandem MSdata are processed using software (for example Mascot) to get information on the amino acid sequencewhich can then be used to identify the proteins present in a sample. In DIA experiments, ions are notselected based on abundance for fragmentation, but rather it is an attempt to fragment and get MS /MSdata on all ions within a given mass range. In these experiments, fragmentation libraries are usedto sort the mixed MS /MS data and identify the proteins present within the sample. Both DDA andDIA experiments can be done with top-down sample preparation and bottom-up sample preparation.The top-down approach, which is when no proteolysis of the proteins takes place prior to MS analysis,remains challenging from a technological perspective [ 149]. While advances have been made in theability to separate and fragment intact proteins, the bottom-up approach remains the most commonly
used sample preparation method. In the bottom-up approach, the sample is digested with a protease,such as trypsin or pepsin, prior to MS analysis. The smaller protein fragments (peptides) produced bythe enzymes are easier to separate, ionize, and fragment for high quality MS /MS data. However, theversatility of this technique is limited because the MS /MS data collection occurs after fragmentation bycollision induced dissociation (CID). During CID, the weakest bonds are broken ﬁrst, and these bondsare typically bonds associated with PTMs, thus making the PTM analysis of these peptides di ﬃcult.The use of top-down approaches, however, would reveal information regarding a protein’s PTMs asthe MS /MS data are collected after electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), which causes fragmentation ofthe peptide /protein backbone while leaving PTMs intact. Additionally, top-down approaches would
reveal sequence variations in proteins between the exosomes and parent cells, which may be useful in
the peptide /protein backbone while leaving PTMs intact. Additionally, top-down approaches wouldreveal sequence variations in proteins between the exosomes and parent cells, which may be useful infurther understanding the role of speciﬁc proteins within exosomal vesicles. Typically, global proteomicexperiments on exosomes result in several hundred to several thousand proteins identiﬁed, dependentupon the amount of starting material used, the sample preparation method, and the algorithm usedfor data analysis. The use of global proteomics in the ﬁeld of exosomes is often for identiﬁcationof novel biomarkers for di ﬀerent cancers or diseases, but sometimes the presence of the protein (orbiomarker) is also present in exosomes from healthy tissues. Thus, it is not only important to identifythe proteins present in the exosomal vesicles, but also be able to quantify the proteins present within
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 15 of 24the exosomal vesicles. Protein quantiﬁcation in global proteomics can be done with labeled techniques,such as SILAC or iTRAQ, which involve the incorporation of a stable heavy isotope labeled aminoacid into the peptide of interest [ 150]. However, not only is this an expensive process, but the peptideof interest may not always be known. Thus, label free techniques have been developed in order toquantify the proteins identiﬁed in DDA or DIA experiments. The techniques rely either on the peakarea of the parent ion or the spectral count, which is the number of times a speciﬁc peptide is selectedfor fragmentation in a data dependent LC-MS /MS [ 151]. While both of these methods require somesort of normalization, they are now used more frequently than the labeling techniques. The use ofglobal proteomics in the ﬁeld of EVs, and speciﬁcally exosomes, has aided, and continues to aid, in
the development of biomarkers for di ﬀerent diseases and cancers. Further, there is potential for thistechnique to reveal the purpose and activity of di ﬀerent proteins in the exosomal vesicles, and howthey are similar and di ﬀerent to those in the parent cells, as the technology around the top-downmethodology continues to develop.Targeted Proteomic ApproachesAs opposed to global proteomics, where the goal is to identify as many proteins as possible in asample, targeted proteomic analysis is used to identify and quantify a predeﬁned set of proteins in agiven sample [ 148]. The most common targeted proteomic approach is multiple reaction monitoring,or MRM. Due to upper mass limitations of triple quadrupole instruments, used for MRM methods,the bottom-up approach must be used and speciﬁc peptides for each protein of interest must beselected prior to analysis. That is, a peptide generated by the trypsin or pepsin digestion must
be selected and be unique for the protein that is to be monitored [ 152,153]. Once the peptide isselected, transitions, or fragments, of the peptide can be established and detected by the instrument.Essentially, in the ﬁrst quadrupole (Q1) of a triple quadrupole instrument, the parent ion, which isthe intact peptide selected to represent the protein of interest, is selected to pass through into thesecond quadrupole (q2). All other ions are ﬁltered out in Q1 quadrupole and do not pass into q2 [ 148].Once in q2, the parent ion will be fragmented and then passed into the third quadrupole, Q3. In Q3,a speciﬁc fragment ion is selected to reach the detector and all other fragment ions are ﬁltered outand do not reach the detector. By monitoring multiple unique peptides for a single protein, andthen multiple fragments for each peptide, the speciﬁcity and accuracy of the method can be greatly
enhanced. Typically, it is recommended that at least 2 unique peptides are used to monitor a speciﬁcprotein, and at least three transitions are used to monitor each peptide, thus a total of 6 signalsare used to monitor a single protein of interest. Additionally, the MRM method is extremely wellmultiplexed, as long as the chromatography allows for good separation of the peptides. By monitoringdiﬀerent peptides at di ﬀerent retention times, the MRM method can give highly sensitive, speciﬁc,and quantitative information on hundreds of peptides in a single experiment. Absolute quantiﬁcationfor proteins (via peptides) in a sample can be assessed using the MRM methodology by spikingstable isotope labeled peptides into the sample prior to analysis. Relative quantiﬁcation can be doneusing simple normalization techniques, similar to the normalization done in the label free globalproteomic approaches. However, because MRM methods have lower limits of detection, greater
dynamic ranges, and increased speciﬁcity, it is the mass spectrometry proteomic approach of choicefor the rapid identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of a predetermined set of proteins in a sample [ 148].
dynamic ranges, and increased speciﬁcity, it is the mass spectrometry proteomic approach of choicefor the rapid identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of a predetermined set of proteins in a sample [ 148].In the realm of EVs, speciﬁcally exosomes, the development of MRM methods to characterize isolatedexosomes would be beneﬁcial not only due to its multiplicity and speciﬁcity over the traditionalWestern blot methodology, but also because a predeﬁned set of proteins (exosomal marker proteinsand non exosomal marker proteins) have been described.4. ConclusionsThe uses of EVs in the clinical setting for diagnostic, prognostic, therapeutic, and drug deliverytools has well been demonstrated and continues to be a subject of intense study simply based on the
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 16 of 24ever-growing literature on the topic. Each isolation and analysis method (see Figure 2 for review) has itsown set of beneﬁts and drawbacks, and it has been demonstrated that di ﬀerent isolation methods usedto isolate exosomes from the same cell type results in di ﬀerent proteomic proﬁles, further complicatingthe situation. Therefore, instead of focusing on establishing a set of exosomal /non exosomal markerproteins secreted by all cell types independent of the isolation method, it may be more beneﬁcial tofocus on the development of exosomal /non exosomal marker proteins for a given cell type, independentof isolation method, or a set of exosomal /non exosomal marker proteins for all exosomes, regardless oftheir origin, when isolated by a speciﬁc method. Regardless, it is of utmost importance to considerand incorporate the recommendations from the Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular
Vesicles 2018 (MISEV2018) [ 154] when conducting and reporting EV-related works to improve rigorand reproducibility of identiﬁed EV markers.Cells 2019 , 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24  traditional Western blot methodology, but also because a predefined set of proteins (exosomal marker proteins and non exosomal mark er proteins) have been described. 4. Conclusions The uses of EVs in the clinical setting for diagnostic, prognostic, therapeutic, and drug delivery tools has well been demonstrated and continues to be a subject of intense study simply based on the ever-growing literature on the topic. Each isolatio n and analysis method (see Figure 2 for review) has its own set of benefits and drawbacks, and it has been demonstrated that different isolation methods used to isolate exosomes from the same cell type  results in different proteomic profiles, further complicating the situation. Therefore, instead of focusing on establishing  a set of exosomal/non
exosomal marker proteins secreted by all cell ty pes independent of the isolation method, it may be more beneficial to focus on the development of ex osomal/non exosomal mark er proteins for a given cell type, independent of isolation method, or a set of exosomal/non exosomal marker proteins for all exosomes, regardless of their origin, when isolated by a specific method. Regardless, it is of utmost importance to consider and incorporate the recommendations from the Minimal Information for Studies of Extracellular Vesicles 2018 (MISEV2018) [154] when conducting and reporting EV-related works to improve rigor and reproducib ility of identified EV markers.   Figure 2. Overview of isolation and anal ysis covered in this review. Author Contributions: Wrote or contributed to the writing of the manuscript: L.M.D., and M.Z.W.  Funding: This work was supported in part by the J.R. & Inez Jay Fund from the University of Kansas. We would
also like to thank the Stella Fellowship (Department of  Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas) for supporting L.M.D.  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. References  1. Zaborowski, M.P.; Balaj, L.; Breakefield, X.O.; Lai, C.P.-K. Extracellular Vesicles: Composition, Biological Relevance, and Methods of Study. Bioscience  2015 , 65, 783–797. 2. Yáñez-Mó, M.; Siljander, P.R.-M.; Andreu, Z.; Zavec, A.B.; Borràs, F.E.; Buzas, E.I.; Buzas, K.; Casal, E.; Cappello, F.; Carvalho, J.; et al. Biological properties  of extracellular vesicles and their physiological functions. J. Extracell. Vesicles  2015 , 4, 27066. 3. Borges, F.; Reis, L.; Schor, N. Extracellular vesicles: Structure, function, and potential clinical uses in renal diseases. Braz. J. Med. Boil. Res.  2013 , 46, 824–830. DifferentialImmuno-basedAcoustic NanofilterStarting MaterialIsolation MethodsAnalysis MethodsCell Culture Medium Biological SamplesBlood/Plasma/SerumUrine
Blood/Plasma/SerumUrineSalivaOthersUltracentrifugation Size Based Techniques Immunoaffinity Precipita tionMicrofluidicDensity GradientMoving Zone
Blood/Plasma/SerumUrineSalivaOthersUltracentrifugation Size Based Techniques Immunoaffinity Precipita tionMicrofluidicDensity GradientMoving ZoneIsopycnicUltrafiltrationSequential FiltrationExosome Isolation KitFlow Field FractionationSECHydrostatic Filtration DialysisELISAImmunocapture PEG InducedLectin InductedAcoustic NanofilterPhysical AnalysisNanoparticle Tracking AnalysisDynamic Light ScatteringElectron MicroscopyTunable Resistive Pulse SensingCompositional AnalysisImmunodetectionWestern BlottingFlow CytometryMass SpectrometryGlobalTargetedMicrofluidicImmuno-basedFigure 2. Overview of isolation and analysis covered in this review.Author Contributions: Wrote or contributed to the writing of the manuscript: L.M.D., and M.Z.W.Funding: This work was supported in part by the J.R. & Inez Jay Fund from the University of Kansas. We wouldalso like to thank the Stella Fellowship (Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas) forsupporting L.M.D.
supporting L.M.D.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Zaborowski, M.P .; Balaj, L.; Breakeﬁeld, X.O.; Lai, C.P .-K. Extracellular Vesicles: Composition, BiologicalRelevance, and Methods of Study. Bioscience 2015 ,65, 783–797. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Yáñez-M ó, M.; Siljander, P .R.-M.; Andreu, Z.; Zavec, A.B.; Borr às, F.E.; Buzas, E.I.; Buzas, K.; Casal, E.;Cappello, F.; Carvalho, J.; et al. Biological properties of extracellular vesicles and their physiological functions.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 27066. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Borges, F.; Reis, L.; Schor, N. Extracellular vesicles: Structure, function, and potential clinical uses in renaldiseases. Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res. 2013 ,46, 824–830. [CrossRef]4. Bebelman, M.P .; Smit, M.J.; Pegtel, D.M.; Baglio, S.R. Biogenesis and function of extracellular vesicles incancer. Pharmacol. Ther. 2018 ,188, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Raposo, G.; Stoorvogel, W. Extracellular vesicles: Exosomes, microvesicles, and friends. J. Cell Biol. 2013 ,200,373–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 17 of 246. Haraszti, R.A.; Didiot, M.-C.; Sapp, E.; Leszyk, J.; Sha ﬀer, S.A.; Rockwell, H.E.; Gao, F.; Narain, N.R.;DiFiglia, M.; Kiebish, M.A.; et al. High-resolution proteomic and lipidomic analysis of exosomes andmicrovesicles from di ﬀerent cell sources. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 2500. [CrossRef] [PubMed]7. Skotland, T.; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Lipids in exosomes: Current knowledge and the way forward.Prog. Lipid Res. 2017 ,66, 30–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Dang, V .D.; Jella, K.K.; Ragheb, R.R.T.; Denslow, N.D.; Alli, A.A. Lipidomic and proteomic analysis ofexosomes from mouse cortical collecting duct cells. FASEB J. 2017 ,31, 5399–5408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]9. Kalra, H.; Adda, C.G.; Liem, M.; Ang, C.-S.; Mechler, A.; Simpson, R.J.; Hulett, M.D.; Mathivanan, S.Comparative proteomics evaluation of plasma exosome isolation techniques and assessment of the stabilityof exosomes in normal human blood plasma. Proteomics 2013 ,13, 3354–3364. [CrossRef]
10. Tauro, B.J.; Greening, D.W.; Mathias, R.A.; Ji, H.; Mathivanan, S.; Scott, A.M.; Simpson, R.J. Comparison ofultracentrifugation, density gradient separation, and immunoa ﬃnity capture methods for isolating humancolon cancer cell line LIM1863-derived exosomes. Methods 2012 ,56, 293–304. [CrossRef]11. Jeppesen, D.K.; Fenix, M.A.; Franklin, J.L.; Higginbotham, J.N.; Zhang, Q.; Zimmerman, L.J.; Liebler, D.C.;Ping, J.; Liu, Q.; Evans, R.; et al. Reassessment of Exosome Composition. Cell2019 ,177, 428–445. [CrossRef][PubMed]12. Palmisano, G.; Jensen, S.S.; Le Bihan, M.-C.; Laine, J.; McGuire, J.N.; Pociot, F.; Larsen, M.R. Characterization ofMembrane-shed Microvesicles from Cytokine-stimulated-Cells Using Proteomics Strategies. Mol. Cell. Proteom.2012 ,11, 230–243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Sonoda, H.; Yokota-Ikeda, N.; Oshikawa, S.; Kanno, Y .; Yoshinaga, K.; Uchida, K.; Ueda, Y .; Kimiya, K.; Uezono, S.;
Ueda, A.; et al. Decreased abundance of urinary exosomal aquaporin-1 in renal ischemia-reperfusion injury.Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 2009 ,297, F1006–F1016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]14. Zhou, H.; Pisitkun, T.; Aponte, A.; Yuen, P .S.; Ho ﬀert, J.D.; Yasuda, H.; Hu, X.; Chawla, L.; Shen, R.-F.;Knepper, M.A.; et al. Exosomal Fetuin-A identiﬁed by proteomics: A novel urinary biomarker for detectingacute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 2006 ,70, 1847–1857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Miranda, K.C.; Bond, D.T.; McKee, M.; Skog, J.; P ăunescu, T.G.; Da Silva, N.; Brown, D.; Russo, L.M. Nucleicacids within urinary exosomes /microvesicles are potential biomarkers for renal disease. Kidney Int. 2010 ,78,191–199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Neal, C.S.; Michael, M.Z.; Pimlott, L.K.; Yong, T.Y.; Li, J.Y.; Gleadle, J.M. Circulating microRNA expression isreduced in chronic kidney disease. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 2011 ,26, 3794–3802. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Hurwitz, S.N.; Rider, M.A.; Bundy, J.L.; Liu, X.; Singh, R.K.; Meckes, D.G. Proteomic proﬁling of NCI-60extracellular vesicles uncovers common protein cargo and cancer type-speciﬁc biomarkers. Oncotarget 2016 ,7, 86999–87015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]18. Hornick, N.I.; Huan, J.; Doron, B.; Goloviznina, N.A.; Lapidus, J.; Chang, B.H.; Kurre, P . Serum ExosomeMicroRNA as a Minimally-Invasive Early Biomarker of AML. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 11295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Wang, J.; Liy, Y.; Sun, W.; Zhang, Q.; Gu, T.; Li, G. Plasma exosomes as novel biomarker for the early diagnosisof gastric cancer. Cancer Biomark. 2018 ,21, 805–812. [CrossRef]20. Rabinowits, G.; Gercel-Taylor, C.; Day, J.M.; Taylor, D.D.; Kloecker, G.H. Exosomal MicroRNA: A DiagnosticMarker for Lung Cancer. Clin. Lung Cancer 2009 ,10, 42–46. [CrossRef]21. Chen, I.-H.; Xue, L.; Hsu, C.-C.; Paez, J.S.P .; Pan, L.; Andaluz, H.; Wendt, M.K.; Iliuk, A.B.; Zhu, J.-K.;
Tao, W.A. Phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles as candidate markers for breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 2017 ,114, 3175–3180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tao, W.A. Phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles as candidate markers for breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 2017 ,114, 3175–3180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Akers, J.C.; Ramakrishnan, V .; Kim, R.; Skog, J.; Nakano, I.; Pingle, S.; Kalinina, J.; Hua, W.; Kesari, S.;Mao, Y.; et al. miR-21 in the extracellular vesicles (EVs) of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF): A Platform forGlioblastoma Biomarker Development. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e78115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Shi, R.; Wang, P .-Y.; Li, X.-Y.; Chen, J.-X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, X.-Z.; Zhang, C.-G.; Jiang, T.; Li, W.-B.; Ding, W.; et al.Exosomal levels of miRNA-21 from cerebrospinal uids associated with poor prognosis and tumor recurrenceof glioma patients. Oncotarget 2015 ,6, 26971. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Goto, T.; Fujiya, M.; Konishi, H.; Sasajima, J.; Fujibayashi, S.; Hayashi, A.; Utsumi, T.; Sato, H.; Iwama, T.;Ijiri, M.; et al. An elevated expression of serum exosomal microRNA-191, −21,−451a of pancreatic neoplasm
is considered to be e ﬃcient diagnostic marker. BMC Cancer 2018 ,18, 116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Fu, F.; Jiang, W.; Zhou, L.; Chen, Z. Circulating Exosomal miR-17-5p and miR-92a-3p Predict PathologicStage and Grade of Colorectal Cancer. Transl. Oncol. 2018 ,11, 221–232. [CrossRef]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 18 of 2426. Liu, Q.; Yu, Z.; Yuan, S.; Xie, W.; Li, C.; Hu, Z.; Xiang, Y.; Wu, N.; Wu, L.; Bai, L.; et al. Circulating exosomalmicroRNAs as prognostic biomarkers for non-small-cell lung cancer. Oncotarget 2017 ,8, 13048–13058.[CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Whiteside, T.L. The potential of tumor-derived exosomes for noninvasive cancer monitoring. Expert Rev.Mol. Diagn. 2015 ,15, 1293–1310. [CrossRef]28. Melo, S.A.; Luecke, L.B.; Kahlert, C.; Fernandez, A.F.; Gammon, S.T.; Kaye, J.; LeBleu, V .S.; Mittendorf, E.A.;Weitz, J.; Rahbari, N.; et al. Glypican-1 identiﬁes cancer exosomes and detects early pancreatic cancer. Nature2015 ,523, 177–182. [CrossRef]29. Pisitkun, T.; Shen, R.-F.; Knepper, M.A. Identiﬁcation and proteomic proﬁling of exosomes in human urine.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004 ,101, 13368–13373. [CrossRef]30. Caby, M.-P .; Lankar, D.; Vincendeau-Scherrer, C.; Raposo, G.; Bonnerot, C. Exosomal-like vesicles are present
in human blood plasma. Int. Immunol. 2005 ,17, 879–887. [CrossRef]31. Vojtech, L.; Woo, S.; Hughes, S.; Levy, C.; Ballweber, L.; Sauteraud, R.P .; Strobl, J.; Westerberg, K.; Gottardo, R.;Tewari, M.; et al. Exosomes in human semen carry a distinctive repertoire of small non-coding RNAs withpotential regulatory functions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 ,42, 7290–7304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Zlotogorski-Hurvitz, A.; Dayan, D.; Chaushu, G.; Korvala, J.; Salo, T.; Sormunen, R.; Vered, M. Humansaliva-derived exosomes: Comparing methods of isolation. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 2015 ,63, 181–189.[CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Yuan, Z.; Bedi, B.; Sadikot, R.T. Bronchoalveolar Lavage Exosomes in Lipopolysaccharide-induced SepticLung Injury. J. Vis. Exp. 2018 ,135, e57737. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Dixon, C.L.; Sheller-Miller, S.; Saade, G.R.; Fortunato, S.J.; Lai, A.; Palma, C.; Guanzon, D.; Salomon, C.;Menon, R. Amniotic Fluid Exosome Proteomic Proﬁle Exhibits Unique Pathways of Term and Preterm Labor.
Endocrinology 2018 ,159, 2229–2240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Li, Z.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, K.; Xiang, S.; Li, Z.; Weng, X. Emerging Role of Exosomes in the Joint Diseases.Cell. Physiol. Biochem .2018 ,47, 2008–2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Grigor’Eva, A.E.; Tamkovich, S.N.; Eremina, A.V .; Tupikin, A.E.; Kabilov, M.R.; Chernykh, V .V .; Vlassov, V .V .;Laktionov, P .P .; Ryabchikova, E.I.; Kabilov, M. Exosomes in tears of healthy individuals: Isolation,identiﬁcation, and characterization. Biochem. Suppl. Ser. B Biomed. Chem. 2016 ,10, 165–172. [CrossRef]37. Milasan, A.; Tessandier, N.; Tan, S.; Brisson, A.; Boilard, E.; Martel, C. Extracellular vesicles are present inmouse lymph and their level di ﬀers in atherosclerosis. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Yoon, S.B.; Chang, J.H. Extracellular vesicles in bile: A game changer in the diagnosis of indeterminatebiliary stenoses? HepatoBiliary Surg. Nutr. 2017 ,6, 408–410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Yoshida, Y.; Yamamoto, H.; Morita, R.; Oikawa, R.; Matsuo, Y.; Maehata, T.; Nosho, K.; Watanabe, Y.;Yasuda, H.; Itoh, F. Detection of DNA methylation of gastric juice-derived exosomes in gastric cancer.Integr. Mol. Med. 2014 ,1, 17–21.40. Simons, M.; Raposo, G. Exosomes–vesicular carriers for intercellular communication. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.2009 ,21, 575–581. [CrossRef]41. Théry, C.; Ostrowski, M.; Segura, E. Membrane vesicles as conveyors of immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol.2009 ,9, 581–593. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Simpson, S.; Simpson, R.J. ExoCarta: A compendium of exosomal proteins and RNA. Proteomics 2009 ,9,4997–5000.43. Mobius, W.; Ohno-Iwashita, Y.; Van Donselaar, E.G.; Oorschot, V .M.; Shimada, Y.; Fujimoto, T.; Heijnen, H.F.;Geuze, H.J.; Slot, J.W. Immunoelectron Microscopic Localization of Cholesterol Using Biotinylated andNon-cytolytic Perfringolysin O. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 2002 ,50, 43–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Geuze, H.J.; Slot, J.W. Immunoelectron Microscopic Localization of Cholesterol Using Biotinylated andNon-cytolytic Perfringolysin O. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 2002 ,50, 43–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Markus, B.; Katzmann, D.J.; Estepa-Sabal, E.J.; Meerloo, T.; Emr, S.D. ESCRT-III: An Endosome-AssociatedHeterooligomeric Protein Complex Required for MVB Sorting. Dev. Cell 2002 ,3, 271–282.45. Wollert, T.; Hurley, J.H. Molecular mechanism of multivesicular body biogenesis by ESCRT complexes.Nature 2010 ,464, 864–869. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Borges, F.T.; Melo, S.A.; Özdemir, B.C.; Kato, N.; Revuelta, L.; Miller, C.A.; Gattone, V .H.; LeBleu, V .S.;Kalluri, R. TGF-beta1-containing exosomes from injured epithelial cells activate ﬁbroblasts to initiate tissueregenerative responses and ﬁbrosis. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2013 ,24, 385–392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 19 of 2447. Morita, E.; Sandrin, V .; Chung, H.-Y.; Morham, S.G.; Gygi, S.P .; Rodesch, C.K.; Sundquist, W.I. Human ESCRTand ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis. EMBO J. 2007 ,26,4215–4227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Théry, C.; Boussac, M.; V éron, P .; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P .; Raposo, G.; Garin, J.; Amigorena, S. ProteomicAnalysis of Dendritic Cell-Derived Exosomes: A Secreted Subcellular Compartment Distinct from ApoptoticVesicles. J. Immunol. 2001 ,166, 7309–7318. [CrossRef] [PubMed]49. Van Niel, G.; Porto-Carreiro, I.; Simoes, S.; Raposo, G. Exosomes: A common pathway for a specializedfunction. J. Biochem. 2006 ,140, 13–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]50. Géminard, C.; de Gassart, A.; Blanc, L.; Vidal, M. LionelBlanc and Michel Vidal, Degradation of AP2 DuringReticulocyte MaturationEnhances Binding of Hsc70 and Alix to a Common Siteon TfR for Sorting intoExosomes. Traﬃc2004 ,5, 181–193. [CrossRef]
Exosomes. Traﬃc2004 ,5, 181–193. [CrossRef]51. Trajkovic, K.; Hsu, C.; Chiantia, S.; Rajendran, L.; Wenzel, D.; Wieland, F.; Schwille, P .; Brugger, B.; Simons, M.Ceramide Triggers Budding of Exosome Vesicles into Multivesicular Endosomes. Science 2008 ,319, 1244–1247.[CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Stuﬀers, S.; Wegner, C.S.; Stenmark, H.; Brech, A. Multivesicular Endosome Biogenesis in the Absence ofESCRTs. Traﬃc2009 ,10, 925–937. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Buschow, S.I.; Van Balkom, B.W.M.; Aalberts, M.; Heck, A.; Wauben, M.; Stoorvogel, W. MHC classII-associated proteins in B-cell exosomes and potential functional implications for exosome biogenesis.Immunol. Cell Biol. 2010 ,88, 851–856. [CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Theos, A.C.; Truschel, S.T.; Tenza, D.; Hurbain, I.; Harper, D.C.; Berson, J.F.; Thomas, P .C.; Raposo, G.;Marks, M.S.; Tenza, D. A Lumenal Domain-Dependent Pathway for Sorting to Intralumenal Vesicles of
Multivesicular Endosomes Involved in Organelle Morphogenesis. Dev. Cell 2006 ,10, 343–354. [CrossRef][PubMed]55. Van Niel, G.; Charrin, S.; Simoes, S.; Romao, M.; Rochin, L.; Saftig, P .; Marks, M.S.; Rubinstein, E.;Raposo, G. The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and -dependent endosomal sorting duringmelanogenesis. Dev. Cell 2011 ,21, 708–721. [CrossRef]56. Witwer, K.W.; Buz ás, E.I.; Bemis, L.T.; Bora, A.; Lässer, C.; Lötvall, J.; Hoen, E.N.N.; Piper, M.G.; Sivaraman, S.;Skog, J.; et al. Standardization of sample collection, isolation and analysis methods in extracellular vesicleresearch. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2013 ,2, 18389. [CrossRef]57. Sinha, A.; Ignatchenko, V .; Ignatchenko, A.; Mejia-Guerrero, S.; Kislinger, T. In-depth proteomic analyses ofovarian cancer cell line exosomes reveals di ﬀerential enrichment of functional categories compared to theNCI 60 proteome. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014 ,445, 694–701. [CrossRef]
58. Tauro, B.J.; Greening, D.W.; Mathias, R.A.; Mathivanan, S.; Ji, H.; Simpson, R.J. Two distinct populations ofexosomes are released from LIM1863 colon carcinoma cell-derived organoids. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2013 ,12,587–598. [CrossRef]59. Crescitelli, R.; Lässer, C.; Szab ó, T.G.; Kittel, Á.; Eldh, M.; Dianzani, I.; Buz ás, E.I.; Lötvall, J. Distinct RNAproﬁles in subpopulations of extracellular vesicles: Apoptotic bodies, microvesicles and exosomes. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2013 ,2, 2. [CrossRef]60. Escrevente, C.; Keller, S.; Altevogt, P .; Costa, J. Interaction and uptake of exosomes by ovarian cancer cells.BMC Cancer 2011 ,11, 108. [CrossRef]61. Soto-Heredero, G.; Baixauli, F.; Mittelbrunn, M. Interorganelle Communication between Mitochondria andthe Endolysosomal System. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2017 ,5, 95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]62. Bobrie, A.; Colombo, M.; Raposo, G.; Th éry, C. Exosome Secretion: Molecular Mechanisms and Rolesin
Immune Responses. Traﬃc2011 ,12, 1659–1668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Chaput, N.; Th éry , C. Exosomes: Immune properties and potential clinical implementations. Semin. Immunopathol.2011 ,33, 419–440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Chaput, N.; Th éry , C. Exosomes: Immune properties and potential clinical implementations. Semin. Immunopathol.2011 ,33, 419–440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Faure, J.; Lachenal, G.; Court, M.; Hirrlinger, J.; Chatellard-Causse, C.; Blot, B.; Grange, J.; Schoehn, G.;Goldberg, Y.; Boyer, V .; et al. Exosomes are released by cultured cortical neurones. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 2006 ,31, 642–648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Krämer-Albers, E.-M.; Bretz, N.; Tenzer, S.; Winterstein, C.; Möbius, W.; Berger, H.; Nave, K.-A.; Schild, H.;Trotter, J. Oligodendrocytes secrete exosomes containing major myelin and stress-protective proteins: Trophicsupport for axons? Proteom. Clin. Appl. 2007 ,1, 1446–1461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 20 of 2466. Lachenal, G.; Pernet-Gallay, K.; Chivet, M.; Hemming, F.J.; Belly, A.; Bodon, G.; Blot, B.; Haase, G.; Goldberg, Y.;Sadoul, R. Release of exosomes from di ﬀerentiated neurons and its regulation by synaptic glutamatergicactivity. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 2011 ,46, 409–418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Bakhti, M.; Winter, C.; Simons, M. Inhibition of myelin membrane sheath formation by oligodendrocyte-derivedexosome-like vesicles. J. Biol. Chem. 2011 ,286, 787–796. [CrossRef] [PubMed]68. Wang, S.; Cesca, F.; Loers, G.; Schweizer, M.; Buck, F.; Benfenati, F.; Schachner, M.; Kleene, R. SynapsinI Is an Oligomannose-Carrying Glycoprotein, Acts as an Oligomannose-Binding Lectin, and PromotesNeurite Outgrowth and Neuronal Survival When Released via Glia-Derived Exosomes. J. Neurosci. 2011 ,31,7275–7290. [CrossRef]69. Fevrier, B.; Vilette, D.; Archer, F.; Loew, D.; Faigle, W.; Vidal, M.; Laude, H.; Raposo, G. Cells release prions in
association with exosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004 ,101, 9683–9688. [CrossRef]70. Rajendran, L. Alzheimer’s disease -amyloid peptides are released in association with exosomes. 2006.71. Gomes, C.; Keller, S.; Altevogt, P .; Costa, J. Evidence for secretion of Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase viaexosomes from a cell model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci. Lett. 2007 ,428, 43–46. [CrossRef]72. Emmanouilidou, E.; Melachroinou, K.; Roumeliotis, T.; Ntzouni, M.; Stefanis, L.; Vekrellis, K.; Garbis, S.D.;Margaritis, L.H. Cell-produced alpha-synuclein is secreted in a calcium-dependent manner by exosomes andimpacts neuronal survival. J. Neurosci. 2010 ,30, 6838–6851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]73. Alvarez-Llamas, G.; De La Cuesta, F.; Barderas, M.E.G.; Darde, V .; Padial, L.R.; Vivanco, F. Recent advancesin atherosclerosis-based proteomics: New biomarkers and a future perspective. Expert Rev. Proteom. 2008 ,5,679–691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
679–691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]74. Al-Nedawi, K.; Meehan, B.; Rak, J. Microvesicles: Messengers and mediators of tumor progression. Cell Cycle2009 ,8, 2014–2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Simpson, R.J.; Lim, J.W.; Moritz, R.L.; Mathivanan, S. Exosomes: Proteomic insights and diagnostic potential.Expert Rev. Proteom. 2009 ,6, 267–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Giusti, I.; Francesco, M.; Dolo, V . Extracellular Vesicles in Glioblastoma: Role in Biological Processes and inTherapeutic Applications. Curr. Cancer Drug Targets 2017 ,17, 221–235. [CrossRef] [PubMed]77. Paulsen, B.S.; Aggerholm-Pedersen, N.; Bæk, R.; Jakobsen, K.R.; Meldgaard, P .; Folkersen, B.; Rasmussen, T.;Varming, K.; Jørgensen, M.; Sorensen, B. Exosomal proteins as prognostic biomarkers in non-small cell lungcancer. Mol. Oncol. 2016 ,10, 1595–1602. [CrossRef] [PubMed]78. Lai, R.C.; Yeo, R.W.Y.; Tan, K.H.; Lim, S.K. Exosomes for drug delivery—A novel application for the
mesenchymal stem cell. Biotechnol. Adv. 2013 ,31, 543–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Alvarez-Erviti, L.; Seow, Y.; Yin, H.; Betts, C.; Lakhal, S.; Wood, M.J.A. Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brainby systemic injection of targeted exosomes. Nat. Biotechnol. 2011 ,29, 341–345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]80. Gatti, S.; Bruno, S.; Deregibus, M.C.; Sordi, A.; Cantaluppi, V .; Tetta, C.; Camussi, G. Microvesicles derivedfrom human adult mesenchymal stem cells protect against ischaemia-reperfusion-induced acute and chronickidney injury. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 2011 ,26, 1474–1483. [CrossRef]81. Reis, L.A.; Borges, F.T.; Sim ões, M.J.; Borges, A.A.; Sinigaglia-Coimbra, R.; Schor, N. Bone Marrow-DerivedMesenchymal Stem Cells Repaired but Did Not Prevent Gentamicin-Induced Acute Kidney Injury throughParacrine E ﬀects in Rats. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e44092. [CrossRef]82. Bruno, S.; Grange, C.; Collino, F.; Deregibus, M.C.; Cantaluppi, V .; Biancone, L.; Tetta, C.; Camussi, G.
Microvesicles Derived from Mesenchymal Stem Cells Enhance Survival in a Lethal Model of Acute KidneyInjury. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e33115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microvesicles Derived from Mesenchymal Stem Cells Enhance Survival in a Lethal Model of Acute KidneyInjury. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e33115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]83. Akao, Y.; Iio, A.; Itoh, T.; Noguchi, S.; Itoh, Y.; Ohtsuki, Y.; Naoe, T. Microvesicle-mediated RNA moleculedelivery system using monocytes /macrophages. Mol. Ther. 2011 ,19, 395–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Bruno, S.; Grange, C.; Deregibus, M.C.; Calogero, R.A.; Saviozzi, S.; Collino, F.; Morando, L.; Busca, A.;Falda, M.; Bussolati, B.; et al. Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Microvesicles Protect Against Acute TubularInjury. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2009 ,20, 1053–1067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Cai, H.; Reinisch, K.; Ferro-Novick, S. Coats, Tethers, Rabs, and SNAREs Work Together to Mediate theIntracellular Destination of a Transport Vesicle. Dev. Cell 2007 ,12, 671–682. [CrossRef] [PubMed]86. Morelli, A.E.; Larregina, A.T.; Shufesky, W.J.; Sullivan, M.L.G.; Stolz, D.B.; Papworth, G.D.; Zahorchak, A.F.;
Logar, A.J.; Wang, Z.; Watkins, S.C.; et al. Endocytosis, intracellular sorting, and processing of exosomes bydendritic cells. Blood 2004 ,104, 3257–3266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 21 of 2487. Christianson, H.C.; Svensson, K.J.; Van Kuppevelt, T.H.; Li, J.-P .; Belting, M. Cancer cell exosomes depend oncell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans for their internalization and functional activity. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 2013 ,110, 17380–17385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]88. Ostergaard, O.; Nielsen, C.T.; Iversen, L.V .; Jacobsen, S.; Tanassi, J.T.; Heegaard, N.H.H. QuantitativeProteome Proﬁling of Normal Human Circulating Microparticles. J. Proteome Res. 2012 ,11, 2154–2163.[CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Escola, J.-M.; Kleijmeer, M.J.; Stoorvogel, W.; Gri ﬃth, J.M.; Yoshie, O.; Geuze, H.J. Selective Enrichmentof Tetraspan Proteins on the Internal Vesicles of Multivesicular Endosomes and on Exosomes Secreted byHuman B-lymphocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 1998 ,273, 20121–20127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Zoller, M. Tetraspanins: Push and pull in suppressing and promoting metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2009 ,9,40–55. [CrossRef]
40–55. [CrossRef]91. Heijnen, H.F.; Schiel, A.E.; Fijnheer, R.; Geuze, H.J.; Sixma, J.J. Activated platelets release two typesof membrane vesicles: Microvesicles by surface shedding and exosomes derived from exocytosis ofmultivesicular bodies and alpha-granules. Blood 1999 ,94, 3791–3799.92. Di Vizio, D.; Morello, M.; Dudley, A.C.; Schow, P .W.; Adam, R.M.; Morley, S.; Mulholland, D.; Rotinen, M.;Hager, M.H.; Insabato, L.; et al. Large Oncosomes in Human Prostate Cancer Tissues and in the Circulationof Mice with Metastatic Disease. Am. J. Pathol. 2012 ,181, 1573–1584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]93. Morello, M.; Minciacchi, V .R.; De Candia, P .; Yang, J.; Posadas, E.; Kim, H.; Gri ﬃths, D.; Bhowmick, N.;Chung, L.W.; Gandellini, P .; et al. Large oncosomes mediate intercellular transfer of functional microRNA.Cell Cycle 2013 ,12, 3526–3536. [CrossRef]94. Harding, C.V .; Heuser, J.E.; Stahl, P .D. Exosomes: Looking back three decades and into the future. J. Cell Biol.
2013 ,200, 367–371. [CrossRef]95. White, I.J.; Bailey, L.M.; Aghakhani, M.R.; Moss, S.E.; Futter, C.E. Minoo Razi Aghakhani, EGF stimulatesannexin 1-dependent inward vesiculation in a multivesicular endosome subpopulation. EMBO J. 2006 ,25,1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]96. Rak, J. Microparticles in Cancer. Semin. Thromb. Hemos. 2010 ,36, 888–906. [CrossRef] [PubMed]97. Hood, J.; San, R.S.; Wickline, S.A. Exosomes Released by Melanoma Cells Prepare Sentinel Lymph Nodes forTumor Metastasis. Cancer Res. 2011 ,71, 3792–3801. [CrossRef] [PubMed]98. Wickman, G.; Julian, L.; Olson, M.F.; Olson, M. How apoptotic cells aid in the removal of their own colddead bodies. Cell Death Di ﬀer.2012 ,19, 735–742. [CrossRef]99. Kerr, J.F.R.; Wyllie, A.H.; Currie, A.R. Apoptosis: A Basic Biological Phenomenon with WiderangingImplications in Tissue Kinetics. Br. J. Cancer 1972 ,26, 239–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Zarovni, N.; Corrado, A.; Guazzi, P .; Zocco, D.; Lari, E.; Radano, G.; Muhhina, J.; Fondelli, C.; Gavrilova, J.;Chiesi, A. Integrated isolation and quantitative analysis of exosome shuttled proteins and nucleic acids usingimmunocapture approaches. Methods 2015 ,87, 46–58. [CrossRef]101. Zhang, M.; Jin, K.; Gao, L.; Zhang, Z.; Li, F.; Zhou, F.; Zhang, L. Methods and Technologies for ExosomeIsolation and Characterization. Small Methods 2018 ,2, 1800021. [CrossRef]102. Laulagnier, K.; Vincent-Schneider, H.; Hamdi, S.; Subra, C.; Lankar, D.; Record, M. Characterization ofexosome subpopulations from RBL-2H3 cells using ﬂuorescent lipids. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 2005 ,35, 116–121.[CrossRef] [PubMed]103. Smith, Z.J.; Lee, C.; Rojalin, T.; Carney, R.P .; Hazari, S.; Knudson, A.; Lam, K.; Saari, H.; Ibañez, E.L.;Viitala, T.; et al. Single exosome study reveals subpopulations distributed among cell lines with variability
related to membrane content. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 28533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]104. Li, P .; Kaslan, M.; Lee, S.H.; Yao, J.; Gao, Z. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques. Theranostics 2017 ,7,
104. Li, P .; Kaslan, M.; Lee, S.H.; Yao, J.; Gao, Z. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques. Theranostics 2017 ,7,789–804. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Zhang, Z.; Wang, C.; Li, T.; Liu, Z.; Li, L. Comparison of ultracentrifugation and density gradient separationmethods for isolating Tca8113 human tongue cancer cell line-derived exosomes. Oncol. Lett. 2014 ,8,1701–1706. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Vlassov, A.V .; Zeringer, E.; Barta, T.; Li, M. Strategies for Isolation of Exosomes. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc.2015 ,2015 , 319–323.107. Kanwar, S.S.; Dunlay, C.J.; Simeone, D.M.; Nagrath, S. Microﬂuidic device (ExoChip) for On-Chip isolation,quantiﬁcation and characterization of circulating exosomes. Lab Chip 2014 ,14, 1891–1900. [CrossRef]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 22 of 24108. Zhao, Z.; Yang, Y.; Zeng, Y.; He, M. A Microﬂuidic ExoSearch Chip for Multiplexed Exosome DetectionTowards Blood-based Ovarian Cancer Diagnosis. Lab Chip 2016 ,16, 489–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]109. Lee, K.; Shao, H.; Weissleder, R.; Lee, H. Acoustic Puriﬁcation of Extracellular Microvesicles. ACS Nano 2015 ,9, 2321–2327. [CrossRef]110. Muller, L.; Hong, C.-S.; Stolz, D.B.; Watkins, S.C.; Whiteside, T.L. Isolation of Biologically-Active Exosomesfrom Human Plasma. J. Immunol. Methods 2014 ,411, 55–65. [CrossRef]111. Hiemstra, T.F.; Charles, P .D.; Gracia, T.; Hester, S.S.; Gatto, L.; Al-Lamki, R.; Floto, R.A.; Su, Y.; Skepper, J.N.;Lilley, K.S.; et al. Human Urinary Exosomes as Innate Immune E ﬀectors. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2014 ,25,2017–2027. [CrossRef]112. Livshits, M.A.; Khomyakova, E.; Evtushenko, E.G.; Lazarev, V .N.; Kulemin, N.A.; Semina, S.E.;
Generozov, E.V .; Govorun, V .M.; Livshts, M.A. Isolation of exosomes by di ﬀerential centrifugation: Theoreticalanalysis of a commonly used protocol. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 17319. [CrossRef]113. Cvjetkovic, A.; Lötvall, J.; Lässer, C. The inﬂuence of rotor type and centrifugation time on the yield andpurity of extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3, 23111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]114. Runz, S.; Keller, S.; Rupp, C.; Stoeck, A.; Issa, Y.; Koensgen, D.; Mustea, A.; Sehouli, J.; Kristiansen, G.;Altevogt, P . Malignant ascites-derived exosomes of ovarian carcinoma patients contain CD24 and EpCAM.Gynecol. Oncol. 2007 ,107, 563–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Anderson, N.G. An introduction to particle separations in zonal centrifuges. Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 1966 ,21, 9–39. [PubMed]116. Liga, A.; Vliegenthart, A.D.B.; Oosthuyzen, W.; Dear, J.W.; Kersaudy-Kerhoas, M. Exosome isolation:A microﬂuidic road-map. Lab a Chip 2015 ,15, 2388–2394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Liu, F.; Vermesh, O.; Mani, V .; Ge, T.J.; Madsen, S.J.; Sabour, A.; Hsu, E.-C.; Gowrishankar, G.; Kanada, M.;Jokerst, J.V .; et al. The Exosome Total Isolation Chip. ACS Nano 2017 ,11, 10712–10723. [CrossRef] [PubMed]118. Heinemann, M.L.; Ilmer, M.; Silva, L.P .; Hawke, D.H.; Recio, A.; Vorontsova, M.A.; Alt, E.; Vykoukal, J.Benchtop isolation and characterization of functional exosomes by sequential ﬁltration. J. Chromatogr. A2014 ,1371 , 125–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]119. Escudier, B.; Dorval, T.; Chaput, N.; Andr é, F.; Caby, M.-P .; Novault, S.; Flament, C.; Leboulaire, C.; Borg, C.;Amigorena, S.; et al. Vaccination of metastatic melanoma patients with autologous dendritic cell (DC)derived-exosomes: Results of theﬁrst phase I clinical trial. J. Transl. Med. 2005 ,3, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]120. Lamparski, H.G.; Metha-Damani, A.; Yao, J.-Y.; Patel, S.; Hsu, D.-H.; Ruegg, C.; Le Pecq, J.-B. Production
and characterization of clinical grade exosomes derived from dendritic cells. J. Immunol. Methods 2002 ,270,211–226. [CrossRef]121. Gheinani, A.H.; Vögeli, M.; Baumgärtner, U.; Vassella, E.; Draeger, A.; Burkhard, F.C.; Monastyrskaya, K.Improved isolation strategies to increase the yield and purity of human urinary exosomes for biomarkerdiscovery. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 3945. [CrossRef]122. Gámez-Valero, A.; Mongui ó-Tortajada, M.; Carreras-Planella, L.; Franquesa, M.; Beyer, K.; Borr às, F.E.Size-Exclusion Chromatography-based isolation minimally alters Extracellular Vesicles’ characteristicscompared to precipitating agents. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 33641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]123. Vogel, R.; Coumans, F.A.W.; Maltesen, R.G.; Böing, A.N.; Bonnington, K.E.; Broekman, M.L.; Broom, M.F.;Buzás, E.I.; Christiansen, G.; Hajji, N.; et al. A standardized method to determine the concentration of
extracellular vesicles using tunable resistive pulse sensing. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 3264. [CrossRef][PubMed]124. Kang, D.; Oh, S.; Ahn, S.M.; Lee, B.H.; Moon, M.H. Proteomic Analysis of Exosomes from Human Neural Stem
[PubMed]124. Kang, D.; Oh, S.; Ahn, S.M.; Lee, B.H.; Moon, M.H. Proteomic Analysis of Exosomes from Human Neural StemCells by Flow Field-Flow Fractionation and Nanoﬂow Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry.J. Proteome Res. 2008 ,7, 3475–3480. [CrossRef] [PubMed]125. Musante, L.; Tataruch, D.; Gu, D.; Benito-Martin, A.; Calzaferri, G.; Aherne, S.; Holthofer, H. A SimpliﬁedMethod to Recover Urinary Vesicles for Clinical Applications and Sample Banking. Sci. Rep. 2014 ,4, 7532.[CrossRef] [PubMed]126. Mathivanan, S.; Lim, J.W.E.; Tauro, B.J.; Ji, H.; Moritz, R.L.; Simpson, R.J. Proteomics Analysis of A33Immunoa ﬃnity-puriﬁed Exosomes Released from the Human Colon Tumor Cell Line LIM1215 Reveals aTissue-speciﬁc Protein Signature. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2010 ,9, 197–208. [CrossRef]127. Taylor, D.D.; Gercel-Taylor, C. MicroRNA signatures of tumor-derived exosomes as diagnostic biomarkers ofovarian cancer. Gynecol. Oncol. 2008 ,110, 13–21. [CrossRef]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 23 of 24128. Conde-Vancells, J.; Rodriguez-Suarez, E.; Embade, N.; Gil, D.; Matthiesen, R.; Valle, M.; Elortza, F.; Lu, S.C.;Mato, J.M.; Falc ón-Pérez, J.M. Characterization and Comprehensive Proteome Proﬁling of Exosomes Secretedby Hepatocytes. J. Proteome Res. 2008 ,7, 5157–5166. [CrossRef]129. Batrakova, E.V .; Kim, M.S. Using exosomes, naturally-equipped nanocarriers, for drug delivery. J. Control.Release 2015 ,219, 396–405. [CrossRef]130. Hosseini, S.; V ázquez-Villegas, P .; Rito-Palomares, M.; Martinez-Chapa, S.O. General Overviews onApplications of ELISA. In Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) ; Springer: Gateway East, Singapore,2018; pp. 19–29.131. Hong, C.S.; Muller, L.; Boyiadzis, M.; Whiteside, T.L. Isolation and characterization of CD34 +blast-derivedexosomes in acute myeloid leukemia. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, e103310. [CrossRef]132. Amarnath, S.; Foley, J.E.; Farthing, D.E.; Gress, R.E.; Laurence, A.; Eckhaus, M.A.; M étais, J.-Y.; Rose, J.J.;
Hakim, F.T.; Felizardo, T.C.; et al. Bone Marrow Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells Harness PurinergenicSignaling to Tolerize Human Th1 Cells In Vivo. Stem Cells 2015 ,33, 1200–1212. [CrossRef]133. Samsonov, R.; Shtam, T.; Burdakov, V .; Glotov, A.; Tsyrlina, E.; Berstein, L.; Nosov, A.; Evtushenko, V .;Filatov, M.; Malek, A. Lectin-induced agglutination method of urinary exosomes isolation followed bymi-RNA analysis: Application for prostate cancer diagnostic. Prostate 2016 ,76, 68–79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]134. Davies, R.T.; Kim, J.; Jang, S.C.; Choi, E.-J.; Gho, Y.S.; Park, J. Microﬂuidic ﬁltration system to isolateextracellular vesicles from blood. Lab Chip 2012 ,12, 5202–5210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]135. He, M.; Crow, J.; Roth, M.; Zeng, Y.; Godwin, A.K. Integrated immunoisolation and protein analysis ofcirculating exosomes using microﬂuidic technology. Lab Chip 2014 ,14, 3773–3780. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Dragovic, R.A.; Gardiner, C.; Brooks, A.S.; Tannetta, D.S.; Ferguson, D.J.; Hole, P .; Carr, B.; Redman, C.W.;Harris, A.L.; Dobson, P .J.; et al. Sizing and phenotyping of cellular vesicles using Nanoparticle TrackingAnalysis. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 2011 ,7, 780–788. [CrossRef] [PubMed]137. Soo, C.Y.; Song, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Campbell, E.C.; Riches, A.C.; Gunn-Moore, F.; Powis, S.J. Nanoparticle trackinganalysis monitors microvesicle and exosome secretion from immune cells. Immunology 2012 ,136, 192–197.[CrossRef] [PubMed]138. PPalmieri, V .; Lucchetti, D.; Gatto, I.; Maiorana, A.; Marcantoni, M.; Maulucci, G.; Papi, M.; Pola, R.;De Spirito, M.; Sgambato, A. Dynamic light scattering for the characterization and counting of extracellularvesicles: A powerful noninvasive tool. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2014 ,16, 2583. [CrossRef]139. Filipe, V .; Hawe, A.; Jiskoot, W. Critical Evaluation of Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) by NanoSight
for the Measurement of Nanoparticles and Protein Aggregates. Pharm. Res. 2010 ,27, 796–810. [CrossRef][PubMed]140. Frisken, B.J. Revisiting the method of cumulants for the analysis of dynamic light-scattering data. Appl. Opt.2001 ,40, 4087–4091. [CrossRef] [PubMed]141. Skoog, D.A.; Holler, F.J.; Crouch, S.R. Principles of Instrumental Analysis , 6th ed.; Saunders College Pub.:Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1998.142. Wu, Y.; Deng, W.; Klinke, D.J., II. Exosomes: Improved methods to characterize their morphology, RNAcontent, and surface protein biomarkers. Analyst 2015 ,140, 6631–6642. [CrossRef]143. Maas, S.L.N.; De Vrij, J.; Broekman, M.L.D. Quantiﬁcation and Size-proﬁling of Extracellular Vesicles UsingTunable Resistive Pulse Sensing. J. Vis. Exp. 2014 ,92, e51623. [CrossRef]144. Ko, J.; Carpenter, E.; Issadore, D. Detection and isolation of circulating exosomes and microvesicles for
cancer monitoring and diagnostics using micro- /nano-based devices. Analst 2016 ,141, 450–460. [CrossRef][PubMed]
cancer monitoring and diagnostics using micro- /nano-based devices. Analst 2016 ,141, 450–460. [CrossRef][PubMed]145. Szatanek, R.; Baj-Krzyworzeka, M.; Zimoch, J.; Lekka, M.; Siedlar, M.; Baran, J. The Methods of Choice forextracellular vesicles (EVs) Characterization. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]146. Gallagher, S.; Winston, S.E.; Fuller, S.A.; Hurrell, J.G.R. Immunoblotting and immunodetection. Curr. Protoc.Mol. Biol. 2004 ,83, 10–18.147. Liu, C.; Zhao, J.; Tian, F.; Cai, L.; Zhang, W.; Feng, Q.; Chang, J.; Wan, F.; Yang, Y.; Dai, B.; et al. Low-costthermophoretic proﬁling of extracellular-vesicle surface proteins for the early detection and classiﬁcation ofcancers. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2019 ,3, 183–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]148. Schey, K.L.; Luther, J.M.; Rose, K.L. Proteomics characterization of exosome cargo. Methods 2015 ,87, 75–82.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2019 ,8, 727 24 of 24149. Rosa-Fernandes, L.; Rocha, V .B.; Carregari, V .C.; Urbani, A.; Palmisano, G. A Perspective on ExtracellularVesicles Proteomics. Front. Chem. 2017 ,5, 102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]150. Schmidt, C.; Grønborg, M.; Deckert, J.; Bessonov, S.; Conrad, T.; Lührmann, R.; Urlaub, H. Massspectrometry–based relative quantiﬁcation of proteins in precatalytic and catalytically active spliceosomes bymetabolic labeling (SILAC), chemical labeling (iTRAQ), and label-free spectral count. RNA 2014 ,20, 406–420.[CrossRef] [PubMed]151. Lai, X.; Wang, L.; Witzmann, F.A. Issues and applications in label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.Int. J. Proteom. 2013 ,2013 , 756039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]152. Chen, Y.; Zane, N.R.; Thakker, D.R.; Wang, M.Z. Quantiﬁcation of Flavin-containing Monooxygenases 1,3, and 5 in Human Liver Microsomes by UPLC-MRM-Based Targeted Quantitative Proteomics and Its
Application to the Study of Ontogeny. Drug Metab. Dispos. 2016 ,44, 975–983. [CrossRef] [PubMed]153. Michaels, S.; Wang, M.Z. The Revised Human Liver Cytochrome P450 “Pie”: Absolute Protein Quantiﬁcationof CYP4F and CYP3A Enzymes Using Targeted Quantitative Proteomics. Drug Metab. Dispos. 2014 ,42,1241–1251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]154. Théry, C.; Witwer, K.W.; Aikawa, E.; Alcaraz, M.J.; Anderson, J.D.; Andriantsitohaina, R.; Antoniou, A.;Arab, T.; Archer, F.; Atkin-Smith, G.K.; et al. Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018(MISEV2018): A position statement of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles and update of theMISEV2014 guidelines. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1535750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
