cellsReviewMesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes: Applications inRegenerative MedicineMangesh D. Hade, Caitlin N. Suire and Zucai Suo */gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Hade, M.D.; Suire, C.N.;Suo, Z. Mesenchymal StemCell-Derived Exosomes: Applicationsin Regenerative Medicine. Cells 2021 ,10, 1959. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10081959Academic Editor: Mujib UllahReceived: 30 June 2021Accepted: 30 July 2021Published: 1 August 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA;mangesh.hade@med.fsu.edu (M.D.H.); csuire@fsu.edu (C.N.S.)*Correspondence: zucai.suo@med.fsu.edu; Tel.: +1-(850)-645-2501Abstract: Exosomes are a type of extracellular vesicles, produced within multivesicular bodies, thatare then released into the extracellular space through a merging of the multivesicular body withthe plasma membrane. These vesicles are secreted by almost all cell types to aid in a vast arrayof cellular functions, including intercellular communication, cell differentiation and proliferation,angiogenesis, stress response, and immune signaling. This ability to contribute to several distinctprocesses is due to the complexity of exosomes, as they carry a multitude of signaling moieties,including proteins, lipids, cell surface receptors, enzymes, cytokines, transcription factors, and
nucleic acids. The favorable biological properties of exosomes including biocompatibility, stability,low toxicity, and proﬁcient exchange of molecular cargos make exosomes prime candidates for tissueengineering and regenerative medicine. Exploring the functions and molecular payloads of exosomescan facilitate tissue regeneration therapies and provide mechanistic insight into paracrine modulationof cellular activities. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of exosome biogenesis,composition, and isolation methods. We also discuss emerging healing properties of exosomesand exosomal cargos, such as microRNAs, in brain injuries, cardiovascular disease, and COVID-19amongst others. Overall, this review highlights the burgeoning roles and potential applications ofexosomes in regenerative medicine.Keywords: exosomes; extracellular vesicles; mesenchymal stem cells; regenerative medicine; mi-
croRNA; growth factors; wound healing; traumatic brain injury; cardiovascular disease; COVID-191. IntroductionExosomes are membranous extracellular vesicles that range from 30–200 nm in di-ameter. Exosomes have been found to be secreted by most cell types including immunecells (B cells, T cells, mast cells, dendritic cells), neuronal cells, epithelial cells, endothe-lial cells, embryonic cells, cancer cells, and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). The term“extracellular vesicle” broadly encompasses several types of vesicles including exosomes,microvesicles, and apoptotic bodies. However, the word “exosome” speciﬁcally denotesvesicles that are formed inside multivesicular bodies (MVBs) within cells [ 1–3]. Exosomescarry vital information and macromolecules from their source of origin and thus have asigniﬁcant role in cell–cell communication. These macromolecules consist of a variety ofproteins, enzymes, transcription factors, lipids, extracellular matrix proteins, receptors, and
nucleic acids, and can be found both on the inside and outside of the exosomal surface(Figure 1). Exosomes have been detected in almost all body ﬂuids in both heathy and
nucleic acids, and can be found both on the inside and outside of the exosomal surface(Figure 1). Exosomes have been detected in almost all body ﬂuids in both heathy anddisease conditions, including ﬂuids such as urine, blood, serum, breast milk, amniotic ﬂuid,cerebrospinal ﬂuid, malignant ascites, saliva, bile, and lymph (Figure 2) [4–12].Cells 2021 ,10, 1959. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10081959 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cells
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 2 of 48Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 50    Figure 1. Typical exosomes.  A powerful communication system between local and distant cells in the human body with pleiotropic functions. Exosomes are a type of extracellular vesicle secreted by cells such as MSCs that carry therapeutic payloads, including proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, enzymes, and metabolites.  Exosomes were first discovered by Pan and Johnstone while investigating the matu-ration mechanisms of sheep reticulocytes into erythrocytes  [13–15]. The researchers dis-covered a type of ve sicle (which they later named: “exosome”) that was released from reticulocytes and contained lipids, proteins, and enzymes of reticulocyte origin  [16]. Exo-somes were initially assumed to be cellular debris or garbage disposal and considered signs of cell d eath  [17–19]. Since their discovery, extensive research has been carried out
to determine the biology, function, and potential clinical uses of exosomes. It is now es-tablished that exosomes are released by donor cells into the extracellular environment to perform diverse biological functions, including intracellular communication and the ex-change of genetic material and proteins between a parent cell and surrounding cells (Fig-ure 1)  [20,21 ]. The clinical importance of exosomes has been established in their use as alternatives to liposome -mediated drug delivery in cancer immunotherapy. Exosomes are also a promising biological gene delivery system due to their microRNA and mRNA con-tent [22–25]. However, there are still many aspects of exosomes that are not fully under-stood or characterized. For example, as many potential targets for cancer therapy are tu-mor-specific biomarkers, it is crucial to study the biomarkers present on the surface of exosomes in order to develop tumor -targeting therapies  [26,27 ]. The great potential of
these small wonder vesicles to aid in gene delivery, disease diagnostics, intracellular com-munication, drug delivery, and biomarker -driven therapies has progressively drawn the attention of researchers.  Figure 1. Typical exosomes. A powerful communication system between local and distant cells in the human body withpleiotropic functions. Exosomes are a type of extracellular vesicle secreted by cells such as MSCs that carry therapeuticpayloads, including proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, enzymes, and metabolites.Exosomes were ﬁrst discovered by Pan and Johnstone while investigating the mat-uration mechanisms of sheep reticulocytes into erythrocytes [ 13–15]. The researchersdiscovered a type of vesicle (which they later named: “exosome”) that was released fromreticulocytes and contained lipids, proteins, and enzymes of reticulocyte origin [ 16]. Ex-osomes were initially assumed to be cellular debris or garbage disposal and considered
signs of cell death [ 17–19]. Since their discovery, extensive research has been carried outto determine the biology, function, and potential clinical uses of exosomes. It is nowestablished that exosomes are released by donor cells into the extracellular environmentto perform diverse biological functions, including intracellular communication and theexchange of genetic material and proteins between a parent cell and surrounding cells(Figure 1) [ 20,21]. The clinical importance of exosomes has been established in their useas alternatives to liposome-mediated drug delivery in cancer immunotherapy. Exosomesare also a promising biological gene delivery system due to their microRNA and mRNAcontent [ 22–25]. However, there are still many aspects of exosomes that are not fullyunderstood or characterized. For example, as many potential targets for cancer therapyare tumor-speciﬁc biomarkers, it is crucial to study the biomarkers present on the surface
of exosomes in order to develop tumor-targeting therapies [ 26,27]. The great potential
are tumor-speciﬁc biomarkers, it is crucial to study the biomarkers present on the surfaceof exosomes in order to develop tumor-targeting therapies [ 26,27]. The great potentialof these small wonder vesicles to aid in gene delivery, disease diagnostics, intracellularcommunication, drug delivery, and biomarker-driven therapies has progressively drawnthe attention of researchers.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 3 of 48Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 50    Figure 2. Sources of exosomes an d stem cells.  Exosomes have been detected in almost all body fluids, including, amniotic fluid, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, blood, serum, breast milk, malignant ascites, saliva, bile, etc.  MSCs are non -hematopoietic, multipotent, adult stem cells which can  be isolated from bone marrow, umbilical cord, placental tissue, adipose tissue, dental pulp, neurons, skin, breast milk, etc.  Stem cell therapies have increasingly gained momentum in treatment of disease; much of the research that has been done in recent years has focused on the potential sig-nificance of applying MSCs  [28,29 ]. MSCs are non -hematopoietic, multipotent, adult stem cells which can be isolated from many biological sources including bone marrow, umbil-ical cord, adipose tissue, brain, spleen, kid ney, and liver (Figure 2)  [30–35]. MSCs can dif-
ferentiate into adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteocytes, as well as endodermal (hepato-cytes) and ectodermal lineages (neurocytes)  [36]. In addition to their mechanical differen-tiation properties, MSCs also sec rete exosomes and biomolecules including cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. Though initial reports indicated that MSCs may play a critical role in tissue repair, investigations have shown poor survival and low grafting potential of MSCs in damaged tissue areas, limiting MSC  effectiveness in tissue repair  [37–41]. Further studies have demonstrated that beneficial effects of MSCs applications in repair are attributable to paracrine signaling, which includes secreted vesicles such as ex-osomes  [42–46]. Interestingly, several studies indicate that exosomes secreted by MSCs can replace the MSC -based stem cell therapies in various injury and disease models
Figure 2. Sources of exosomes and stem cells. Exosomes have been detected in almost all body ﬂuids, including, amnioticﬂuid, urine, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, blood, serum, breast milk, malignant ascites, saliva, bile, etc. MSCs are non-hematopoietic,multipotent, adult stem cells which can be isolated from bone marrow, umbilical cord, placental tissue, adipose tissue,dental pulp, neurons, skin, breast milk, etc.Stem cell therapies have increasingly gained momentum in treatment of disease; muchof the research that has been done in recent years has focused on the potential signiﬁcanceof applying MSCs [ 28,29]. MSCs are non-hematopoietic, multipotent, adult stem cellswhich can be isolated from many biological sources including bone marrow, umbilical cord,adipose tissue, brain, spleen, kidney, and liver (Figure 2) [ 30–35]. MSCs can differentiateinto adipocytes, chondrocytes and osteocytes, as well as endodermal (hepatocytes) and
ectodermal lineages (neurocytes) [ 36]. In addition to their mechanical differentiation prop-erties, MSCs also secrete exosomes and biomolecules including cytokines, chemokines, andgrowth factors. Though initial reports indicated that MSCs may play a critical role in tissuerepair, investigations have shown poor survival and low grafting potential of MSCs indamaged tissue areas, limiting MSC effectiveness in tissue repair [ 37–41]. Further studieshave demonstrated that beneﬁcial effects of MSCs applications in repair are attributable toparacrine signaling, which includes secreted vesicles such as exosomes [ 42–46]. Interest-ingly, several studies indicate that exosomes secreted by MSCs can replace the MSC-based
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 4 of 48stem cell therapies in various injury and disease models [ 28,29]. For example, MSC-derivedexosomes (MSC-Exos) have been shown to induce repair in mouse models of woundhealing and myocardial infarction (Figure 3) [ 47–51]. In particular, investigations haverevealed that exosomes secreted by placental umbilical cord MSCs play a signiﬁcant role inwound healing and tissue regeneration [ 52]. Similarly, in the past few decades, studies havedemonstrated that MSC-Exos can have advantageous effects in various contexts includingneurological, respiratory, cartilage, kidney, cardiac, and liver diseases, bone repair, andcancer (Figure 3) [28,29,48,53–59].Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 50   [28,29 ]. For example, MSC -derived exosomes ( MSC -Exos)  have been shown to induce re-pair in mouse models  of wound healing and myocardial infarction (Figure 3)  [47–51]. In
particular, investigations have revealed that exosomes secreted by placental umbilical cord MSCs play a significant role in wound healing and tissue regeneration  [52]. Similarly, in the pas t few decades, studies have demonstrated that MSC -Exos can have advanta-geous effects in various contexts including neurological, respiratory, cartilage, kidney, cardiac, and liver diseases, bone repair, and cancer (Figure 3)  [28,29,48,53 –59].   Figure 3. MSC -derived exosome methodology.  Graphical representation  of isolation of MSCs, exosome biogenesis, isola-tion of exosomes. and therapeutic applications of exosomes in regenerative medicine.  In short, MSC -Exos can serve as a smart drug delivery approach thr ough the trans-portation of exogenous chemicals and biomolecules for stem cell -free regenerative medi-cine. MSC -Exos have many potential therapeutic advantages when compared to synthetic
nanoparticles, liposomes, single molecules, and cells. This stems from their novel benefi-cial characteristics such as smaller size, lower complexity, lack of nuclei (thus preventing neoplastic transformation), increased stability, easier production, longer preservation, and potential for loading proteins, small molecules, or RNAs for delivery of biomolecules [60]. MSC -Exos can also be modified to display distinct antibodies or surface receptors to transfer therapeutic payloads to specific organs, tissues, and cells. Additionally, MSC -Exos host numerous types of biological mole cules, enabling them to participate in various therapeutic approaches simultaneously, which cannot be accomplished with conventional small molecules. Therefore, here, we review the recent advancements in the field of mo-lecular mechanisms of exosomes in regenerative medicine and exosome research, as well as address  the potential therapeutic approaches of exosomes in tissue regeneration due to
disease and injury recovery.  2. Exosome Biogenesis, Secretion  and Uptake  The structure and composition of exosomes depends on several factors  including the donor cell, microen vironment, and physiological conditions. Exosomes are formed from endosomal vesicles via the exocytosis process (Figure 4). As cargo transporters, exosomes can carry proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, and lipids. Studies investigating the protein compositi on of exosomes have shown that, while some proteins specifically arise from parental tissue, some were unique to exosomes  [1,2,9] . Specific proteins contained within exosomes include those present in the endosome, plasma membrane, and cytoplasm, im-plying d ifferential selection  [20]. Additionally, several studies have shown that exosomes carry nucleic acids including different RNA types, e.g., microRNA, messenger RNA, and non-coding RNA  [61–67]. Interestingly, the composition of proteins, peptides, and nucle ic
Figure 3. MSC-derived exosome methodology. Graphical representation of isolation of MSCs, exosome biogenesis, isolationof exosomes. and therapeutic applications of exosomes in regenerative medicine.
Figure 3. MSC-derived exosome methodology. Graphical representation of isolation of MSCs, exosome biogenesis, isolationof exosomes. and therapeutic applications of exosomes in regenerative medicine.In short, MSC-Exos can serve as a smart drug delivery approach through the trans-portation of exogenous chemicals and biomolecules for stem cell-free regenerative medicine.MSC-Exos have many potential therapeutic advantages when compared to syntheticnanoparticles, liposomes, single molecules, and cells. This stems from their novel beneﬁ-cial characteristics such as smaller size, lower complexity, lack of nuclei (thus preventingneoplastic transformation), increased stability, easier production, longer preservation, andpotential for loading proteins, small molecules, or RNAs for delivery of biomolecules [ 60].MSC-Exos can also be modiﬁed to display distinct antibodies or surface receptors to trans-
fer therapeutic payloads to speciﬁc organs, tissues, and cells. Additionally, MSC-Exos hostnumerous types of biological molecules, enabling them to participate in various therapeu-tic approaches simultaneously, which cannot be accomplished with conventional smallmolecules. Therefore, here, we review the recent advancements in the ﬁeld of molecu-lar mechanisms of exosomes in regenerative medicine and exosome research, as well asaddress the potential therapeutic approaches of exosomes in tissue regeneration due todisease and injury recovery.2. Exosome Biogenesis, Secretion and UptakeThe structure and composition of exosomes depends on several factors includingthe donor cell, microenvironment, and physiological conditions. Exosomes are formedfrom endosomal vesicles via the exocytosis process (Figure 4). As cargo transporters,exosomes can carry proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, and lipids. Studies investigating the
protein composition of exosomes have shown that, while some proteins speciﬁcally arisefrom parental tissue, some were unique to exosomes [ 1,2,9]. Speciﬁc proteins containedwithin exosomes include those present in the endosome, plasma membrane, and cytoplasm,implying differential selection [ 20]. Additionally, several studies have shown that exosomescarry nucleic acids including different RNA types, e.g., microRNA, messenger RNA,
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 5 of 48and non-coding RNA [ 61–67]. Interestingly, the composition of proteins, peptides, andnucleic acids in exosomes are independent of donor cell types; on the other hand, thelipid composition in exosomes primarily depends on exosome-producing cells. Typically,exosomes contain plasma membrane lipids including sphingomyelin (SM), desaturatedphosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine (PS), desaturated phosphatidylcholine(PC), cholesterol (CHOL), GM3, and ganglioside [68–73].Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 50   acids in exosomes are independent of donor cell types; on the other hand, the lipid com-position in exosomes primarily depends on exosome -producing cells. Typically, exosomes contain plasma membrane lipids including sphingomyelin (SM), desaturated phosph ati-dylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine (PS), desaturated phosphatidylcholine (PC), choles-terol (CHOL), GM3, and ganglioside  [68–73].
terol (CHOL), GM3, and ganglioside  [68–73].  Figure 4. Exosome biogenesis, secretion  and uptake.  Extracellular milieu is composed of various components including proteins, lipids, small molecules, numerous metabolites, which enter the cell through the process of endocytosis. This process leads to the formation of early endosomes; cargo is wrapped int o intraluminal  vesicles  within multivesicular bod-ies (MVB) upon inward budding of the membrane. Further, early endosomes are transformed into late endosomes, which later give rise to the multivesicular bodies. The modified multivesicular bodies have a carg o of extracellular milieu and cytoplasmic constitutes. Multivesicular bodies and their exosomal content can follow two primary pathways. In the first, they can be fused with autophagosomes and follow the degradation pathway through lysosomes. In the second  pathway,
multivesicular bodies can fuse to the plasma membrane through the microtubule and cytoskeletal network, and be re-leased by budding from cytomembrane. Furthermore, the exosomes released through exocytosis interact with recipient cells through cell  signaling molecules on their respective surfaces. Exosomes can also enter into recipient cells by employ-ing different mechanisms such as endocytosis, macropinocytosis, phagocytosis and direct fusion of plasma membranes. Various proteins are involved in ex osome biogenesis, secretion and uptake, include ESCRT, AAA ATPases, ESCRT -asso-ciated protein, SNAREs, Rabs, and other enzymes (Table 1).  The biogenesis of exosomes occurs via exocytosis: a depiction of exosome biogenesis, secretion, and uptake is detailed in Figure 4. Exosomes are generated from multivesicular endosomes (MVEs); generally, the intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) of MVEs are subjected to
lysosomal degradation by hydrolases. However, escaped MVEs, such as multivesicular bodies (MVBs), can directly fu se with cellular plasma membrane and, through the process of budding, are subsequently secreted to the extracellular milieu as exosomes. There, the exosomes have pleiotropic functions through paracrine signaling  [20]. Currently, little is known about the u nderlying mechanism behind the sorting of exosomes into the different Figure 4. Exosome biogenesis, secretion and uptake. Extracellular milieu is composed of various components includingproteins, lipids, small molecules, numerous metabolites, which enter the cell through the process of endocytosis. Thisprocess leads to the formation of early endosomes; cargo is wrapped into intraluminal vesicles within multivesicular bodies(MVB) upon inward budding of the membrane. Further, early endosomes are transformed into late endosomes, which
later give rise to the multivesicular bodies. The modiﬁed multivesicular bodies have a cargo of extracellular milieu andcytoplasmic constitutes. Multivesicular bodies and their exosomal content can follow two primary pathways. In the ﬁrst,they can be fused with autophagosomes and follow the degradation pathway through lysosomes. In the second pathway,
they can be fused with autophagosomes and follow the degradation pathway through lysosomes. In the second pathway,multivesicular bodies can fuse to the plasma membrane through the microtubule and cytoskeletal network, and be releasedby budding from cytomembrane. Furthermore, the exosomes released through exocytosis interact with recipient cellsthrough cell signaling molecules on their respective surfaces. Exosomes can also enter into recipient cells by employingdifferent mechanisms such as endocytosis, macropinocytosis, phagocytosis and direct fusion of plasma membranes. Variousproteins are involved in exosome biogenesis, secretion and uptake, include ESCRT, AAA ATPases, ESCRT-associated protein,SNAREs, Rabs, and other enzymes (Table 1).The biogenesis of exosomes occurs via exocytosis: a depiction of exosome biogenesis,secretion, and uptake is detailed in Figure 4. Exosomes are generated from multivesicular
endosomes (MVEs); generally, the intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) of MVEs are subjected tolysosomal degradation by hydrolases. However, escaped MVEs, such as multivesicularbodies (MVBs), can directly fuse with cellular plasma membrane and, through the processof budding, are subsequently secreted to the extracellular milieu as exosomes. There, the
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 6 of 48exosomes have pleiotropic functions through paracrine signaling [ 20]. Currently, little isknown about the underlying mechanism behind the sorting of exosomes into the differentpopulations. Studies have revealed that MVBs speciﬁcally contain various lysosome-associated molecules such as lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1, 2, and 3 (LAMP-1,-2, -3), tetraspanins, and a cluster of differentiation factors (CD-107a, CD-107b, CD-208or CD-63) (Figure 1), whereas late endosomes possess major histocompatibility complex(MHC) class II [ 20,74]. Hanson and Cashikar explored the morphogenesis mechanism ofMVBs and found that the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) playsa crucial role in driving both exosomal and ectosomal biogenesis [ 75]. ESCRT comprisesapproximately 30 different proteins that are organized into four machinery complexes,namely ESCRT-0, -I, -II, and -III in association with vacuolar protein sorting associated
protein 4 (VPS4), vesicle trafﬁcking 1, and apoptosis-linked gene 2-interacting protein X(Alix) which is also called programmed cell death six interacting protein [ 75]. The initialESCRT-0 complex assists in recognizing and sorting ubiquitinated intracellular cargosthat are prescribed for lysosomal degradation. ESCRT-I and -II contribute to deformingthe membrane into buds with sequestered vesicles, whereas ESCRT-III plays a role invesicle scission [ 76]. ESCRT-independent biogenesis mechanisms are proposed to involvetetraspanins (CD63, CD9, CD37, CD82 or CD81), which have been identiﬁed as exosomalmarkers. These proteins are vital in extracellular vesicle biogenesis and essential forextracellular vesicle secretion and uptake by receptor cells. Hydrolysis of sphingomyelininto ceramide is also known to contribute to the biogenesis of exosomes [ 20,77]. As asummary, Table 1 includes the composition and functions of proteins, e.g., ESCRT, AAA
ATPases, ESCRT-associated proteins, SNAREs, Rabs, and other enzymes, that are activelyinvolved in exosome biogenesis, sorting, transport, and secretion [78–89].Table 1. Composition and function of complexes and key enzymes related to exosome biogenesis, sorting, transport, andsecretion.Complexes Subunits Localization Function ReferencesESCRT ESCRT-O (HRS, STAM) MVBsRecognizes and bindsubiquitinated proteins and sortsthem into spatially restrictedareas on the endosomalmembrane; HRS recognizes themono-ubiquitinated proteinsand recruits TSG101[78,79,88]ESCRTESCRT-1 (TSG101,VPS28, VPS37, MVB12);ESCRT-2 (VPS36,VPS22, VPS25)MVBsRegulates the initial deformationof membrane into buds withsequestered cargo and may beinvolved in cargo transfer[78,79,88]ESCRT ESCRT-3 (VPS2, VPS20) ILV , MVBsDrives membrane invaginationand subsequent vesicle scission[78,79,88]AAA ATPases VPS4 ILVsInteract with ESCRT-3 to causeconstriction and scission of ILV[88]ESCRT-associated
ESCRT-associatedproteinsALIX ILVs, MVBsControls exosomal cargoincorporation and regulatessorting of PD-L1 on to ILVs;ALIX and syntenin-ALIX andsyntenin-ALIX complexstimulate intraluminal budding[82,86]Rabs Rab5 PM, Early endosomeMediates endocytosis andgeneration and maintenance ofearly endosomes[80,87]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 7 of 48Table 1. Cont.Complexes Subunits Localization Function ReferencesRabs Rab7 MVBsMediates maturation andtrafﬁcking of MVBs to lysosomes[87]Rabs Rab27a MVBsInvolved in the fusion of MVBsto the PM[83,85]Rabs Rab27b MVBsPromotes formation and stabilityof MVB docking and facilitatesexosome shedding[83,84]Rabs Rab35 MVBsControls MVB transport andinﬂuences the docking process[89]SNAREs t-SNARE; v-SNAREWidespreaddistribution inendosomal systemDrive membrane fusion andmediate fusion of MVBs with thePM[89,90]Enzyme HeparanasePM, endosomemembraneExogenous heparanase impactsintraluminal budding and,therefore, exosome biogenesis[86]Enzyme snMase2/SMPD3 PM, endosomesRegulates biosynthesis ofceramide and promotes buddingof intravesicular vesicles[81,85]Abbreviation: ESCRT, endosomal sorting complex required for transport; STAM, signaling transducing adaptor molecule; MVB, multivesic-
ular body; VPS, vacuolar protein sorting associated protein; ILV , intraluminal vesicles; ALIX, apoptosis-linked gene 2-interacting protein X;PM, plasma membrane.3. Complicated Architecture of ExosomesAll exosomes share typical characteristic compositions of donor cells, and cargo can in-clude proteins (tetraspanins, annexins, heat shock proteins, etc.), lipids (glycosphingolipids,sphingomyelins, cholesterol), genetic materials (DNA, tRNA, mRNA, miRNA, small andlong noncoding RNAs (sncRNA and lncRNA, respectively)), and small-molecule metabo-lites (amino acids, ATP , amides, sugars, etc.) (Tables 2–4) [ 67,91–98]. The main databaseavailable for protein content in exosomes is ExoCarta (http://exocarta.ludwig.edu.au/accessed on 17 April 2021); the recent version of ExoCarta includes listings from over286 exosomal investigations annotated with International Society for Extracellular Vesi-cles’ minimal experimental requirements for deﬁnition of exosomes: data include 41,860
proteins, 1116 lipid molecules, and more than 7540 RNAs. Other databases include Vesi-clepedia (http://www.microvesicles.org/ accessed on 17 April 2021), and the UrinaryExosomes Protein Database (http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lkem/exosome/ accessedon 17 April 2021) [99–102].Table 2. Distinct protein families identiﬁed in exosomes from different cell types.Protein Class Name Cell Type ReferenceAntigen PresentationMHC class IB cellsDendritic cellsEnterocytesTumorsT cells[103–107]MHC class IIB cellsDendritic cellsEnterocytesMastocytesT cells[74,103,105,107,108]CD86 Dendritic cells [109]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 8 of 48Table 2. Cont.Protein Class Name Cell Type ReferenceIntegrinsα4β1 Reticulocytes [110]αMβ2 Dendritic cells [111]β2 T cells [103]αLβ2 Mastocytes [112]α3Immunoglobulin familymembersICAM1/CD54B cellsDendritic cellsMastocytes[112–114]P-selection Platelets [112]A33 antigen Enterocytes [105]Cell surface peptidasesDipeptidylpeptidase IV/CD26 Enterocytes [105]Aminopeptidase n/CD13 Mastocytes [112]TetraspaninsCD63B cellsDendritic cellsEnterocytesMastocytesT cellsPlatelets[103,105,107,114–116]CD37, CD53, CD81, CD82 B cells [114]CD9 Dendritic cells [111]Heat shock proteinsHSC70TumorsReticulocytesDendritic cells[16,106,111]HSP70TumorsPeripheral blood mononuclearcells[117–120]HSP84/90EnterocytesDendritic cells[105,111]Cytoskeletal proteinsActinMastocytesDendritic cellsEnterocytesActin binding protein (coﬁlin) Dendritic cellsTubulinDendritic cellsEnterocytesMembrane transport andfusionAnnexins I, II, IV , V , VI Dendritic cells [121]
Annexin VI Mastocytes [112]RAB7/RAP1B/RABGDI Dendritic cells [121]Signal transductionGi2α/14-3-3 Dendritic cells [121]CBL/LCK T cells [103]Metabolic enzymesEnolase 1 Enterocytes [105]Thioredoxin peroxidase Dendritic cells [121]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 9 of 48Table 3. Important protein families identiﬁed within or externally located on exosomes [122–125].Protein Class NameMetabolic enzymesPhosphoglycerate kinase 1NADP-dependent malic enzymeCitrate synthaseMalate dehydrogenaseFatty acid binding protein-3Fatty acid binding protein-4Secretory/membrane proteinsMFG-E8AdiponectinFasting-induced adipose factorCD9CD63Integral membrane protein TAPA-1Clathrin heavy chainMMP-2MMP-9Coagulation factor IICoagulation factor VFibulin 2Annexin IIHeat shock proteinsHsp1HSP60HSP70HSP75HSP84TCP-1 chaperone family β-subunitTCP-1 chaperone family γ-subunitTCP-1 chaperone family ε-subunitGPI-anchored proteinsGce1CD73Ubiquitin/proteasome-related proteins26S proteasome subunit α126S proteasome subunit β326S proteasome subunit β526S proteasome subunit Rpn13Ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1Nuclear proteinsHistone H1.1Histone H1.5Histone H1.3Histone H2AHistone H2BHistone H440S ribosomal protein SA
Histone H2BHistone H440S ribosomal protein SA40S ribosomal protein S860S ribosomal protein L760S ribosomal protein L18aCytoskeletonActr1b proteinβ-ActinTubulinα2Tubulinβ2Tubulinβ5Membrane transport/fusionAnnexin IIAnnexin VMiscellaneousGalectin 1Galectin 3Translation elongation factor-1Translation elongation factor-2Translation initiation factor 4AMajor vault protein14-3-3βDynein heavy chainAlbumin
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 10 of 48Table 4. Lipid families identiﬁed in exosomes released from various cell types.Lipids Cell Types ReferencesSM, PC, PE, PS, PI, CHOL, Plip Erythrocytes [126]SM, PC, PE, PS, PI, LPC, CHOL, Plip, HexCer,LacCerMast cells [70,126,127]SM, PC, PE, PS, PI, LPC Dendritic cells [126]SM, GM3, PCP , SPI, PE, EthLip, CholPlip, DAG B lymphocytes [70,126]SM, PC, PS, PE, CholPlip T lymphocytes [70,126]Acylcarnitine, Cholesterol, Sphingolipids, glyserolipids,glycerophospholipidsNon-tumorigenic (RWPE1), tumorigenic(NB26) and metastatic (PC-3) prostate celllines[128]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, DAG, PC ethers, PG, PA, PI,Cer, HexCer, LacCerPC-3 Cells [70,92]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, DAG, PC, ethers, PG, PA, PI,Cer, HexCer, LacCerPC-3 cells + HG [70]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PI, Cer, HexCer, LacCer Oli-neu Cells [70]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PI, CerHex, Cer, LacCer HepG2/C3a [70,129]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PI, Cer, HexCer, LacCer, Gb3 Prostasome [70,130]
CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, PC, ethers PI, Cer, HexCer,LacCer, Gb3Urine [70,131]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, PC, ethers Nematodes [70,132]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PI, Cer, HexCer, LacCer Reticulocytes [71,73]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, PC, ethersPI, Cer Platelets [71,133]CHOL, SM, PC, PS, PE, PE, ethers, DAG, PI, CerHexCer Adipocytes [71,134]Abbreviation: EthLip, ether lipids; CHOL, cholesterol; PLIP , phospholipids; Prot, proteins; SM, sphingomyelins; PC, phosphatidyl-cholines; PE, phosphatidylethanolamines; PS, phosphatidylserines; PI, phosphatidylinositols; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholines; PE, Phos-phatidylethanolamine; PG, Phosphatidylglycerol; PA, Phosphatidic acid; SMG, Sphingomyelin; GSLe, lycosphingolipids; CE, Cholesterolester; LPCb, Lysophosphatidylcholine; DAG, diacylglycerol; LacCer, lactosylceramide.4. ProteinsExosomal proteins perform various functions such as targeting/adhesion, anti-apoptosis ,
membrane fusion, signal transduction, metabolism, and structural dynamics [ 2,9]. Thereare similarities in protein content between species, as the available proteomic data forexosomes isolated from mouse and human dendritic cells (DCs) suggest that about 80%of the proteins are conserved in the two species [ 2,9,121]. However, based on proteomicstudies, exosomes isolated from different cell types contain speciﬁc groups of proteinsdepending on the secreting cell types (Table 2). Western blot and ﬂuorescence-activatedcell sorting analysis can identify known cellular proteins in exosomes prepared from dif-ferent cell types [ 74,107,108,135,136]. For unknown cellular proteins, mass spectrometryassociated with trypsin digestions can analyze exosomes derived from cells like mast cells,DCs, and enterocytes [ 2,105,112,121,137–140]. These methods have been used to identifycytosolic proteins present in exosomes including actin, tubulin, cytoskeletal components,
and actin-binding proteins, as well as Rab and annexins, which are important in intracel-lular membrane fusions and transport function (Tables 2 and 3). Exosomes also containdifferent types of 14-3-3, heterotrimeric G proteins, and protein kinases, which are criticalin signal transduction during critical physiological processes. Further, exosomes derivedfrom human DCs and enterocytes contain various types of metabolic enzymes such asenolases, peroxidases, and lipid kinases. The two constitutive forms of heat shock proteins(i.e., HSP70 and HSP90) are found in exosomes which perform the function of antigenpresentation and aid in loading antigenic peptides onto MHC class I molecules (Table 3).Notably, the MHC class I molecules are present in most isolated exosomes [141–144].
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 11 of 48Exosomes also consist of proteins that are involved in speciﬁc cellular functions. Forexample, MHC class II molecules are present in large amounts in exosomes. Exosomesderived from DCs contain CD86, which acts as costimulatory molecule for T cells, and cancontain cell-speciﬁc transmembrane proteins such as αM,β2 on DCs, and T cells, α4B1.Other exosome proteins include immunoglobulin-family members, intercellular adhesionmolecule 1 (ICAM1)/CD54 on B cells and cell-surface peptidases such as dipeptidyl-peptidase IV/CD26 on enterocytes and aminopeptidase N/CD13 on mastocytes [ 145].Additionally, exosomes harbor a vast variety of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) an-chored proteins, nuclear proteins, and proteasome related proteins. Finally, the proteomeof exosomes of various cell types are also divided into several signaling molecules andenzymes complexes (Tables 2 and 3) [122–125,146].5. Lipids
5. LipidsLipids are the least studied but most crucial components within exosomal membranes.Exosomes contain an abundance of lipids including glycosphingolipids, sphingomyelins(SM), cholesterol (CHOL), and phosphatidylserine (PS). Lipids not only play an impor-tant role in the structure of exosomal membranes, but also facilitate the formation ofexosomes and their release into extracellular milieu [ 73,147,148]. Exosomes mainly con-tain monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and saturated fatty acids,though the lipid composition of an exosome depends on the parent cells from whichthe exosome is derived [ 69–72]. Interestingly, exosomes can transport several bioactivelipids and lipid metabolism-related enzymes [ 126,149]. Fatty acids such as arachidonicacid (AA), leukotrienes prostaglandins, phosphatidic acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA),and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) have been found in MSC-Exos. The lipid metabolism
enzymes of exosomes can modulate the cell homeostasis of a beneﬁciary [71,150].The lipid classes found in different exosome types based on the published investi-gations are shown in Table 4. Methods such as thin-layer chromatography, gas–liquidchromatography, and mass spectrometry have been used to identify the lipids in exo-somes [ 71]. Studies have shown that the content of CHOL, SM, glycosphingolipids, and PSis 2–3 times higher in exosomes compared to their parent cell. In addition to this, the ma-jority of exosomes show lower content of PC and phosphatidylinositol (PI) than in parentcells. Additionally, lipid content can signiﬁcantly vary by cell type. The lipid compositionof exosomes isolated from hepatocyte cells (HepG2/C3a Oli-neu cells), prostate cancer cells(PC-3 cells), and PC-3 cells+ hexadecylglycerol (HG: a precursor of ether phospholipids)exhibit some similarities [ 66]. Furthermore, the exosome preparation from Oli-neu cells
has lower enrichment of SM and higher enrichment of CHOL, as compared to exosomesisolated from PC-3 cells [ 66]. Reticulocyte-derived exosomes present high levels of CHOLas compared to other cells [ 56], while the enrichment of exosomes from adipocytes wasfound to contain a higher level of SM and lower level of PS than other various preparationsin Table 4 [134].Though lipidomic studies conducted on exosomes isolated from different cell typeshave been published, results are typically given only in the form of the number of differentlipid classes. For example, the lipidomic study of exosomes isolated from colorectalcancer cells (LIM1215) identiﬁed a total of 500 lipid species [ 151], whereas Brzozowskiet al. reported total of 187 lipid species identiﬁed in exosomes enriched from prostatecancer cell lines, i.e., PC-3, RWPE1, and NB26 [ 71,72,128]. Further studies have shownthat exosomes secreted from epithelial cells (RWPE1) contain high amounts of fatty acids,
prenol, and glycerolipids lipids. Exosomes from prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3 and NB26)
that exosomes secreted from epithelial cells (RWPE1) contain high amounts of fatty acids,prenol, and glycerolipids lipids. Exosomes from prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3 and NB26)show an abundant amount of sterol lipids, glycerophospholipids, and sphingolipids. In alipidomic analysis of exosomes isolated from U87 (glioblastoma cells), Huh7 (hepatocellularcarcinoma cells), and human bone marrow derived MSCs, Haraszti et al. showed that thelipid composition of MSCs and Huh7 exosomes were similar to each other but distinctfrom the U87 exosomes [152].
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 12 of 486. RNAsAnother important cargo of exosomes is RNAs, leading to the emergence of exo-somes as a mediator of intracellular communication and a component of various signalingpathways [ 153–155]. MSC-Exos include RNA, which was found to be enclosed withincholesterol-rich phospholipid. This was demonstrated by the RNA cargo’s vulnerabilityto RNase degradation only in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-based lysisbuffer, a chelator of cholesterol, cyclodextrin, and phospholipase A2 [154,155].Ethidium bromide staining, a technique routinely used for the detection of RNA, ofMSC exosomal RNAs found that they consist of mainly short RNAs (<300 nt), whereas28S and 18S RNAs were not visible [ 67,154,156,157]. A primary exosomal mechanismof action is thought to be post-transcriptional gene regulation via microRNA content(miRNAs, miRs), which are small, endogenous RNA molecules around 22 nucleotides in
length. miRNAs have been shown to play pivotal roles in health and disease, includingcancer, cardiovascular diseases, and wound healing [ 158]. Microarray hybridization ofMSC-derived exosomal RNA against probes for 151 miRNAs revealed the existence of 60miRNAs and ribosomal RNA degradative products [ 154,155]. Comparative analysis ofthe composition of MSC exosomal miRNAs with their cellular miRNA revealed that 106miRNAs from the MSCs were not secreted in the MSC exosomes. These results suggestedthat MSCs secrete a select population of miRNA through a regulated process. Furthermore,an ample amount of passenger miRNA has been found in MSC-Exos [159].There have been several studies conducted on exosomal miRNAs involved in intracel-lular communications and disease [ 61,62,64–66]. The plasma-derived exosomal miR-92ashowed an anti-apoptotic effect on ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes, which ultimately leads into
the destruction of bone in rheumatoid arthritis patients [66]. Researchers have found thatMSC-derived exosomal miRNAs can both promote [ 160] and reduce tumor growth [ 161].For example, Leeet al. found that miR-16, a microRNA known to target vascular en-dothelial growth factor (VEGF), was abundantly present in MSC exosomes, leading to anantiangiogenic effect on tumor cells [ 161]. MSC-derived exosomal miRNAs also play anessential role in cardiovascular protection and repair by regeneration, as well as inhibitionof cardiac apoptosis and ﬁbrosis [ 162].Shao et al. discovered that MSC-Exos enclosed ahigher amount of cardioprotective miRNA such as miR-29 and miR-24, and lower amountof cardiac-offensive miR-21 and miR-15 as compared to MSCs [ 163]. Further, it was foundthat human amniotic epithelial cell-derived exosomal miRNAs play a crucial role in woundhealing by promoting cell migration and proliferation of ﬁbroblasts [ 164]. Human amnion
MSC-derived exosomal miRNA, miR-135a, promotes wound healing and ﬁbroblast migra-tion by downregulating large tumor suppressor kinase 2 expression [ 165].Wuel al. furtherfound that MSC-derived exosomal miR-100 provides protection to the articular cartilageand helps in regulation of cartilage homeostasis in the OA mice model via inhibition ofmTOR-autophagy pathway [ 149]. Further, it has been identiﬁed that plasma-derived exo-somal miRNAs are involved in ‘extracellular matrix-receptor interaction’ and contribute toHirschsprung’s disease through interfering in cell junctions [ 166]. Human adipose stemcell-derived exosomes loaded with miR-21 mimics play a critical role in cell proliferationand migration of keratinocytes, and treatment of diabetic chronic wounds with miR-21mimics results in accelerated healing by collagen remodeling, increasing re-epithelization,vessel maturation, and angiogenesis in vivo [167]. Further descriptions of the role of
exosomal miRNA are discussed in later sections.7. Emerging Technologies for Exosome IsolationThe majority of the cells in the body secrete exosomes in the extracellular milieu;
exosomal miRNA are discussed in later sections.7. Emerging Technologies for Exosome IsolationThe majority of the cells in the body secrete exosomes in the extracellular milieu;however, exosomes are also found with other body ﬂuids (Figure 2). Since their discovery,several methods have been developed to isolate the exosomes from body ﬂuids. In thepast decades, there have been many advances in exosome detection and separation tech-niques, resulting in higher recovery, purity, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity of isolated exosomes
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 13 of 48(Table 5) . Still, due to overlapping size range, small sizes, and similar morphologies toother extracellular vesicles challenges persist in isolation methods.Table 5. Characteristics of exosome isolation methods [3,5,168,169].IsolationTechniqueEquipment Isolation Principle Advantages DisadvantagesTraditionalmethodsUltra-centrifugationUltra-centrifuge Physical methodHigh sample capacity;Protein and RNAcomponents are notaffected; Facilitated laterresearchTime-consuming;Instrument-dependent;Low purityDensity gradient Ultra-centrifuge Physical methodHigh separationefﬁciency; High purity;Exosomes will not becrushed or deformedExtended run time;Equipmentdependence;Low yield; ComplexprocessImmuno-magneticbeadsMagnetic bead,antibodyChemical methodTime efﬁcient; Maintainintegrity;Convenient operation;Not affected by exosomesize;No need for expensiveinstrumentsHigh reagent cost; Lowcapacity;Low yields
capacity;Low yieldsPrecipitation Ultra-centrifugePhysical/ChemicalmethodHigh yield; Easy;Concentrates dilutedsamplesPost-clean up isneeded fordownstreamapplicationsEmergingmethodsExoQuick ExoQuick kitPhysical/ChemicalmethodSimple steps, Quickoperation; Sizeuniformity; Suitable forsmallsamples, such as serumImpurity; Affected byexosomediameter; Expensivereagents; LowproductionSize ExclusionChromatogra-phyGel ﬁltration columnPhysical/ChemicalmethodHigh purity; Uniform insizeLow extraction volume;Extensivelaboratory equipmentrequirementsStirredultraﬁltrationUltra-ﬁltrationmembrane, NitrogengasPhysical methodDoes not rely onequipment; Less timeconsuming than othermethods; Reduces thedestruction of exosomesduring the processModerate purity of isolatedexosomes; Loss ofexosomes during theprocessFiltration DeviceMicroﬂuidic devices(e.g., nano traps)Physical/ChemicalmethodFast, Low cost; Easyautomation andintegration; High
automation andintegration; HighportabilityLack of standardization andlarge-scale tests on clinicalsamples, Lack ofmethod validation; Lowsample capacitynPESGNPs,AntibodiesChemical methodFast; Efﬁcient; Highpurity;Quantitative analysisHigh reagent cost; Complexstatistical tools; LowcapacityMembranemodiﬁcationMagnetic ﬁeld,MagneticnanoparticlesPhysical/ChemicalmethodNeeds no antibodies;Save time; preserve theoriginal structure oftheexosomes; DrugcarriersComplicated operation;ImpurityExoTICExoTIC, Syringe,PumpPhysical/ChemicalmethodSimple operation;Exosomes in aspeciﬁc range; HighpuritySpecial equipmentrequirements;Lack of tests on clinicalsamplesFlow ﬁeld-ﬂowfractionationFlow ﬁeld-ﬂowfractionationinstrumentPhysical methodLabel free isolation; Largescale productionSpecial instrumentrequirement; Costly
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 14 of 48The most common and traditional method of exosome isolation is ultracentrifuga-tion/differential ultracentrifugation, which separates exosomes based on size and den-sity [ 170,171]. This technique is comparatively cost-effective and secure, though timeconsuming. It is generally used for the isolation of exosomes from large volumes of bio-logical cultures. The main disadvantage of this method is a lack of speciﬁcity, in that theseparated exosomes could contain other extracellular vesicles of similar sizes. To over-come this problem, it is recommended to use iodixanol or sucrose cushions in addition todifferential ultracentrifugation [172–174].Ultraﬁltration is another conventional method used for the isolation of exosomes.In this method, exosomes can be isolated based on their molecular weight or size. Forexample, exosomes can be separated using deﬁned molecular weight cut-off membrane
ﬁlters. The ﬁltration method is much faster than differential ultracentrifugation and doesnot require any kind of unique instrument [ 168,171,175–177]. However, a major drawbackis a lack of purity in the isolated fraction. Similar to ultracentrifugation, it is hard to omitcompounds of other molecules with similar sizes to exosomes [178,179].In addition to ultraﬁltration, size exclusion chromatography (SEC) also separatesexosomes on the basis of size or molecular weight [ 180,181]. SEC isolates exosomeswith high purity and high yield, and acts as an essential tool in the process of exosomepuriﬁcation. In SEC, a column made with a solid-phase matrix of beads, with pores ofdifferent sizes, is used to separate macromolecules and other particulate matter [ 47,182].SEC can be used in combination with ultracentrifugation or other techniques for higheryield of exosomes [183,184].An immunoafﬁnity chromatography method can be used to enhance the purity of
separated exosomes. Exosomal membrane proteins and receptor molecules are used todevelop this highly speciﬁc method. In this technique, the exosomes can be capturedon the column by immunoafﬁnitive proteins and their speciﬁc antibodies [ 185–187]. Theimmunoafﬁnity chromatography technique is appropriate for smaller-scale production ofexosomes from fewer sample volumes. A microplate-based enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay (ELISA) is the best example of immunoafﬁnity-based chromatography approachused for quantifying the captured exosomes from biological samples such as a serum,plasma, and urine [188].Exosome puriﬁcation can also be carried out by precipitation [ 189,190]. Precipitation-based exosome isolation is used to concentrate the exosomes from biological ﬂuids. Ex-osomes can be precipitated from cell culture media by altering their dispersibility andsolubility. This can be achieved by commercially available precipitation reagents such as
polyethylene glycol (PEG) [ 177,191]. Currently, numerous precipitation-based exosomeisolation kits are available in the market. These are compatible with biological ﬂuids suchas urine, plasma, serum, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, and cell culture medium [192,193].Recently, microﬂuidic-based methods were developed for the rapid and efﬁcientisolation of exosomes from biological samples. The main advantages of these techniques areremarkable reductions in reagent consumption, sample volume, analysis cost, and isolationtime [ 194–196]. As scalability is enhanced through technique modiﬁcation and availabletechnologies, the needs of health care applications such as reproducibility, reliability,low cost, and speed can eventually be fulﬁlled. A full summary of advantages anddisadvantages of the exosome isolation methods is given in Table 5.8. Applications of Exosomes in Injury and DiseaseExosomes, and speciﬁcally exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells, have
been found to have enormous beneﬁts in a variety of diseases and injuries through the
Exosomes, and speciﬁcally exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells, havebeen found to have enormous beneﬁts in a variety of diseases and injuries through theproteins and RNAs that they contain. Additionally, because exosomes are representationsof their parent cells, as the cellular environment changes, so exosomes change. As such,the number and content of exosomes can be used as a biomarker for changing conditionsin disease. In the following sections we summarize recent ﬁndings in problems such aswound healing, neurological damage, and hepatic diseases.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 15 of 489. Wound HealingSkin damage can commonly arise due to factors such as the sun, parasites, or afall, often leading to open abrasions with potential for infection. Injuries to the skin arehealed in an intricate process that takes place in four overlapping stages: (1) hemostasis,(2) inﬂammation, (3) proliferation; and (4) maturation/remodeling (Figure 5) [ 197–199].In the ﬁrst stage, hemostasis, platelets form a blood clot to prevent blood loss. Simul-taneously, the platelets secrete hormones, cytokines, and chemokines, including tumorgrowth factor- β(TGF-β), epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor(PDGF), and ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF), to attract inﬂammatory cells (growth factorsimportant in wound healing are summarized in Table 6) [ 9,40,200–204]. Inﬂammation, thesecond step of wound healing, begins within 24 h of injury as neutrophils inﬁltrate the
wound and secrete products, such as toll-like receptors (TLRs) and nuclear factor к-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF- кB), to attract and activate pro-inﬂammatory (M1)macrophages [ 9,40,201,202,204]. M1 macrophages phagocytose pathogens, produce anoxidative burst, and remove apoptotic cells before products including signal transducerand activator of transcription 3 (STAT-3) promote the polarization of M1 macrophages intoanti-inﬂammatory M2 macrophages, thus stimulating inﬂammatory resolution [ 205–208].Proliferation then begins as keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts proliferate at the edge of thewound. Increased levels of VEGF and FGF stimulate angiogenesis, the process by whichnew blood vessels are formed to transport necessary nutrients, oxygen, and growth factorsto the damaged tissues. Fibroblasts secrete immature type III collagen to form a newextracellular matrix (ECM), and then differentiate into myoﬁbroblasts. These cells have
contractile abilities, pulling together the edges of the wound [ 197,198,203,206,209]. Finally,during the maturation phase, the former ECM gets degraded by a variety of enzymes,including matrix metalloproteinases and plasminogen activators, as the type III collagenis substituted by mature type I collagen. The remodeling of the scar is a longer processthan other stages of wound healing: over months or years, the scar tissue reaches itsﬁnal appearance [ 198,209]. The proper sequence, timing, and regulation of these stagesare critical during wound healing; any delinquency in this progression can result in theformation of chronic ulcers or hypertrophic scarring [ 197,199,210]. The major risk factorsin this are underlying conditions such as aging, diabetes, and recalcitrant infections. In-temperate ﬁbroblast activity results in hypertrophic scarring and may degenerate intokeloids [210–212].Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 50
Figure 5. Phases of wound healing . The main events implicated during wound healing are hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. (1) Hemostasis is the process of blood clotting and is the shortest phase in wound healing, lasting for only a few minutes. (2) The inflammatory phase comprises of blood coagulation, phagocytosis, removal of foreign bodies, and recruitment of g rowth factors and anti -inflammatory cells at the site of injury. (3) The proliferation phase encompasses fibroplasia, angiogenesis and cell migration, cell recruitment, re -epithelialization, and wound contrac-tion. (4) Finally, in the remodeling phase, type  I collagen replaces type III collagen in the wound site. Eventually, scar formation occurs through apoptosis.  Table 6. Summary of major growth factors families and their applications in injury healing.  Growth Factor  Source  Molecular Function  References  VEGF  Keratinocytes,  Fibroblasts,  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts,  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Smooth muscle cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis  [200,213–218] CX3CL1  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis,
Fibroblasts,  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Smooth muscle cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis  [200,213–218] CX3CL1  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis,  Collagen deposition  [219,220 ] TGF -β Fibroblasts,  Keratinocytes,  Macrophages,  Platelets  Inflammation, Angiogenesis,  Granulation tissue  formation, Collagen  synthesis, Tissue  remodeling, Leukocyte  chemotactic function  [200,217,221 –228] IL-6 Fibroblasts,  Endothelial cells, Macrophages,  Keratinocytes  Inflamm ation, Angiogenesis,  Re-epithelialization, Collagen  deposition, Tissue  remodeling  [217,229–231] IL-1 Macrophages,  Leukocytes,  Inflammation, Angiogenesis,  Re-epithelialization, Tissue  remodeling  [217,232–235] Figure 5. Cont.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 16 of 48Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 50    Figure 5. Phases of wound healing . The main events implicated during wound healing are hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. (1) Hemostasis is the process of blood clotting and is the shortest phase in wound healing, lasting for only a few minutes. (2) The inflammatory phase comprises of blood coagulation, phagocytosis, removal of foreign bodies, and recruitment of g rowth factors and anti -inflammatory cells at the site of injury. (3) The proliferation phase encompasses fibroplasia, angiogenesis and cell migration, cell recruitment, re -epithelialization, and wound contrac-tion. (4) Finally, in the remodeling phase, type  I collagen replaces type III collagen in the wound site. Eventually, scar formation occurs through apoptosis.  Table 6. Summary of major growth factors families and their applications in injury healing.  Growth Factor  Source  Molecular Function  References
VEGF  Keratinocytes,  Fibroblasts,  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Smooth muscle cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis  [200,213–218] CX3CL1  Macrophages,  Endothelial cells  Inflammation,  Angiogenesis,  Collagen deposition  [219,220 ] TGF -β Fibroblasts,  Keratinocytes,  Macrophages,  Platelets  Inflammation, Angiogenesis,  Granulation tissue  formation, Collagen  synthesis, Tissue  remodeling, Leukocyte  chemotactic function  [200,217,221 –228] IL-6 Fibroblasts,  Endothelial cells, Macrophages,  Keratinocytes  Inflamm ation, Angiogenesis,  Re-epithelialization, Collagen  deposition, Tissue  remodeling  [217,229–231] IL-1 Macrophages,  Leukocytes,  Inflammation, Angiogenesis,  Re-epithelialization, Tissue  remodeling  [217,232–235] Figure 5. Phases of wound healing. The main events implicated during wound healing are hemostasis, inﬂammation,
proliferation, and remodeling. (1) Hemostasis is the process of blood clotting and is the shortest phase in wound healing,lasting for only a few minutes. (2) The inﬂammatory phase comprises of blood coagulation, phagocytosis, removal offoreign bodies, and recruitment of growth factors and anti-inﬂammatory cells at the site of injury. (3) The proliferation phaseencompasses ﬁbroplasia, angiogenesis and cell migration, cell recruitment, re-epithelialization, and wound contraction. (4)Finally, in the remodeling phase, type I collagen replaces type III collagen in the wound site. Eventually, scar formationoccurs through apoptosis.Table 6. Summary of major growth factors families and their applications in injury healing.Growth Factor Source Molecular Function ReferencesVEGFKeratinocytes,Fibroblasts,Macrophages,Endothelial cellsSmooth muscle cellsInﬂammation,Angiogenesis[200,213–218]CX3CL1Macrophages,Endothelial cellsInﬂammation,Angiogenesis,Collagen deposition[219,220]
Angiogenesis,Collagen deposition[219,220]TGF-βFibroblasts,Keratinocytes,Macrophages,PlateletsInﬂammation, Angiogenesis,Granulation tissueformation, Collagensynthesis, Tissueremodeling, Leukocytechemotactic function[200,217,221–228]IL-6Fibroblasts,Endothelial cells,Macrophages,KeratinocytesInﬂammation, Angiogenesis,Re-epithelialization, Collagendeposition, Tissueremodeling[217,229–231]IL-1Macrophages,Leukocytes,Keratinocytes,FibroblastsInﬂammation, Angiogenesis,Re-epithelialization, Tissueremodeling[217,232–235]PDGF PlateletsInﬂammation,Re-epithelialization, Collagendeposition, Tissueremodeling[212,236]IL-27 MacrophagesSuppression ofinﬂammation, Collagensynthesis[237,238]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 17 of 48Table 6. Cont.Growth Factor Source Molecular Function ReferencesHGF FibroblastsSuppression ofinﬂammation, Granulationtissue formation,Angiogenesis,Re-epithelialization[215,217,239]ActivinKeratinocytes,FibroblastsGranulation tissueformation, KeratinocyteDifferentiation,Re-epithelialization,[240–243]FGF-2Keratinocytes,Fibroblasts,Endothelial cellsAngiogenesis, Granulationtissue formation[217,244–248]Angiopoietin-1/-2 Fibroblasts Angiogenesis [216,249]EGF, HB-EGF, TGF- α Keratinocytes, Macrophages Re-epithelialization [217,250–254]FGF-7, FGF-10Fibroblasts,KeratinocytesRe-epithelialization,Detoxiﬁcation of ROS[200,217,255–257]CXCL10, CXCL11Keratinocytes,Endothelial cellsRe-epithelialization, Tissueremodeling[258–260]IL-4 Leukocytes Collagen synthesis [217,226]GM-CSFMacrophages, T cells, Mastcells, Natural killer cells,Fibroblast, Endothelial cellsRecruit Langerhans cells, Stimulateproliferation and differentiation[239,261]
proliferation and differentiation[239,261]TNF-αNeutrophilsMacrophagesInﬂammationRe-epithelialization[262]Abbreviation: CXCL10/11, cysteine-X amino acid-cysteine; EGF, epidermal growth factor; FGF, ﬁbroblast growth factor; HB-EGF, heparinbinding EGF; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; IL, interleukin; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF, transforming growth factor;VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.One of the promising approaches for this is an exploitation of cellular therapies us-ing MSCs and the possible role of MSC-Exos in wound healing and regeneration [ 39].Though studies using MSCs have revealed that both autologous and allogenous MSCsgive promising results [ 263], several studies have demonstrated that the effectiveness andthe regenerative capacity of the conditioned media from MSCs is similar or greater thanMSCs when applied to chronic wounds [ 37,39–41,48,264]. As such, it has been found
that the MSC-derived secretome, in the form of exosomes, carries soluble factors andmetabolites that play an important part during wound healing [ 40,41,265]. Recent re-search has highlighted the potential of MSC-Exos, and in particular the growth factorand microRNA content of exosomes, as a therapeutic treatment of chronic skin ulcersand hypertrophic scarring, as well as the possible role of exosomes in the modulationof different stages of wound healing (see Table 7 for an expansive list of microRNAs inwound healing) [ 48,198,200,217,266,267]. Exosomes can target several pathways includingphosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT, ERK, and STAT-3 which are vital in facilitating andaccelerating wound healing through downstream targets such as hepatocyte growth factor(HGF), insulin-like growth factor-1, nerve growth factor (NGF), and stromal cell-derivedfactor [ 48,50,198,268–273]. Further, a study by Shabbir and team demonstrated a trending
increase in VEGF induced by MSC-Exo administration [ 48]. In addition to activation ofgrowth factors through downstream processes, growth factors such as VEGF, HGF, andPDGF have been found in exosomes isolated from MSCs of different sources [ 274,275].TGF-βhas been found in low levels in umbilical cord MSC-Exos [ 274,276], and whenexosomes are further loaded with TGF- βcargo, can stimulate vascularization and matrixremodeling [ 277]. Exosomes, by proxy of their effect on and containment of growth factor,
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 18 of 48possess cellular proliferation and differentiation modulating properties along with highimmunomodulating, immunosuppressing, and angiogenic activities, which have beendemonstrated both in cell culture and animal models [50,266,269,278].Table 7. List of miRNAs involved in the various stages of wound healing. Highly expressed microRNA are bolded[158,160,279–284].InﬂammatoryPhaseProliferation PhaseRemodelingPhaseMigration InvasionRe-Epithelialization Angio-GenesisGranulation TissueFormationmiR-17-5p miR-21 miR-1 miR-15a miR-29a miR-196a miR-141miR-18a miR-31 miR-21 miR-15b miR-29b miR-200bmiR-34a miR-203 miR-23a miR-16 miR-29c miR-200cmiR-106b miR-204 miR-29b miR-17 miR-192miR-181a miR-205 miR-126 miR-17-92miR-181b miR-210 miR-133a miR-20amiR-193b miR-133b miR-20bmiR-210 miR-146a miR-21miR-221 miR-210 miR-29miR-222 miR-218 miR-92amiR-377 miR-98miR-939 miR-101miR-4530 miR-126miR-130amiR-141miR-184miR-185miR-200bmiR-203miR-205
miR-141miR-184miR-185miR-200bmiR-203miR-205miR-206miR-210miR-221miR-222miR-296miR-320amiR-320bmiR-378aExosomes have been identiﬁed as an important regulator of inﬂammation. Impor-tantly, exosomes are even beneﬁcial in instances of chronic inﬂammation, such as found indiabetic patients, where higher levels of glucose thwart the proper macrophage polarization(M1→M2), making these patients prone to chronic skin wounds [ 40,201–205]. MSC-Exoscan promote macrophage polarization and attenuate cytokine secretion to resolve the in-ﬂammatory stage [ 49,201,202]. These effects can be explained in part through microRNA, asmicroRNAs such as miR-132 are highly upregulated during inﬂammation and can induce
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 19 of 48M2 polarization through regulation of TLRs [ 285–287]. Studies have found that miR-132located within MSC-Exos can elevate IL-10 expression and decrease levels of NF- кB, IL-6and IL-1βin favor of inﬂammation resolution [ 288–290]. Broadly, exosomes have shownsigniﬁcant beneﬁcial effects on proliferation, collagen deposition, and angiogenesis, even instates of chronic wounds and comorbidities such as diabetes [ 272,273,291]. Several microR-NAs participate in this step including miR-132, miR-126, and miR-21. miR-132 plays a rolein proliferation, as it can increase the activity of the STAT-3 and ERK pathways, therebypromoting keratinocyte growth. Exosomes loaded with miR-132 improved angiogenesis byincreasing the tube formation of endothelial cells [ 211,289]. In a hypoxia-like environment,exosomes have been found to be abundant with miR-126, which aids in angiogenesisthrough downstream activation of PI3K/AKT signaling [ 292,293]. Though many miRNAs
can be found in exosomes, some are highly expressed, including miR-21 [ 280]. This impor-tant microRNA has been shown to be impactful in several diseases and injuries. miR-21promotes migration of keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts, stimulating re-epithelialization, andpromotes collagen synthesis [ 280,285,294–296]. Further, miR-21 can resolve inﬂammation,as miR-21 is increased in macrophages after they envelop apoptotic neutrophils, a keyprocess in the transition from inﬂammation into proliferation stages [ 39,263]. Additionally,miR-21 can downregulate TLR-4-mediated inﬂammation through the inhibition of theexpression of programmed cell death protein 4 [ 39,281]. miR29a and miR29b are alsoshown to be have elevated levels in MSC-Exos and play pivotal roles in regulation ofTGF-βand cell growth; in addition to the highly expressed miR-23a, the 29 family also hasa large impact on angiogenesis [280,284].
a large impact on angiogenesis [280,284].Exosomes, and MSC-Exos speciﬁcally, show great potential for the promotion of rapidand efﬁcient wound healing. Exosomes can be applied directly to an injury, which inanimal models has been shown to promote collagen synthesis and the proliferation andmigration of ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes (Table 8) [ 268,297,298]. These effects are shown tobe due in part to exosomal regulations of microRNA levels and protease activities [ 297,299].However, progressively more creative ways to utilize these versatile particles in noveltechnologies are being developed, such as the incorporation of exosomes into a gel, whichis then applied to an injury. This treatment method has been shown to be more beneﬁcialthan a single, direct administration of exosomes due to a slow, steady rate of delivery,with some gels delivering exosomes for up to a week [ 300–302]. These scaffolds offer
structure, hydration, and increased ﬂexibility in treatment options, as hydrogels can beenused for wounds from basic skin injuries to deep nerve damage [ 302,303]. In the continueddevelopment of wound healing strategies continue, the broad applicability and therapeuticbeneﬁts of exosomes will only expand the prospects and efﬁciency of wound healingtechnologies.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 20 of 48Table 8. MSC-derived exosomes in wound healing therapies.Study MSC Source Particle Isolation Particle SizeMSC ExosomeCharacterizationModel Species/CellsIntervention(s), Route,and DoseImportant Finding fromthe Studies(Choi et al., 2019) [299]Humanadipose-derived (AD)MSCsCentrifugation, TFF 133 ±14 nm EM, WB, NTAUV damaged Humandermal ﬁbroblasts1×108particles in1 mL PBSIncreased collagen andelastin synthesis anddecreased MMP activity(Hu et al., 2016) [267] Human ADMSCsUltraﬁltration andExoQuick-TC kit30–100 nm EM, WB, NTA Adult male Balb/c miceInjection of 200 µg oftotal exosome protein in200µL PBSIncreased wound healing byregulating the migration,proliferation, and collagensynthesis of ﬁbroblast(Ferreira et al., 2017)[300]Human ADMSCs UC 135 nm NTAHuman epidermalkeratinocytes anddermal ﬁbroblastsExosome-geltransplantation/1.9 ×108particles inhydroxyethyl celluloseaqueous gelEnhanced wound healingthrough increased migration
through increased migrationand proliferation ofkeratinocytes andﬁbroblasts(Cooper et al., 2018)[304]Human ADMSCs ExoQuick-TC kit 90–100 nm NTASix-month-old maleFischer 344 ratsInjection of conditionedmedia from ZenBio™ADSC (20µL) or control(unconditioned) media(20µL)Increased wound healingthrough increased migrationand proliferation ofkeratinocytes andﬁbroblasts(Shi et al., 2020) [297] Human ADMSCs UC 50–120 nm EM, WB Male C57BL miceSubcutaneous injectionof exosomes/200 µg in100µL of PBSEnhanced wound healingthrough inducing miR-128-3p/SIRT1-mediatedautophagy(Shabbir et al., 2015) [ 48]Human bone-marrow(BM) MSCsUC 30–100 nm EM, WB, NTAHuman dermalﬁbroblasts0.1, 1, and 10 µg totalexosome protein in1 mL; PBS/details notprovidedIncreased migration andproliferation of ﬁbroblastsand tube formation byendothelial cells(Ding et al., 2019) [268] Human BMMSCs UC 50–150 nm EM, WB, NTAAdult maleSprague–Dawley (SD)ratsSubcutaneous injectionof exosomes/100 µg in
ratsSubcutaneous injectionof exosomes/100 µg in100µL of PBSEnhanced wound healingthrough elevatedproaniogenic activity(Zhang et al., 2016) [ 298]Human umbilical cord(UC) MSCsDifferentialcentrifugation andsucrose gradient UC30–100 nm EM, NTA Adult female SD ratsInjection of 200 µg oftotal exosome protein in200µL PBSIncreased wound healingthrough increasedproliferation, angiogenesisof ﬁbroblasts
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 21 of 48Table 8. Cont.Study MSC Source Particle Isolation Particle SizeMSC ExosomeCharacterizationModel Species/CellsIntervention(s), Route,and DoseImportant Finding fromthe Studies(Fang et al., 2016) [305] Human UCMSCsDifferentialcentrifugation andsucrose gradient UC30–100 nm WB, NTAAdult male ICR mice(Swiss-Hauschka mice)and nude mice(BALB/c-ν)Exosome-scaffoldtransplantation(HydroMatrix)/100 µgof total exosome proteinin 100µL PBSEnhanced wound healingthrough supression ofmyoﬁbroblastdifferentiation(Ti et al., 2015) [306] Human UCMSCs UC 40–90 nm EM, WBDiabetic rats (Detailsnot provided)Injection at woundsite/MSC-exosomes(60µg) andLPS-preconditionedMSC-exosomes (60 µg)Increased diabeticcutaneous wound healingthrough regulation ofmacrophage polarizationand resolution of chronicinﬂammation(Zhang et al., 2015) [50] Human iPSC-MSCs UC 30–100 nm EM, FC, WB Adult male SD ratsInjection/160 µg totalexosome protein in160µL; PBS at wound
exosome protein in160µL; PBS at woundsites and 40µg totalexosome protein in 40µL PBS at wound beds;14-day studyEnhanced angiogenesis andcollagen synthesis(Bian et al., 2020) [307] Human decidua UC 64–125 nm EM, WB, NTAFemale diabetic mice(BKS-DockLeprem2Cd479, db/db)dMSC-s Exosomes(100µL, 5.22×1011particles/mL) injectedaround wounds weeklyfor 4 weeksEnhanced human dermalﬁbroblasts migration,proliferation, anddifferentiation andimproved senescent state(Li et al., 2016) [302] Human synovium UC 85 ±36 nm EM, DLS, WB Adult male SD ratsHydroxyapatite/chitosancomposite hydrogelsloaded with exosomesIncreased wound healingthrough re-epithelialization,accelerating angiogenesis,and expediting collagenmaturityAbbreviations: BM, bone-marrow; MSC, mesenchymal stem cells; iPSC, induced-pluripotent stem cells; AD, adipose-derived; UC, umbilical cord; UC, ultracentrifugation; EM, electron microscopy; WB, western
blot; NTA, Nanoparticle tracking analysis; FC, ﬂow cytometry; DLS, dynamic light scattering; TFF, tangential ﬂow ﬁltration; SD, Sprague-Dawley; PBS, Phosphate Buffered Saline; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 22 of 4810. Brain InjuryInjuries to the brain, including traumatic brain injury (TBI) or stroke, can lead to long-term disability and decreased life expectancy, making them major health and economicissues [ 46,308,309]. These traumas can prompt rapid acute and long-term damage toneuronal tissue and function. Successful treatment of brain injuries is limited due to theneed for swift diagnosis and difﬁculties in delivering therapeutics past the blood-brainbarrier (BBB). Additional complications arise due to the myriad of changes that take placefollowing brain damages. MSC-Exos are not only capable of crossing the BBB throughintravenous or intranasal delivery, but also have beneﬁcial effects in treating chronicinﬂammation in and promoting healthy healing, making them a potential therapeutic forcomplex brain injuries (Figure 6) [310–313].Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  22 of 50   10. Brain Injury
10. Brain Injury  Injuries to the brain, including traumatic brain injury (TBI) or stroke, can lead to long -term disability and decreas ed life expectancy, making them major health and economic issues  [46,308,309] . These traumas can prompt rapid acute and long -term damage to neu-ronal tissue and function. Successful treatment of brain injuries is limited due to the need for swift diagnosis and difficulties in delivering therapeutics past the blood -brain barrier (BBB). Additional complications arise due to the myriad of changes that take place follow-ing brain damages. MSC -Exos are not only capable of crossing the BBB through intrave-nous or in tranasal delivery, but also have beneficial effects in treating chronic inflamma-tion in and promoting healthy healing, making them a potential therapeutic for complex brain injuries (Figure 6)  [310–313].   Figure 6. Schematic representation of functions of exosomes in neural cell communication.  Exosomes released from dif-
ferent types of MSCs such as human umbilical cord, adipose tissue, bone marrow, and neural stem cells perform several investigated and suggested biological functions. Exosomes delivered vi a intranasal, intravenous, or other routes can mi-grate to the brain and penetrate the blood brain barrier. From there, the exosomes can enter general circulation and arrive at far off targets. Conversely, exosomes can travel across the blood brain barrier from inside the blood vessel into the central nervous system and be taken up by neurons and glial cells. Exosomes contain diverse contents (as depicted in Figure 1), that can influence inflammation, misfolded proteins, damage, and disease. In injury states  such as TBI or stroke, exosomes interact with synaptic activity and neural survival, facilitating neurite outgrowth, and can promoting mye-lination and blood brain barrier repair.
lination and blood brain barrier repair.  Figure 6. Schematic representation of functions of exosomes in neural cell communication. Exosomes released fromdifferent types of MSCs such as human umbilical cord, adipose tissue, bone marrow, and neural stem cells perform severalinvestigated and suggested biological functions. Exosomes delivered via intranasal, intravenous, or other routes can migrateto the brain and penetrate the blood brain barrier. From there, the exosomes can enter general circulation and arrive atfar off targets. Conversely, exosomes can travel across the blood brain barrier from inside the blood vessel into the centralnervous system and be taken up by neurons and glial cells. Exosomes contain diverse contents (as depicted in Figure 1),that can inﬂuence inﬂammation, misfolded proteins, damage, and disease. In injury states such as TBI or stroke, exosomes
interact with synaptic activity and neural survival, facilitating neurite outgrowth, and can promoting myelination andblood brain barrier repair.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 23 of 48Impacts from sports, car crashes, military experiences, or falls can lead to damage tothe brain called a concussion, or traumatic brain injury (TBI). Originally thought to be anacute event, research has now shown that TBIs can lead to long-lasting effects on brain func-tion, reducing life expectancy [ 308,309,314]. TBIs produce immediate trauma to the brainin which neurons, glia, and blood vessels stretch or tear, inducing apoptosis and damagingthe BBB. This is followed by a pro-inﬂammatory immune response that recruits glial cellsto the injury site; upon arrival to the injury, immune cells become activated, phagocytosedead and damaged cells, and secrete pro-inﬂammatory signals. In moderate to severeinjuries, this inﬂammatory immune response does not properly resolve, causing chronicinﬂammation: complications of chronic inﬂammation can last weeks to years following
injury [ 46,308,314]. MSC-Exos from various sources including bone marrow, umbilical cord,and adipose tissue have shown great potential in modulating the inﬂammatory responsethat follows a TBI [ 46,51,315]. When MSC-Exos were delivered 24 hours after injury ina model of TBI, controlled cortical impact, researchers found a decreased inﬂammatoryresponse, which led to improved recovery via enhanced neurogenesis and angiogene-sis [51,309,315]. This effect is due in part to microRNAs contained within exosomes, suchas miR-9, miR-124, and miR-125b. These microRNAs regulate important cytokines such asIL-1β, and thus promote neurogenesis. Studies have found that treatment with exosomescan decrease inﬂammatory markers in a dose-dependent fashion [ 46,308,316,317]. Addi-tionally, exosomes can regulate TLR-4 and macrophage polarization, thereby promotingrecovery following a TBI [ 46,136,314,317,318]. Importantly, administration of MSC-Exos
following a concussion can not only help the molecular changes that take place, but alsolead to improvements in motor and cognitive deﬁcits that commonly occur after braindamage [51,309,315,317–320].Another common injury to the brain is a stroke, which is a major cause of morbidityglobally, with 15 million estimated strokes every year worldwide [ 310,313,321,322]. Thereare different types of strokes which can be difﬁcult to differentiate between creating com-plications in diagnoses, including ischemic (development of a clot that blocks blood ﬂowto a part of the brain) and hemorrhagic (a blood vessel ruptures) [ 74,323,324]. Followinga stroke, there is a loss of oxygen to the brain, cell death, and excess inﬂammation. Inter-estingly, exosomes are being considered as a potential biomarker for stroke severity, andimportantly for diagnosis, stroke type [ 8,322,325].Kalani et al. found that the microRNA
content in secreted exosomes is contingent on the type of stroke a patient suffered from,with miRs such as miR-21-3p, miR-27b-3p, and miR-132-3p elevated in patients with anischemic stroke [ 8]. In addition to exosomes serving as a stroke biomarker, MSC-Exos havehighly beneﬁcial properties in the treatment of stroke. The primary standard of ischemicstroke care is the delivery of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA); interestingly, the additionof exosomes to tPA treatment signiﬁcantly improved functional outcome following strokecompared to tPA treatment alone [ 313,317]. Delivery of MSC-Exos in stroke models leads tolong-term neuroprotection, improved neurogenesis and neurovascular remodeling, as wellas enhanced behavioral and neurological performances in motor function, coordination,sensorimotor, and spatial learning [ 136,317,324,326–330]. Varied contents of exosomes havebeen shown to aid recuperation, from growth factors such as VEGF to microRNAs [ 46,331].
Zheng et al. identiﬁed that miR-25 in MSC-Exos improved cell viability following strokethrough modulation of BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein-interacting protein 3, while in
Zheng et al. identiﬁed that miR-25 in MSC-Exos improved cell viability following strokethrough modulation of BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein-interacting protein 3, while ina model of middle cerebral artery occlusion, miR-133b secreted from MSCs led to improvedneurogenesis and stroke recovery [ 46,310,311,330]. Similar to studies in TBI, MSC-Exoscan improve recovery through modulation of inﬂammation [ 43,136,310,313,328]. A studybyZhao et al. found that delivery of MSC exosomes signiﬁcantly decreased inﬂammatorysignaling and promoted the polarization of microglia from M1 to M2 activation [ 136].miR-21, miR-199a, miR-124a, and miR-17 are a few of many exosomal microRNAs thathave been shown to play beneﬁcial roles in neuroprotection, immune regulation, andrejuvenation after injury [ 324,332]. Together, these studies demonstrate that exosomesare highly beneﬁcial for neurological injuries, not only due to the vast therapeutic value
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 24 of 48provided by exosomal contents, but also because these vesicles can bypass the BBB throughboth intravenous and intranasal administration. See Figure 6 for depiction of exosomalrole in brain healing.11. Hepatic DiseasesLiver diseases include illnesses such as cirrhosis (the scarring of the liver) and hep-atocellular carcinoma, and worldwide account for approximately 2 million deaths annu-ally [ 333]. Treatments for liver diseases vary, but several studies related to acute liverinjury and other hepatic diseases have identiﬁed that exosomes may have dual functionof therapeutic agents as well as speciﬁc biomarkers for liver disease diagnosis [ 334–338].Recently, a report from Momen-Heravi and group has demonstrated that in alcoholic hepati-tis patients, the number of exosomes was found to be elevated compared to the healthypopulation [ 338]. Certain RNAs are differentially affected in exosomes derived from pa-
tients with liver diseases, with RNAs such as miR-21 elevated in exosomes of patientswith hepatocellular carcinoma [ 334,335,338,339]. These ﬁndings set a stage for exosomesas biomarkers for noninvasive detection of hepatocellular carcinoma and other acute liverdiseases [340–342].The regenerative capacities of exosomes in liver have been explored as therapeuticagents, as exosomes carry cargo over large distances for cellular communication. Severalstudies have found that treatment with exosomes beneﬁts liver repair and regenerationfollowing hepatic failure, an effect thought to be due to the promotion of angiogenesisvia the Wnt signaling pathway [ 343]. Further, hepatocyte-derived exosomes can deliverthe synthetic machinery to form sphingosine-1-phosphate in target hepatocytes, enablingcell proliferation and liver regeneration after ischemia, reperfusion injuries, or after partialhepatectomy [ 344]. It has also demonstrated that hepatocyte-derived exosomes stimulate
hepatocyte proliferation in vitro and promote liver regeneration in vivo during acute liverinjury; the underlying mechanism is thought to involve exosome-mediated transfer ofneutral ceramidase and sphingosine kinase 2 at the site of regeneration. Additionally,it was revealed that after liver injury, the enhanced levels of circulating exosomes haveproliferative effects [ 344]. The regenerative potential of MSC-Exos in carbon tetrachloride(CCl4)-induced liver injury has also been investigated. It was found that these exosomeseffectively attenuated the CCl4-induced liver injury by promoting proliferative and regen-erative responses [ 345,346]. The potential effect of exosomes derived from human-inducedpluripotent stem cell-derived mesenchymal stromal cells was studied in hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury. The administration of such exosomes showed promising effects inthe recovery of hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury, with suppressed inﬂammatory re-
sponses, attenuated oxidative stress responses, and inhibited cellular apoptosis, pointingto exosomes as a viable therapeutic option for liver diseases [347].12. Cardiovascular DiseasesCardiovascular diseases (CVDs), such as heart failure and coronary artery disease, aresome of the prime causes of morbidities and mortalities in the United States, accounting fora total of around 655,000 attributable fatalities per year and are associated with immensehealth and ﬁnancial expenditure [ 348,349]. Conventional CVD therapies primarily consistof transplantations and therapeutics; however, receiving a transplant can be a very drawn-out process, and therapeutics have limited clinical efﬁcacy. Therefore, focus has shifted tothe development and validation of new therapeutics, with numerous cell-based therapeuticinterventions initiated for the treatment of CVDs. Though cell-based treatment methods are
promising, they face challenges such as low engraftment, poor survival rate of transplant
interventions initiated for the treatment of CVDs. Though cell-based treatment methods arepromising, they face challenges such as low engraftment, poor survival rate of transplantcells, tumorigenesis potential, and immune rejection. Intriguingly, recent experimental datahave suggested that myocardial protective functions through autocrine and/or paracrineactions of cell-based therapies may be achieved via through exosomes (Figure 7) [ 350,351].Exosomes have major roles physiological and pathological cardiovascular processes includ-ing regulation of angiogenesis, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, cardiac ﬁbrosis, blood pressure
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 25 of 48control, and anti-apoptotic effect (survival) have been broadly acknowledged. Additionally,in the heart, cells including cardiomyocytes, cardiac ﬁbroblasts, endothelial, vascular, car-diac progenitors, and stem cells release exosomes [ 352–360]. Moreover, exosomes lack someof the issues of cell-based therapies due to their low immunogenicity, minimal embolismrisk, and biocompatibility, and can be delivered to the heart in a variety of ways, includingengineered exosomes, endogenous exosomes, targeted exosomes, or exosomes containedin a patch [ 361,362]. The heart undergoes extensive cardiac remodeling following cardiacstressors such as myocardial infarction (MI) ,to restore contractile function. Numerousstudies have indicated that after cardiac stressors, endogenous exosomes can ameliorateheart function (Figure 7) [ 363–365]. This demonstrates that exosomes can have effectivetherapeutic utility in the treatment of CVDs.
therapeutic utility in the treatment of CVDs.The therapeutic potential of exosome-based cell-free therapy for CVDs applies toseveral diseases including MI, atherosclerosis, and dilated cardiomyopathy. The cardio-protective effect of exosomes can be augmented by pretreatments like hypoxia precondi-tioning, gene programming, or drug intervention [ 294,366,367]. In MI increasing evidencehas shown that the administration of exosomes can enhance cardiac repair. For example,a study has revealed that MSC-Exos improve cardiac function by down-regulating theexpression of CD68 [ 163]. Exosomes obtained from miR-146a-modiﬁed adipose-derivedstem cells (ADSCExos) have been shown to attenuates acute MI-induced myocardial dam-age by suppressing the local inﬂammatory response through inhibition of the release ofproinﬂammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1 β, and TNF-α). The same report further demon-strated that ADSCExos improves cardiac functions by arresting cardiomyocyte apoptosis
via early growth response factor 1 downregulation [ 368].Huang and coworkers havediscovered that exosomes from atorvastatin (ATV)-pretreated MSC (MSCATV-Exos) ame-liorated cardiac dysfunction and reduced infarct area by diminishing IL-6 and TNF- αlevels,promoting angiogenesis, and preventing apoptosis following MI. MSCATV-Exos are abun-dant in lncRNA H19 that regulates miR-675 expression and activation of pro-angiogenicfactors [ 366]. Adipose-derived stromal cells (ADSC)-derived miR-93-5p-containing exo-somes are also beneﬁcial in the treatment of MI by conferring protection against autophagy,apoptosis, and inﬂammation [ 369]. Separately, in a mouse model of MI, hypoxia-derivedexosomal miR125b-5p exerts cardioprotective function and enhances cardiac repair bysuppressing the expression of pro-apoptotic genes p53and BAK1 , thus inhibiting cardiomy-ocyte apoptosis [370].The therapeutic promise of exosomes has also been investigated in the treatment
of atherosclerosis. MSC-Exos serve a protective role in hindering the progression ofatherosclerosis by inducing M1 →M2 macrophage polarization through up-regulation ofmiR-let7 [ 371], an effect also displayed in different animal models of ischemia-reperfusion(I/R) injury [ 372,373]. Post myocardial I/R injury, exosomes aid in cardiac repair andcontract myocardial infarct size by limiting cardiac ﬁbroblast proliferation, creating ananti-inﬂammation microenvironment, and improving cardiac function mainly via theshuttling of miRNAs (miR-182, miR-146a, miR-181b, and miR-126) [ 372,373]. In addition,Lankford and colleagues have shown that the MSC-Exos are effective in dilated cardiomy-opathy, as exosomes reduce ventricular dilation by hampering inﬂammatory cytokinesexpression and enhancing the production of anti-inﬂammatory M2 macrophages overM1 macrophages [ 374]. In chronic heart failure, a study has shown signiﬁcantly elevated
exosomal miR-146 levels, which can inhibit the inﬂammatory response [375].
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 26 of 48Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  25 of 50   cardiovascular processes including regulation of angiogenesis, cardiomyocyte hypertro-phy, cardiac fibrosis, blood press ure control, and anti -apoptotic effect (survival) have been broadly acknowledged. Additionally, in the heart, cells including cardiomyocytes, cardiac fibroblasts, endothelial, vascular, cardiac progenitors, and stem cells  release exosomes  [352–360]. Moreover, exosomes lack some of the issues of cell -based therapies due to their low immunogenicity, minimal embolism risk, and biocompatibility, and can be delivered to the heart in a variety of ways, including engineered exosomes, endogenous exosomes, targeted exosomes, or exosomes contained in a patch  [361,362 ]. The heart undergoes ex-tensive cardiac remodeling following cardiac stressors such as myocardial infarction (MI) , to restore contractile function. Numerous studies have indicated that after cardiac  stress-
ors, endogenous exosomes can ameliorate heart function (Figure 7)  [363–365]. This demonstrates  that exosomes can have effective therapeutic utility in the treatment of CVDs.   (A) Cells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  26 of 50    (B) Figure 7. Stem cell -derived exosomes for cardiac repair therapies.  (A) Exosomes isolated from dif-ferent types of Mesenchymal stem cells carry and deliver proteins, nucleic acids (DNA, miRNAs, mRNAs, and other RNAs) and metabolites to the damage heart tissue, consequently promoting car-dioprotective effects. ( B) Schematic representation of tissue engineering approaches in exosome -based cardiac repair therapies. MSCs or exosomes can be genetically modified with tRNA, miRNA or mRNA to express the desired gene using gene delivery methods or CRISPR/Cas9. MSC -derived exosomes can act as therapeutic vehicles to deliver biological molecules or drug molecules and fur-
ther immersed in scaffolds and delivered as patch, injectable scaffold, or 3D tissue construct to in-crease the functions of exosomes. Similarly, exosomes can b e chemically conjugated with targeted peptides to further enhance efficacy and retention when delivered intravenously.  The therapeutic potential of exosome -based cell -free therapy for CVDs applies to sev-eral diseases including MI, atherosclerosis, and dila ted cardiomyopathy. The cardiopro-tective effect of exosomes can be augmented by pretreatments like hypoxia precondition-ing, gene programming, or drug intervention  [294,366,367] . In MI increasing evidence has shown that the administration of exosomes can enhance cardiac repair.  For example, a study has revealed that MSC -Exos improve cardiac function by down -regulating the ex-pression of CD68  [163] . Exosomes obtained from miR -146a -modified adipose -derived stem cells (ADSCExos) have been shown to attenuates  acute MI -induced myocardial dam-
age by suppressing the local inflammatory response through inhibition of the release of proinflammatory cytokines (IL -6, IL -1β, and TNF -α). The same report further demon-strated that ADSCExos improves cardiac functions by arres ting cardiomyocyte apoptosis via early growth response factor 1 downregulation  [368]. Huang  and coworkers have dis-covered that exosomes from atorvastatin (ATV) -pretreated MSC (MSCATV -Exos) amelio-rated  cardiac dysfunction and reduced infarct area by diminis hing IL -6 and TNF -α levels, promoting angiogenesis, and preventing apoptosis following MI. MSCATV -Exos are abundant in lncRNA H19 that regulates miR -675 expression and activation of pro -angio-genic factors  [366] . Adipose -derived stromal cells (ADSC) -derived  miR-93-5p-containing exosomes are also beneficial in the treatment of MI by conferring protection against au-tophagy, apoptosis, and inflammation  [369]. Separately, in a mouse model of MI, hypoxia -
Figure 7. Stem cell-derived exosomes for cardiac repair therapies. ( A) Exosomes isolated from
tophagy, apoptosis, and inflammation  [369]. Separately, in a mouse model of MI, hypoxia -Figure 7. Stem cell-derived exosomes for cardiac repair therapies. ( A) Exosomes isolated fromdifferent types of mesenchymal stem cells carry and deliver proteins, nucleic acids (DNA, miRNAs,mRNAs, and other RNAs) and metabolites to the damage heart tissue, consequently promotingcardioprotective effects. ( B) Schematic representation of tissue engineering approaches in exosome-based cardiac repair therapies. MSCs or exosomes can be genetically modiﬁed with tRNA, miRNAor mRNA to express the desired gene using gene delivery methods or CRISPR/Cas9. MSC-derivedexosomes can act as therapeutic vehicles to deliver biological molecules or drug molecules andfurther immersed in scaffolds and delivered as patch, injectable scaffold, or 3D tissue construct toincrease the functions of exosomes. Similarly, exosomes can be chemically conjugated with targeted
peptides to further enhance efﬁcacy and retention when delivered intravenously.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 27 of 48Though exosomes are heavily investigated for their therapeutic potential, they arealso capable of propagating detrimental pathology in heart disease. In MI, miR-155-enriched exosomes secreted by activated macrophages were found to negatively regulatesﬁbroblast differentiation and promote inﬂammation, exacerbating cardiac rupture [ 376].In atherosclerosis, Gao et al. reported that dendritic cell-derived exosomes induce theprogression of atherosclerosis by triggering inﬂammatory responses [ 377]. Taken together,although these preliminary studies on CVDs have promising results, there are still manyquestions that must be answered before exosomal treatment can fully achieve a usefulclinical outcome (Figure 7).13. Bone RegenerationBone health is a rising issue and public health concern, as in the United States, approx-imately 850,000 people suffer from bone fractures per year [ 378,379], while approximately
25 million peoples are at high risk for injury due to low bone density [ 380,381]. In thebone remodeling and fracture healing process, osteoclasts reabsorb old or damaged bone,while new bone is synthesized by osteoblasts [ 381,382]. A healing cascade is initiated,leading to the recruitment of inﬂammatory cells, formation of new vessels, and establish-ment of hematoma at the fracture site [ 383]. The management of these bone fracturesincludes autologous and allogeneic transplantation; however, these procedures have aprolonged recovery time and thus increased likelihood of complications. In recent years,tissue engineering-based biomaterials and cell therapies have emerged as major playersin the treatment of bone fractures. Research has identiﬁed that the biological effect ofcell-based therapies is executed largely via exosomes, and as such, exosomal regulation ofbone repair has become a viable therapeutic strategy. Exosomes are secreted by cell types
including osteoblasts, osteoclasts, osteocytes, and bone marrow MSCs, which are known tomediate cellular communication and participate in the regulation of bone microenviron-ment [ 384–390]. Furthermore, numerous studies have corroborated the potential regulatoryroles of exosomes in bone remodeling and fracture healing [ 381,382], suggesting exosomescan be utilized as individualized therapeutic strategies to promote bone tissue repair.Exosomes derived from various sources have been demonstrated to be beneﬁcial inbone repair. Chief amongst them are MSC-Exos, which play a promising role in the in-duction of osteo-differentiational activity through microRNA regulations [ 391]. Exosomesobtained from adipose tissue MSCs, preconditioned with TNF- α, promote primary os-teoblast differentiation by regulating the Wnt pathway [ 392]. Separately, exosomes derivedfrom mineralizing osteoblast cells promote new bone growth through directly regulating
osteoblast proliferation and stimulating the differentiation of osteoblast precursors intomature osteoblasts via mediating miRNA proﬁles. This successively activates downstreamsignaling pathways for bone formation and matrix mineralization [ 384]. Another grouphas reported that exosomes isolated from human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derivedMSCs potently enhance osteo-inductivity of β-TCP through activation of PI3K/AKT path-way [ 393]. Further, this study demonstrated that in an immunocompetent rat osteochondraldefect model, the MSC-Exos promote cartilage regeneration by enhancing early cellularinﬁltration and proliferation, inducing synovial macrophage polarization, and exhibitinganti-apoptotic activity [393].Bone remodeling is a long-lasting process in which can exosomes play crucial regula-tory roles. Exosomes derived from osteoblasts stimulate the differentiation of osteoclastsin vivo , and as such exosome treatment can be used to enhance the removal of damaged
tissue [ 394,395]. It has also been revealed that in a femur fracture model of CD9−/−mice,
in vivo , and as such exosome treatment can be used to enhance the removal of damagedtissue [ 394,395]. It has also been revealed that in a femur fracture model of CD9−/−mice,which lacks exosome production, there is a delay of callus formation resulting in remissionof a bone union. Providing further support for the beneﬁcial role of exosomes in bonerepair, the administration of MSC-Exos rescued this delayed repair [ 396]. The same studyfurther explained that, when compared to exosomes isolated from MSCs cultured in pre-conditioned media, control exosomes were deprived of bone repair-related cytokines suchas monocyte chemotactic protein-1(MCP-1), MCP-3, and stromal cell-derived factor-1 [ 396].
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 28 of 48In a rat osteochondral defect model, the intra-articular administration of human embryonicMSC-Exos induces an enhanced gross appearance and improved histological scores; by12 weeks of treatment, the cartilage and subchondral bone was fully restored [ 397]. Inaddition, studies have shown that overactivated inﬂammatory response or inﬂammationattenuation results in either bone tissue damage or accumulation of necrotic tissue, respec-tively [ 398–400]. MSC-Exos are shown to diminish inﬂammation-based delay of fracturehealing by effectively suppressing levels of proinﬂammation factors IL-1 βand TNF-α,whereas increasing levels of anti-inﬂammatory factor TGF- β[401].Vascularization is an important event in bone formation as it improves diffusion ofoxygen and nutritional components that are crucial for new bone formation [ 402]. Variousreports have demonstrated the involvement exosomes in the activities of endothelial cells
(ECs) including migration, proliferation, and tube formation. Exosomes derived fromendothelial progenitor cells induce the formation of vessel-like structures both in vitro andin vivo by activating eNOS and PI3K/AKT pathways in human umbilical vein endothe-lial cells and human mammalian ECs [ 403]. In addition, the contribution of MSC-Exosin angiogenesis is well established [ 404,405]. Researchers have shown that MSC-Exosare internalized into tissue engineering-based matrix, which results in pro-angiogenicand pro-osteogenic activities, suggesting exosomes may regulate synergistic bone re-generation and enhance angiogenesis [ 406]. Moreover, in an in vivo study, MSC-Exosdelivered to osteoporotic rats had elevated angiogenesis and osteogenesis eight weekspost-administration [ 407]. However, the coupling underlying mechanisms of angiogenesisand osteogenesis is still unclear.A primary mechanism of action is osteopathic repair is through microRNA activity and
regulation, many of which have been identiﬁed within exosomes. For example, researchershave identiﬁed that miR-199b is involved in the regulation of Runx 2, a master transcrip-tion factor for osteoblast and osteocyte differentiation [ 391]. Let-7 positively regulatesosteogenesis and new bone formation by downregulating high-mobility group AT-hook2 expression [ 408], while upregulated levels of miR-135b signiﬁcantly inhibit osteogenicdifferentiation of MSCs [ 409]. In both human MSCs and human unrestricted somatic stemcells, miR-221 downregulation showed to stimulate osteogenic differentiation [ 410]. Thecrucial role of miR-21 in enhancing the rate of fracture healing has also been illustratedin a rat closed femur fracture model [ 411]. miR-21 rich exosomes possess anti-apoptoticproperties and can contribute to osteoblastogenesis through the regulation of small mothersagainst decapentaplegic 7 (Smad7) and modulating PI3K/ β-catenin pathways [ 412,413].
Exosomes can also serve as a biomarker, as altered miRNA proﬁles in MSC-Exos havebeen discovered during osteogenesis [ 391]. Therefore, the involvement of specializedcargo within exosomes enriched with speciﬁc factors such as miRNA, cytokines, or growthfactors can play vital roles during bone repair and diagnostics [ 396]. This collective dataand positive outcomes provided new insight for exosome-based synergetic therapy forbone fracture healing.14. COVID-19In late 2019, Chinese health authorities reported an outbreak of pneumonia of un-known origin in the city of Wuhan [ 414–416]. This led to the occurrence of a global pan-demic, now known as COVID-19, resulting in thousands of deaths and infecting millionsof people across the world (https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html accessed 25 June 2021).COVID-19 has had an enormous destabilizing impact on society, including the healthcaresector and economies of even the most developed nations. A novel coronavirus named
2019-nCoV (later renamed as SARS-CoV-2) is known to be the causative agent and was
sector and economies of even the most developed nations. A novel coronavirus named2019-nCoV (later renamed as SARS-CoV-2) is known to be the causative agent and wasﬁrst isolated from the airway epithelial cells of a patient [ 414–416]. SARS-CoV-2 was ﬁrstsequenced in China and found to be different from previously identiﬁed viruses includingMERS-CoV and SARS-CoV . It is now considered as the seventh member of the familyof coronaviruses that are known to infect humans. SARS-CoV-2 is mainly transmittedvia droplets within individuals of a susceptible population. It has also been shown to
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 29 of 48survive on glass and banknotes surfaces for 24–72 h [ 417]. However, the exact molecularmechanism of infection from SARS-CoV-2 is currently unknown.MSCs have been substantially investigated as useful tools for stem cell-based therapyof degenerative diseases, cardiovascular disease, and lung diseases due to properties suchas high proliferation rate, high differentiation, and vast source potential. Recently, severalstudies have posited that COVID-19 can hijack the immune system of the body and triggeran overreaction, ultimately leading to extreme inﬂammation and organ damage. In COVID-19, following its infection of the lungs, SARS CoV-2 virus triggers an immune responseof cytokine secretion along with other immune cells, resulting in a hyper inﬂammationcondition called cytokine storm. Numerous studies have shown that MSCs can interactwith and regulate the function of immune cells such as B cells, DCs, natural killer cells,
macrophages, T cells, and neutrophils [ 418–420]. In COVID-19, the SARS-CoV-2 enters thebody by binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), an enzyme located on themembrane of many cell types, including those in the lung [ 421,422]. MSCs do not containany ACE2 receptors, making them immune to SARS-CoV-2. Recent research has found thattransplanting MSCs in COVID-19 patients has immunomodulatory effects that can preventthe cytokine storm and decrease the damage to tissues through the regenerative potentialof MSCs [423,424].Interestingly, several studies have demonstrated that exosomes derived from MSCssuppress cytokine release and reduce the level of inﬂammation [ 418,425,426]. In additionto this, Dinh et al. showed that exosomes can help in lung regeneration in pulmonaryﬁbrosis conditions [ 250]. Therefore, exosomes could possibly be used in the treatment ofcritically ill COVID-19 patients in combination with other therapies (Figure 8). To date,
more than 90 MSCs based studies for respiratory diseases have been registered for clinicaltrials (https://clinicaltrials.gov, accessed 25 June 2021). In addition, Ruijin hospital inChina registered a pilot clinical study to explore the inhalation of exosomes derived fromallogenic adipose MSCs in patients critically ill with COVID-19 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁer:NCT04276987). Similarly, several other, similar clinical trial studies have been registeredworldwide (Table 9). Therefore, there is growing evidence that the use of MSC-Exos inCOVID-19 therapy may limit the respiratory complications in patients.Table 9. List of registered exosome cell based clinical trials for the treatment of COVID-19.Registration Number Study Topic Cell Source Type of StudyNCT04276987A Pilot Clinical Study on Inhalationof Mesenchymal Stem CellsExosomes Treating Severe NovelCoronavirus PneumoniaAdipose MSC-derivedexosomeBiological:MSCs-derived exosomesNCT04493242Extracellular Vesicle Infusion
NCT04493242Extracellular Vesicle InfusionTherapy for Severe COVID-19(EXIT COVID-19)Bone marrow derivedextracellular vesicles.Intervention studyNCT04389385COVID-19 Speciﬁc T Cell DerivedExosomes (CSTC-Exo)COVID-19 Speciﬁc T Cellderived exosomes (CSTC-Exo)Intervention studyNCT04384445Zoﬁn (Organicell Flow) for PatientsWith COVID-19Human amniotic ﬂuidderived exosomesIntervention studyNCT04902183Safety and Efﬁcacy of ExosomesOverexpressing CD24 in Two Dosesfor Patients With Moderate orSevere COVID-19- Intervention studyNCT04747574Evaluation of the Safety ofCD24-Exosomes in Patients WithCOVID-19 Infection- Intervention studyNCT04491240Evaluation of Safety and Efﬁciencyof Method of Exosome Inhalation inSARS-CoV-2 AssociatedPneumonia. (COVID-19EXO)- Intervention study
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 30 of 48Table 9. Cont.Registration Number Study Topic Cell Source Type of StudyNCT04798716The Use of Exosomes for theTreatment of Acute RespiratoryDistress Syndrome or NovelCoronavirus Pneumonia Caused byCOVID-19 (ARDOXSO)MSC-exosomes Intervention studyNCT04657406Expanded Access to ZoﬁnTM(OrganicellTM Flow) for PatientsWith COVID-19MSC-exosomes Intervention studyChiCTR2000030484Clinical application of umbilicalcord mesenchymal stem cellscombined with intravenousexosome infusion to repair lunginjury of new coronaviruspneumonia (COVID-19)Adipose MSC-derivedexosomeIntervention studyChiCTR2000030261Bone marrow derivedextracellular vesicles.Intervention studyCells 2021 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  30 of 50    Figure 8. Schematic representation of role of cytokine storm in SARS -CoV -2 infection and possible therapeutic effects of  MSCs and MSC -derived exosomes. (A) Pathogenesis of SARS -CoV -2; SARS -CoV -2 virus target s the lung epithelial cells.
During this process, immune cells such as macrophages identify the virus particles and start to produce pro -inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines attract more immune cells, which in turn enhance the cytokine production. This creates a cycle of inflammation that damages the lung cells through the formation of fibrin. This damage results in weakened blood vessels, allowing fluid to seep in and fill the lung cavities, leading to respiratory failure and failure in multiple organs.  MSCs and MSC -derived exosomes have the potent ability to suppress the inflammatory responses and prevent the pro-gression towards multiple organ failure.  (B) Putative mechanisms of MSC and MSC -derived exosome therapy in severe SARS -CoV2 cases; MSCs and MSC -derived exosomes have the potent ability to suppress the inflammatory responses and prevent the progression towards multiple organ failure. Isolated MSCs cultured in conditioned media that induces the
release of exosomes. The MSCs identify the extracellul ar signals and start the packaging of several regulatory factors into exosomes that are released into the conditioned medium. These exosomes contain different growth factors, metabolic enzymes, molecules involved in immunomodulation, cytokine receptors, mo lecules important for cell division and pro-liferation, DNA, and regulatory miRNAs. In MSC -derived exosome therapy, exosomes are administered intravenously or via aerosol inhalation. The administered exosomes inhibit inflammatory cytokines and other immune regulatory cells which results in the suppression of the cytokine storm.  Table 9. List of registered exosome cell based clinical trials for the treatment of COVID -19. Registration Number  Study Topic  Cell Source  Type of Study  NCT04276987  A Pilot Clinical Study on Inhalation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Exosomes Treating Severe Novel  Coronavirus Pneumonia  Adipose MSC -derived exosome  Biological: MSCs -
derived exosomes  NCT04493242  Extracellular Vesicle Infusion Therapy for Severe COVID -19 (EXIT COVID -19) Bone marrow derived extracellu-lar vesicles.  Intervention study  NCT04389385  COVID -19 Specific T Cell Derived Exo-somes (CSTC -Exo)  COVID -19 Specific T Cell derived exosomes (CSTC -Exo)  Intervention study  NCT04384445  Zofin (Organicell Flow) for Patients With COVID -19 Human amniotic fluid derived exosomes  Intervention study  NCT04902183  Safety and Efficacy of Exosomes Over-expressing CD24 in Two Doses for Pa-tients With Moderate or Severe COVID -19 - Intervention study  Figure 8. Schematic representation of role of cytokine storm in SARS-CoV-2 infection and possible therapeutic effects ofMSCs and MSC-derived exosomes. ( A) Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2; SARS-CoV-2 virus targets the lung epithelial cells.During this process, immune cells such as macrophages identify the virus particles and start to produce pro-inﬂammatory
During this process, immune cells such as macrophages identify the virus particles and start to produce pro-inﬂammatorycytokines. These cytokines attract more immune cells, which in turn enhance the cytokine production. This creates a cycle ofinﬂammation that damages the lung cells through the formation of ﬁbrin. This damage results in weakened blood vessels,allowing ﬂuid to seep in and ﬁll the lung cavities, leading to respiratory failure and failure in multiple organs. MSCsand MSC-derived exosomes have the potent ability to suppress the inﬂammatory responses and prevent the progressiontowards multiple organ failure. ( B) Putative mechanisms of MSC and MSC-derived exosome therapy in severe SARS-CoV2cases; MSCs and MSC-derived exosomes have the potent ability to suppress the inﬂammatory responses and preventthe progression towards multiple organ failure. Isolated MSCs cultured in conditioned media that induces the release of
exosomes. The MSCs identify the extracellular signals and start the packaging of several regulatory factors into exosomesthat are released into the conditioned medium. These exosomes contain different growth factors, metabolic enzymes,molecules involved in immunomodulation, cytokine receptors, molecules important for cell division and proliferation,DNA, and regulatory miRNAs. In MSC-derived exosome therapy, exosomes are administered intravenously or via aerosolinhalation. The administered exosomes inhibit inﬂammatory cytokines and other immune regulatory cells which results inthe suppression of the cytokine storm.
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 31 of 4815. Conclusions and PerceptiveIn recent years, it has been established that exosomes have modulatory potentialand play a critical role in diverse biological processes. Exosomes show tremendous ther-apeutic potential for disorders including chronic wound healing, neurological damages,and cardiovascular dysfunction. Exosomes have also gained widespread attention in theﬁeld of biomarker research and are now even being seen as an alternative strategy tostem cell-based regenerative therapies. Exosomes can be genetically engineered to de-liver distinct therapeutic moieties to a desired target. These cargos include recombinantproteins, antagomirs, short interfering RNAs, antisense oligonucleotides, and immunemodulators [427].Although exosomes have attained significant achievements in several therapies, challengesremain. While numerous proteins, RNAs, lipids, and metabolic enzymes (Tables 2–4) have
been identiﬁed in exosomes, little is known about their functions and sorting mechanisms.Exosomal cargo is also highly dependent on surrounding milieu and metabolic status ofhost cells. It remains ambiguous whether natural, physiological levels of small vesiclesexert any pathological or regulatory roles in vivo . Despite several exosomal studies inchronic wound healing and skin regeneration, the exact molecular mechanism and therole of exosomes in these processes require further investigations. Additionally, for betterexploitation of exosomes, an extensive study is needed in the areas of biogenesis, cellularuptake, and trafﬁcking of exosomes. Moreover, other critical challenges involving theuse of exosomes in regenerative medicine require further investigations, such as isolation,puriﬁcation, optimization, standardization, quality control, and further exploration ofmolecular mechanisms of exosome communication with target cells. Overall, the potential
of exosomes derived from various sources in regenerative medicine and tissue engineeringis highly promising.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.D.H. and C.N.S.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation,M.D.H. and C.N.S.; Visualization, M.D.H.; Writing—Review and Editing, M.D.H., C.N.S., and Z.S.Supervision, Z.S.; Funding Acquisition, Z.S. All authors have read and agreed to the publishedversion of the manuscript.Funding: This work was supported by the Florida State University startup fund to Z.S.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: No new data were created in this study. Data sharing is not applicableto this article.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors have declared that no conﬂict of interest exists.References1. Stremersch, S.; Vandenbroucke, R.E.; Van Wonterghem, E.; Hendrix, A.; De Smedt, S.C.; Raemdonck, K. Comparing exosome-like
vesicles with liposomes for the functional cellular delivery of small RNAs. J. Control. Release 2016 ,232, 51–61. [CrossRef]2. Théry, C.; Zitvogel, L.; Amigorena, S. Exosomes: Composition, biogenesis and function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2002 ,2, 569–579.[CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Witwer, K.W.; Buz ás, E.I.; Bemis, L.T.; Bora, A.; Lässer, C.; Lötvall, J.; Nolte-’t Hoen, E.N.; Piper, M.G.; Sivaraman, S.; Skog, J.; et al.Standardization of sample collection, isolation and analysis methods in extracellular vesicle research. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2013 ,2.[CrossRef] [PubMed]4. Blans, K.; Hansen, M.S.; Sørensen, L.V .; Hvam, M.L.; Howard, K.A.; Moeller, A.; Wiking, L.; Larsen, L.B.; Rasmussen, J.T.Pellet-free isolation of human and bovine milk extracellular vesicles by size-exclusion chromatography. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2017 ,6, 1294340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6, 1294340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Clayton, A.; Boilard, E.; I Buzas, E.; Cheng, L.; Falc ón-Perez, J.M.; Gardiner, C.; Gustafson, D.; Gualerzi, A.; Hendrix, A.; Hoffman,A.; et al. Considerations towards a roadmap for collection, handling and storage of blood extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell.
A.; et al. Considerations towards a roadmap for collection, handling and storage of blood extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1647027. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Gallo, A.; Tandon, M.; Alevizos, I.; Illei, G.G. The Majority of MicroRNAs Detectable in Serum and Saliva Is Concentrated inExosomes. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e30679. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 32 of 487. Iwai, K.; Minamisawa, T.; Suga, K.; Yajima, Y.; Shiba, K. Isolation of human salivary extracellular vesicles by iodixanol densitygradient ultracentrifugation and their characterizations. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 30829. [CrossRef]8. Kalani, M.Y.S.; Alsop, E.; Meechoovet, B.; Beecroft, T.; Agrawal, K.; Whitsett, T.; Huentelman, M.J.; Spetzler, R.F.; Nakaji, P .; Kim,S.; et al. Extracellular microRNAs in blood differentiate between ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke subtypes. J. Extracell. Vesicles2020 ,9, 1713540. [CrossRef]9. Simpson, R.J.; Lim, J.W.; Moritz, R.L.; Mathivanan, S. Exosomes: Proteomic insights and diagnostic potential. Expert Rev. Proteom.2009 ,6, 267–283. [CrossRef]10. Srinivasan, S.; Duval, M.; Kaimal, V .; Cuff, C.; Clarke, S.H. Assessment of methods for serum extracellular vesicle small RNAsequencing to support biomarker development. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1684425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Taylor, D.D.; Gercel-Taylor, C. MicroRNA signatures of tumor-derived exosomes as diagnostic biomarkers of ovarian cancer.Gynecol. Oncol. 2008 ,110, 13–21. [CrossRef]12. Zonneveld, M.; Brisson, A.R.; van Herwijnen, M.; Tan, S.; Van De Lest, C.H.A.; Redegeld, F.A.; Garssen, J.; Wauben, M.; Hoen,E.N.M.N.-. ’T Recovery of extracellular vesicles from human breast milk is inﬂuenced by sample collection and vesicle isolationprocedures. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Harding, C.; Stahl, P . Transferrin recycling in reticulocytes: pH and iron are important determinants of ligand binding andprocessing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1983 ,113, 650–658. [CrossRef]14. Pan, B.-T.; Johnstone, R.M. Fate of the transferrin receptor during maturation of sheep reticulocytes in vitro : Selective externaliza-tion of the receptor. Cell1983 ,33, 967–978. [CrossRef]
15. Pan, B.T.; Teng, K.; Wu, C.; Adam, M.; Johnstone, R.M. Electron microscopic evidence for externalization of the transferrinreceptor in vesicular form in sheep reticulocytes. J. Cell Biol. 1985 ,101, 942–948. [CrossRef]16. Johnstone, R.M.; Adam, M.; Hammond, J.R.; Orr, L.; Turbide, C. Vesicle formation during reticulocyte maturation. Association ofplasma membrane activities with released vesicles (exosomes). J. Biol. Chem. 1987 ,262, 9412–9420. [CrossRef]17. Bobrie, A.; Colombo, M.; Raposo, G.; Th éry, C. Exosome Secretion: Molecular Mechanisms and Roles in Immune Responses.Trafﬁc 2011 ,12, 1659–1668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]18. Johnstone, R.M. Maturation of reticulocytes: Formation of exosomes as a mechanism for shedding membrane proteins. Biochem.Cell Biol. 1992 ,70, 179–190. [CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Pant, S.; Hilton, H.; Burczynski, M.E. The multifaceted exosome: Biogenesis, role in normal and aberrant cellular function, and
frontiers for pharmacological and biomarker opportunities. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2012 ,83, 1484–1494. [CrossRef]20. Colombo, M.; Raposo, G.; Th éry, C. Biogenesis, secretion, and intercellular interactions of exosomes and other extracellularvesicles. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2014 ,30, 255–289. [CrossRef]21. Miller, I.V .; Grünewald, T.G.P . Tumour-derived exosomes: Tiny envelopes for big stories. Biol. Cell 2015 ,107, 287–305. [CrossRef][PubMed]22. Bunggulawa, E.J.; Wang, W.; Yin, T.; Wang, N.; Durkan, C.; Wang, Y.; Wang, G. Recent advancements in the use of exosomes asdrug delivery systems 06 biological sciences 0601 biochemistry and cell biology. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018 ,16, 81. [CrossRef]23. Ha, D.; Yang, N.; Nadithe, V . Exosomes as therapeutic drug carriers and delivery vehicles across biological membranes: Currentperspectives and future challenges. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 2016 ,6, 287–296. [CrossRef]
24. O’Loughlin, C.A.W.A.M.J.W.A.J.; Wofﬁndale, C.; Wood, M. Exosomes and the Emerging Field of Exosome-Based Gene Therapy.Curr. Gene Ther. 2012 ,12, 262–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. O’Loughlin, C.A.W.A.M.J.W.A.J.; Wofﬁndale, C.; Wood, M. Exosomes and the Emerging Field of Exosome-Based Gene Therapy.Curr. Gene Ther. 2012 ,12, 262–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Saari, H.; Turunen, T.; L õhmus, A.; Turunen, M.; Jalasvuori, M.; Butcher, S.J.; Ylä-Herttuala, S.; Viitala, T.; Cerullo, V .; Siljander,P .R.M.; et al. Extracellular vesicles provide a capsid-free vector for oncolytic adenoviral DNA delivery. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2020 ,9,1747206. [CrossRef]26. Lai, R.C.; Yeo, R.W.Y.; Tan, K.H.; Lim, S.K. Exosomes for drug delivery—A novel application for the mesenchymal stem cell.Biotechnol. Adv. 2013 ,31, 543–551. [CrossRef]27. Min, L.; Zhu, S.; Chen, L.; Liu, X.; Wei, R.; Zhao, L.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Kong, G.; Li, P .; et al. Evaluation of circulating smallextracellular vesicles derived miRNAs as biomarkers of early colon cancer: A comparison with plasma total miRNAs. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1643670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1643670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Bjørge, I.M.; Kim, S.Y.; Mano, J.F.; Kalionis, B.; Chrzanowski, W. Extracellular vesicles, exosomes and shedding vesicles inregenerative medicine—A new paradigm for tissue repair. Biomater. Sci. 2018 ,6, 60–78. [CrossRef]29. Yin, K.; Wang, S.; Zhao, R.C. Exosomes from mesenchymal stem/stromal cells: A new therapeutic paradigm. Biomark. Res. 2019 ,7, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]30. Lin, F. Adipose tissue–derived mesenchymal stem cells: A fat chance of curing kidney disease? Kidney Int. 2012 ,82, 731–733.[CrossRef]31. A Pelekanos, R.; Sardesai, V .S.; Futrega, K.; Lott, W.B.; Kuhn, M.; Doran, M.R. Isolation and Expansion of MesenchymalStem/Stromal Cells Derived from Human Placenta Tissue. J. Vis. Exp. 2016 ,10, e54204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Erices, A.; Conget, P .; Minguell, J.J. Mesenchymal progenitor cells in human umbilical cord blood. Br. J. Haematol. 2000 ,109,235–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
235–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Alonso-Goulart, V .; Ferreira, L.B.; Duarte, C.A.; de Lima, I.L.; Ferreira, E.R.; de Oliveira, B.C.; Vargas, L.N.; de Moraes, D.D.; Silva,I.B.B.; Faria, R.D.O.; et al. Mesenchymal stem cells from human adipose tissue and bone repair: A literature review. Biotechnol.Res. Innov. 2018 ,2, 74–80. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 33 of 4834. Meirelles, L.D.S.; Chagastelles, P .C.; Nardi, N.B. Mesenchymal stem cells reside in virtually all post-natal organs and tissues. J.Cell Sci. 2006 ,119 Pt 11 , 2204–2213. [CrossRef]35. Gang, E.J.; Jeong, J.A.; Hong, S.H.; Hwang, S.H.; Kim, S.W.; Yang, I.H.; Ahn, C.; Han, H.J.; Kim, H. Skeletal MyogenicDifferentiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Isolated from Human Umbilical Cord Blood. Stem Cells 2004 ,22, 617–624. [CrossRef]36. Crapnell, K.; Blaesius, R.; Hastings, A.; Lennon, D.P .; Caplan, A.; Bruder, S.P . Growth, differentiation capacity, and functionof mesenchymal stem cells expanded in serum-free medium developed via combinatorial screening. Exp. Cell Res. 2013 ,319,1409–1418. [CrossRef]37. De Mayo, T.; Conget, P .; Becerra-Bayona, S.M.; Sossa, C.; Galvis, V .; Arango-Rodr íguez, M.L. The role of bone marrow mesenchy-mal stromal cell derivatives in skin wound healing in diabetic mice. PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0177533. [CrossRef]
38. Gnecchi, M.; Danieli, P .; Malpasso, G.; Ciuffreda, M.C. Paracrine Mechanisms of Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Tissue Repair.Methods Mol. Biol. 2016 ,1416 , 123–146. [CrossRef]39. Kucharzewski, M.; Rojczyk, E.; Wilemska-Kucharzewska, K.; Wilk, R.; Hudecki, J.; Los, M.J. Novel trends in application of stemcells in skin wound healing. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2019 ,843, 307–315. [CrossRef]40. Lou, P .; Liu, S.; Xu, X.; Pan, C.; Lu, Y.; Liu, J. Extracellular vesicle-based therapeutics for the regeneration of chronic wounds:Current knowledge and future perspectives. Acta Biomater. 2021 ,119, 42–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]41. Walter, M.; Wright, K.; Fuller, H.; MacNeil, S.; Johnson, W. Mesenchymal stem cell-conditioned medium accelerates skin woundhealing: An in vitro study of ﬁbroblast and keratinocyte scratch assays. Exp. Cell Res. 2010 ,316, 1271–1281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Barreca, M.M.; Cancemi, P .; Geraci, F. Mesenchymal and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells-Derived Extracellular Vesicles: The NewFrontier for Regenerative Medicine? Cells 2020 ,9, 1163. [CrossRef]43. Drommelschmidt, K.; Serdar, M.; Bendix, I.; Herz, J.; Bertling, F.; Prager, S.; Keller, M.; Ludwig, A.-K.; Duhan, V .; Radtke, S.; et al.Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles ameliorate inﬂammation-induced preterm brain injury. Brain Behav. Immun.2017 ,60, 220–232. [CrossRef]44. Nakano, M.; Nagaishi, K.; Konari, N.; Saito, Y.; Chikenji, T.S.; Mizue, Y.; Fujimiya, M. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stemcells improve diabetes-induced cognitive impairment by exosome transfer into damaged neurons and astrocytes. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 24805. [CrossRef]45. Rani, S.; Ryan, A.E.; Grifﬁn, M.D.; Ritter, T. Mesenchymal Stem Cell-derived Extracellular Vesicles: Toward Cell-free TherapeuticApplications. Mol. Ther. 2015 ,23, 812–823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Yang, Y.; Ye, Y.; Su, X.; He, J.; Bai, W.; He, X. MSCs-Derived Exosomes and Neuroinﬂammation, Neurogenesis and Therapy ofTraumatic Brain Injury. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2017 ,11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]47. Lai, R.C.; Arslan, F.; Lee, M.M.; Sze, N.S.K.; Choo, A.; Chen, T.S.; Salto-Tellez, M.; Timmers, L.; Lee, C.N.; El Oakley, R.M.; et al.Exosome secreted by MSC reduces myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. Stem Cell Res. 2010 ,4, 214–222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Shabbir, A.; Cox, A.; Rodriguez-Menocal, L.; Salgado, M.; Van Badiavas, E. Mesenchymal Stem Cell Exosomes Induce Proliferationand Migration of Normal and Chronic Wound Fibroblasts, and Enhance Angiogenesis In Vitro. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 ,24, 1635–1647.[CrossRef]49. Zhang, B.; Yin, Y.; Lai, R.C.; Tan, S.S.; Choo, A.B.H.; Lim, S.K. Mesenchymal Stem Cells Secrete Immunologically Active Exosomes.Stem Cells Dev. 2014 ,23, 1233–1244. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Zhang, J.; Guan, J.; Niu, X.; Shangchun, G.; Guo, S.; Li, Q.; Xie, Z.; Zhang, C.; Wang, Y. Exosomes released from human induced
Stem Cells Dev. 2014 ,23, 1233–1244. [CrossRef] [PubMed]50. Zhang, J.; Guan, J.; Niu, X.; Shangchun, G.; Guo, S.; Li, Q.; Xie, Z.; Zhang, C.; Wang, Y. Exosomes released from human inducedpluripotent stem cells-derived MSCs facilitate cutaneous wound healing by promoting collagen synthesis and angiogenesis. J.Transl. Med. 2015 ,13, 49. [CrossRef]51. Zhang, Y.; Chopp, M.; Meng, Y.; Katakowski, M.; Xin, H.; Mahmood, A.; Xiong, Y. Effect of exosomes derived from multi-pluripotent mesenchymal stromal cells on functional recovery and neurovascular plasticity in rats after traumatic brain injury. J.Neurosurg. 2015 ,122, 856–867. [CrossRef]52. Bakhtyar, N.; Jeschke, M.G.; Mainville, L.; Herer, E.; Amini-Nik, S. Acellular Gelatinous Material of Human Umbilical CordEnhances Wound Healing: A Candidate Remedy for Deﬁcient Wound Healing. Front. Physiol. 2017 ,8, 200. [CrossRef]
53. Brossa, A.; Fonsato, V .; Grange, C.; Tritta, S.; Tapparo, M.; Calvetti, R.; Cedrino, M.; Fallo, S.; Gontero, P .; Camussi, G.; et al.Extracellular vesicles from human liver stem cells inhibit renal cancer stem cell-derived tumor growth in vitro and in vivo .Int. J.Cancer 2020 ,147, 1694–1706. [CrossRef]54. Budgude, P .; Kale, V .; Vaidya, A. Mesenchymal stromal cell-derived extracellular vesicles as cell-free biologics for the ex vivoexpansion of hematopoietic stem cells. Cell Biol. Int. 2020 ,44, 1078–1102. [CrossRef]55. Grange, C.; Bellucci, L.; Bussolati, B.; Ranghino, A. Potential Applications of Extracellular Vesicles in Solid Organ Transplantation.Cells 2020 ,9, 369. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Katsuda, T.; Tsuchiya, R.; Kosaka, N.; Yoshioka, Y.; Takagaki, K.; Oki, K.; Takeshita, F.; Sakai, Y.; Kuroda, M.; Ochiya, T. Humanadipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells secrete functional neprilysin-bound exosomes. Sci. Rep. 2013 ,3, srep01197.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]57. Shao, M.; Xu, Q.; Wu, Z.; Chen, Y.; Shu, Y.; Cao, X.; Chen, M.; Zhang, B.; Zhou, Y.; Yao, R.; et al. Exosomes derived from humanumbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate IL-6-induced acute liver injury through miR-455-3p. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2020 ,11, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 34 of 4858. Wong, K.L.; Zhang, S.; Wang, M.; Ren, X.; Aﬁzah, H.; Lai, R.C.; Lim, S.K.; Lee, E.H.; Hui, J.H.P .; Toh, W.S. Intra-Articular Injectionsof Mesenchymal Stem Cell Exosomes and Hyaluronic Acid Improve Structural and Mechanical Properties of Repaired Cartilagein a Rabbit Model. Arthrosc. J. Arthrosc. Relat. Surg. 2020 ,36, 2215–2228.e2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]59. Yoon, Y.M.; Lee, J.H.; Song, K.-H.; Noh, H.; Lee, S.H. Melatonin-stimulated exosomes enhance the regenerative potential ofchronic kidney disease-derived mesenchymal stem/stromal cells via cellular prion proteins. J. Pineal Res. 2020 ,68, e12632.[CrossRef] [PubMed]60. Katsuda, T.; Kosaka, N.; Takeshita, F.; Ochiya, T. The therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles.Proteom. 2013 ,13, 1637–1653. [CrossRef]61. Dilsiz, N. Role of exosomes and exosomal microRNAs in cancer. Futur. Sci. OA 2020 ,6, FSO465. [CrossRef]
62. Maeda, Y.; Farina, N.H.; Matzelle, M.M.; Fanning, P .J.; Lian, J.B.; Gravallese, E.M. Synovium-Derived MicroRNAs Regulate BonePathways in Rheumatoid Arthritis. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2017 ,32, 461–472. [CrossRef]63. Ratajczak, J.; Mi˛ ekus, K.; Kucia, M.; Zhang, J.; Reca, R.; Dvorak, P .; Ratajczak, M.Z. Embryonic stem cell-derived microvesiclesreprogram hematopoietic progenitors: Evidence for horizontal transfer of mRNA and protein delivery. Leuk. 2006 ,20, 847–856.[CrossRef]64. Wang, L.; Wang, C.; Jia, X.; Yu, J. Circulating Exosomal miR-17 Inhibits the Induction of Regulatory T Cells via SuppressingTGFBR II Expression in Rheumatoid Arthritis. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 2018 ,50, 1754–1763. [CrossRef]65. Wang, Y.; Zheng, F.; Gao, G.; Yan, S.; Zhang, L.; Wang, L.; Cai, X.; Wang, X.; Xu, D.; Wang, J. MiR-548a-3p regulates inﬂammatoryresponse via TLR4/NF- κB signaling pathway in rheumatoid arthritis. J. Cell. Biochem. 2019 ,120, 1133–1140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Xin, Y.; Yang, Z.; Fei, X.; Ke, L.; Juan, J.; Ting, F.; Xu, Z.; Gu, Z. THU0059 Plasma exosomal mir-92a are involved in the occurrenceand development of bone destruction in ra patients by inhibiting apoptosis of ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. Ann. Rheuma. Dis.2018 ,77, 254–255. [CrossRef]67. Valadi, H.; Ekström, K.; Bossios, A.; Sjöstrand, M.; Lee, J.J.; Lötvall, J.O. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs isa novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 2007 ,9, 654–659. [CrossRef]68. Choi, D.-S.; Kim, D.-K.; Kim, Y.-K.; Gho, Y.S. Proteomics, transcriptomics and lipidomics of exosomes and ectosomes. Proteomics2013 ,13, 1554–1571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]69. Mathieu, M.; Martin-Jaular, L.; Lavieu, G.; Th éry, C. Speciﬁcities of secretion and uptake of exosomes and other extracellularvesicles for cell-to-cell communication. Nat. Cell Biol. 2019 ,21, 9–17. [CrossRef]
70. Skotland, T.; Hessvik, N.P .; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Exosomal lipid composition and the role of ether lipids and phosphoinositidesin exosome biology. J. Lipid Res. 2019 ,60, 9–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]71. Skotland, T.; Sagini, K.; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. An emerging focus on lipids in extracellular vesicles. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2020 ,159, 308–321. [CrossRef]72. Skotland, T.; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Lipids in exosomes: Current knowledge and the way forward. Prog. Lipid Res. 2017 ,66,30–41. [CrossRef]73. Vidal, M.; Sainte-Marie, J.; Philippot, J.R.; Bienvenue, A. Asymmetric distribution of phospholipids in the membrane of vesiclesreleased during in vitro maturation of guinea pig reticulocytes: Evidence precluding a role for ?aminophospholipid translocase?J. Cell. Physiol. 1989 ,140, 455–462. [CrossRef]74. Raposo, G.; Nijman, H.W.; Stoorvogel, W.; Liejendekker, R.; Harding, C.V .; Melief, C.J.; Geuze, H.J. B lymphocytes secrete
antigen-presenting vesicles. J. Exp. Med. 1996 ,183, 1161–1172. [CrossRef]
antigen-presenting vesicles. J. Exp. Med. 1996 ,183, 1161–1172. [CrossRef]75. Hanson, P .I.; Cashikar, A. Multivesicular Body Morphogenesis. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012 ,28, 337–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Juan, T.; Fürthauer, M. Biogenesis and function of ESCRT-dependent extracellular vesicles. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2018 ,74, 66–77.[CrossRef] [PubMed]77. Yáñez-M ó, M.; Siljander, P .R.-M.; Andreu, Z.; Zavec, A.B.; Borr às, F.E.; Buzas, E.I.; Buzas, K.; Casal, E.; Cappello, F.; Carvalho, J.;et al. Biological properties of extracellular vesicles and their physiological functions. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 27066. [CrossRef][PubMed]78. Colombo, M.; Moita, C.F.; van Niel, G.; Kowal, J.; Vigneron, J.; Benaroch, P .; Manel, N.; Moita, L.F.; Th éry, C.; Raposo, G. Analysisof ESCRT functions in exosome biogenesis, composition and secretion highlights the heterogeneity of extracellular vesicles. J. CellSci.2013 ,126, 5553–5565. [CrossRef]
Sci.2013 ,126, 5553–5565. [CrossRef]79. Farooqi, A.A.; Desai, N.N.; Qureshi, M.Z.; Nogueira-Librelotto, D.R.; Gasparri, M.L.; Bishayee, A.; Nabavi, S.M.; Curti, V .; Daglia,M. Exosome biogenesis, bioactivities and functions as new delivery systems of natural compounds. Biotechnol. Adv. 2018 ,36,328–334. [CrossRef]80. Grant, B.D.; Donaldson, J.G. Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2009 ,10, 597–608.[CrossRef]81. Kosaka, N.; Iguchi, H.; Yoshioka, Y.; Takeshita, F.; Matsuki, Y.; Ochiya, T. Secretory mechanisms and intercellular transfer ofMicroRNAs in living cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2010 ,285, 17442–17452. [CrossRef]82. Monypenny, J.; Milewicz, H.; Flores-Borja, F.; Weitsman, G.; Cheung, A.; Chowdhury, R.; Burgoyne, T.; Arulappu, A.; Lawler, K.;Barber, P .R.; et al. ALIX Regulates Tumor-Mediated Immunosuppression by Controlling EGFR Activity and PD-L1 Presentation.Cell Rep. 2018 ,24, 630–641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 35 of 4883. Ostrowski, M.; Carmo, N.B.; Krumeich, S.; Fanget, I.; Raposo, G.; Savina, A.; Moita, C.F.; Schauer, K.; Hume, A.N.; Freitas, R.P .;et al. Rab27a and Rab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway. Nat. Cell Biol. 2010 ,12, 19–30. [CrossRef][PubMed]84. Peng, D.; Wang, H.; Li, L.; Ma, X.; Chen, Y.; Zhou, H.; Luo, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Liu, L. miR-34c-5p promotes eradication of acute myeloidleukemia stem cells by inducing senescence through selective RAB27B targeting to inhibit exosome shedding. Leukemia 2018 ,32,1180–1188. [CrossRef]85. Poggio, M.; Hu, T.; Pai, C.-C.; Chu, B.; Belair, C.D.; Chang, A.; Montabana, E.; Lang, U.E.; Fu, Q.; Fong, L.; et al. Suppression ofexosomal PD-L1 induces systemic anti-tumor immunity and memory. Cell2019 ,177, 414.e13–427.e13. [CrossRef]86. Roucourt, B.; Meeussen, S.; Bao, J.; Zimmermann, P .; David, G. Heparanase activates the syndecan-syntenin-ALIX exosome
pathway. Cell Res. 2015 ,25, 412–428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]87. Stenmark, H. Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle trafﬁc. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2009 ,10, 513–525. [CrossRef]88. Wenzel, E.M.; Schultz, S.W.; Schink, K.O.; Pedersen, N.M.; Nähse, V .; Carlson, A.; Brech, A.; Stenmark, H.; Raiborg, C. ConcertedESCRT and clathrin recruitment waves deﬁne the timing and morphology of intraluminal vesicle formation. Nat. Commun. 2018 ,9, 1–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Yang, L.; Peng, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, X.; Ma, Y.; Wu, C.; Fan, Q.; Wei, S.; Li, H.; Liu, J. Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR promotesexosome secretion by regulating RAB35 and SNAP23 in hepatocellular carcinoma. Mol. Cancer 2019 ,18, 1–12. [CrossRef]90. Jahn, R.; Scheller, R.H. SNAREs—Engines for membrane fusion. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2006 ,7, 631–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Hadacek, F. Low-molecular-weight metabolite systems chemistry. Front. Environ. Sci. 2015 ,3, 12. [CrossRef]
92. Llorente, A.; Skotland, T.; Sylvänne, T.; Kauhanen, D.; R óg, T.; Orlowski, A.; Vattulainen, I.; Ekroos, K.; Sandvig, K. Molecularlipidomics of exosomes released by PC-3 prostate cancer cells. Biochim. et Biophys. Acta (BBA) Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 2013 ,1831 ,1302–1309. [CrossRef]93. Mittelbrunn, M.; Gutierrez-Vazquez, C.; Villarroya-Beltri, C.; Gonz ález, S.; Sanchez-Cabo, F.; Gonz ález, M. Á.; Bernad, A.;Sánchez-Madrid, F. Unidirectional transfer of microRNA-loaded exosomes from T cells to antigen-presenting cells. Nat. Commun.2011 ,2, 282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]94. Montecalvo, A.; Larregina, A.T.; Shufesky, W.J.; Beer Stolz, D.; Sullivan, M.L.G.; Karlsson, J.M.; Baty, C.J.; Gibson, G.A.; Erdos, G.;Wang, Z.; et al. Mechanism of transfer of functional microRNAs between mouse dendritic cells via exosomes. Blood 2012 ,119,756–766. [CrossRef]95. Nolte-’t Hoen, E.N.; Buermans, H.P .J.; Waasdorp, M.; Stoorvogel, W.; Wauben, M.H.M.; ’t Hoen Hoen, P .A. Deep sequencing of
RNA from immune cell-derived vesicles uncovers the selective incorporation of small non-coding RNA biotypes with potentialregulatory functions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 ,40, 9272–9285. [CrossRef]96. Raimondo, F.; Morosi, L.; Chinello, C.; Magni, F.; Pitto, M. Advances in membranous vesicle and exosome proteomics improvingbiological understanding and biomarker discovery. Proteomics 2011 ,11, 709–720. [CrossRef] [PubMed]97. Boorn, J.G.V .D.; Daßler, J.; Coch, C.; Schlee, M.; Hartmann, G. Exosomes as nucleic acid nanocarriers. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2013 ,65, 331–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]98. Zebrowska, A.; Skowronek, A.; Wojakowska, A.; Widlak, P .; Pietrowska, M. Metabolome of Exosomes: Focus on Vesicles Releasedby Cancer Cells and Present in Human Body Fluids. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 3461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]99. Keerthikumar, S.; Chisanga, D.; Ariyaratne, D.; Al Saffar, H.; Anand, S.; Zhao, K.; Samuel, M.; Pathan, M.; Jois, M.; Chilamkurti,
N.; et al. ExoCarta: A Web-Based Compendium of Exosomal Cargo. J. Mol. Biol. 2016 ,428, 688–692. [CrossRef]
N.; et al. ExoCarta: A Web-Based Compendium of Exosomal Cargo. J. Mol. Biol. 2016 ,428, 688–692. [CrossRef]100. Mathivanan, S.; Fahner, C.J.; Reid, G.; Simpson, R.J. ExoCarta 2012: Database of exosomal proteins, RNA and lipids. Nucleic AcidsRes. 2011 ,40, D1241–D1244. [CrossRef]101. Mathivanan, S.; Simpson, R.J. ExoCarta: A compendium of exosomal proteins and RNA. Proteomics 2009 ,9, 4997–5000. [CrossRef]102. Simpson, R.J.; Kalra, H.; Mathivanan, S. ExoCarta as a resource for exosomal research. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2012 ,1, 10–3402.[CrossRef]103. Blanchard, N.; Lankar, D.; Faure, F.; Regnault, A.; Dumont, C.; Raposo, G.; Hivroz, C. TCR Activation of Human T Cells Inducesthe Production of Exosomes Bearing the TCR/CD3/ ζComplex. J. Immunol. 2002 ,168, 3235–3241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]104. Kleijmeer, M.J.; Escola, J.M.; UytdeHaag, F.G.; Jakobson, E.; Grifﬁth, J.M.; Osterhaus, A.D.; Stoorvogel, W.; Melief, C.J.; Rabouille,
C.; Geuze, H.J. Antigen Loading of MHC Class I Molecules in the Endocytic Tract. Trafﬁc 2001 ,2, 124–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Van Niel, G.; Raposo, G.; Candalh, C.; Boussac, M.; Hershberg, R.; Cerf-Bensussan, N.; Heyman, M. Intestinal epithelial cellssecrete exosome–like vesicles. Gastroenterology 2001 ,121, 337–349. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Wolfers, J.; Lozier, A.; Raposo, G.; Regnault, A.; Th éry, C.; Masurier, C.; Flament, C.; Pouzieux, S.; Faure, F.; Tursz, T.; et al.Tumor-derived exosomes are a source of shared tumor rejection antigens for CTL cross-priming. Nat. Med. 2001 ,7, 297–303.[CrossRef] [PubMed]107. Zitvogel, L.; Regnault, A.; Lozier, A.; Wolfers, J.; Flament, C.; Tenza, D.; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P .; Raposo, G.; Amigorena, S.Eradication of established murine tumors using a novel cell-free vaccine: Dendritic cell derived exosomes. Nat. Med. 1998 ,4,594–600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
594–600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]108. Raposo, G.; Tenza, D.; Mecheri, S.; Peronet, R.; Bonnerot, C.; Desaymard, C. Accumulation of Major Histocompatibility ComplexClass II Molecules in Mast Cell Secretory Granules and Their Release upon Degranulation. Mol. Biol. Cell 1997 ,8, 2631–2645.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 36 of 48109. Liu, H.; Chen, L.; Peng, Y.; Yu, S.; Liu, J.; Wu, L.; Zhang, L.; Wu, Q.; Chang, X.; Yu, X.; et al. Dendritic cells loaded with tumorderived exosomes for cancer immunotherapy. Oncotarget 2017 ,9, 2887–2894. [CrossRef]110. Rieu, S.; Geminard, C.; Rabesandratana, H.; Sainte-Marie, J.; Vidal, M. Exosomes released during reticulocyte maturation bind toﬁbronectin via integrin α4β1.JBIC J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2000 ,267, 583–590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]111. Théry, C.; Regnault, A.; Garin, J.; Wolfers, J.; Zitvogel, L.; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P .; Raposo, G.; Amigorena, S. MolecularCharacterization of Dendritic Cell-Derived Exosomes. J. Cell Biol. 1999 ,147, 599–610. [CrossRef] [PubMed]112. Skokos, D.; Le Panse, S.; Villa, I.; Rousselle, J.-C.; Peronet, R.; David, B.; Namane, A.; M écheri, S. Mast Cell-Dependent B andT Lymphocyte Activation Is Mediated by the Secretion of Immunologically Active Exosomes. J. Immunol. 2001 ,166, 868–876.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]113. Clayton, A.; Court, J.; Navabi, H.; Adams, M.; Mason, M.D.; A Hobot, J.; Newman, G.R.; Jasani, B. Analysis of antigen presentingcell derived exosomes, based on immuno-magnetic isolation and ﬂow cytometry. J. Immunol. Methods 2001 ,247, 163–174.[CrossRef]114. Escola, J.-M.; Kleijmeer, M.J.; Stoorvogel, W.; Grifﬁth, J.M.; Yoshie, O.; Geuze, H.J. Selective Enrichment of Tetraspan Proteins onthe Internal Vesicles of Multivesicular Endosomes and on Exosomes Secreted by Human B-lymphocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 1998 ,273,20121–20127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Heijnen, H.F.; Schiel, A.E.; Fijnheer, R.; Geuze, H.J.; Sixma, J.J. Activated Platelets Release Two Types of Membrane Vesicles:Microvesicles by Surface Shedding and Exosomes Derived From Exocytosis of Multivesicular Bodies and α-Granules. Blood 1999 ,94, 3791–3799. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94, 3791–3799. [CrossRef] [PubMed]116. Vincent-Schneider, H.; Stumptner-Cuvelette, P .; Lankar, D.; Pain, S.; Raposo, G.; Benaroch, P .; Bonnerot, C. Exosomes bearingHLA-DR1 molecules need dendritic cells to efﬁciently stimulate speciﬁc T cells. Int. Immunol. 2002 ,14, 713–722. [CrossRef]117. Borges, T.J.; Wieten, L.; Van Herwijnen, M.J.C.; Broere, F.; Van Der Zee, R.; Bonorino, C.; Van Eden, W. The anti-inﬂammatorymechanisms of Hsp70. Front. Immunol. 2012 ,3, 95. [CrossRef]118. Chanteloup, G.; Cordonnier, M.; Isambert, N.; Bertaut, A.; Hervieu, A.; Hennequin, A.; Luu, M.; Zanetta, S.; Coudert, B.; Bengrine,L.; et al. Monitoring HSP70 exosomes in cancer patients’ follow up: A clinical prospective pilot study. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2020 ,9,1766192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]119. Lancaster, G.I.; Febbraio, M.A. Exosome-dependent Trafﬁcking of HSP70. J. Biol. Chem. 2005 ,280, 23349–23355. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]120. Wyciszkiewicz, A.; Kalinowska-Łyszczarz, A.; Nowakowski, B.; Ka´ zmierczak, K.; Osztynowicz, K.; Michalak, S. Expression ofsmall heat shock proteins in exosomes from patients with gynecologic cancers. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 1–9. [CrossRef]121. Théry, C.; Boussac, M.; V éron, P .; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P .; Raposo, G.; Garin, J.; Amigorena, S. Proteomic Analysis of DendriticCell-Derived Exosomes: A Secreted Subcellular Compartment Distinct from Apoptotic Vesicles. J. Immunol. 2001 ,166, 7309–7318.[CrossRef] [PubMed]122. Aoki, N.; Jin-No, S.; Nakagawa, Y.; Asai, N.; Arakawa, E.; Tamura, N.; Tamura, T.; Matsuda, T. Identiﬁcation and Characterizationof Microvesicles Secreted by 3T3-L1 Adipocytes: Redox- and Hormone-Dependent Induction of Milk Fat Globule-EpidermalGrowth Factor 8-Associated Microvesicles. Endocrinol. 2007 ,148, 3850–3862. [CrossRef]
123. Müller, G. Control of lipid storage and cell size between adipocytes by vesicle-associated glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchoredproteins. Arch. Physiol. Biochem. 2010 ,117, 23–43. [CrossRef]124. Müller, G.; Wied, S.; Dearey, E.-A.; Wetekam, E.-M.; Biemer-Daub, G. Lipid Storage in Large and Small Rat Adipocytes by
proteins. Arch. Physiol. Biochem. 2010 ,117, 23–43. [CrossRef]124. Müller, G.; Wied, S.; Dearey, E.-A.; Wetekam, E.-M.; Biemer-Daub, G. Lipid Storage in Large and Small Rat Adipocytes byVesicle-Associated Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-Anchored Proteins. Chem. Biol. Pteridines Folates 2010 ,52, 27–34. [CrossRef]125. Ogawa, R.; Tanaka, C.; Sato, M.; Nagasaki, H.; Sugimura, K.; Okumura, K.; Nakagawa, Y.; Aoki, N. Adipocyte-derivedmicrovesicles contain RNA that is transported into macrophages and might be secreted into blood circulation. Biochem. Biophys.Res. Commun. 2010 ,398, 723–729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]126. Subra, C.; Laulagnier, K.; Perret, B.; Record, M. Exosome lipidomics unravels lipid sorting at the level of multivesicular bodies.Biochimie 2007 ,89, 205–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]127. Laulagnier, K.; Motta, C.; Hamdi, S.; Roy, S.; Fauvelle, F.; Pageaux, J.-F.; Kobayashi, T.; Salles, J.-P .; Perret, B.; Bonnerot, C.; et al.
Mast cell- and dendritic cell-derived exosomes display a speciﬁc lipid composition and an unusual membrane organization.Biochem. J. 2004 ,380, 161–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]128. Brzozowski, J.S.; Jankowski, H.; Bond, D.R.; McCague, S.B.; Munro, B.R.; Predebon, M.J.; Scarlett, C.J.; Skelding, K.A.; Weidenhofer,J. Lipidomic proﬁling of extracellular vesicles derived from prostate and prostate cancer cell lines. Lipids Heal. Dis. 2018 ,17, 1–12.[CrossRef]129. Trajkovic, K.; Hsu, C.; Chiantia, S.; Rajendran, L.; Wenzel, D.; Wieland, F.; Schwille, P .; Brugger, B.; Simons, M. Ceramide TriggersBudding of Exosome Vesicles into Multivesicular Endosomes. Science 2008 ,319, 1244–1247. [CrossRef]130. Brouwers, J.F.; Aalberts, M.; Jansen, J.W.A.; Van Niel, G.; Wauben, M.; Stout, T.A.E.; Helms, J.B.; Stoorvogel, W. Distinct lipidcompositions of two types of human prostasomes. Proteomics 2013 ,13, 1660–1666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Skotland, T.; Ekroos, K.; Kauhanen, D.; Simolin, H.; Seierstad, T.; Berge, V .; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Molecular lipid species inurinary exosomes as potential prostate cancer biomarkers. Eur. J. Cancer 2017 ,70, 122–132. [CrossRef]132. Simbari, F.; McCaskill, J.; Coakley, G.; Millar, M.; Maizels, R.M.; Fabri ás, G.; Casas, J.; Buck, A.H. Plasmalogen enrichment inexosomes secreted by a nematode parasite versus those derived from its mouse host: Implications for exosome stability andbiology. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 30741. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 37 of 48133. Pienimaeki-Roemer, A.; Kuhlmann, K.; Böttcher, A.; Konovalova, T.; Black, A.; Ors ó, E.; Liebisch, G.; Ahrens, M.; Eisenacher, M.;Meyer, H.E.; et al. Lipidomic and proteomic characterization of platelet extracellular vesicle subfractions from senescent platelets.Transfusion 2015 ,55, 507–521. [CrossRef]134. Durcin, M.; Fleury, A.; Taillebois, E.; Hilairet, G.; Krupova, Z.; Henry, C.; Truchet, S.; Trötzmüller, M.; Köfeler, H.; Mabilleau, G.;et al. Characterisation of adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicle subtypes identiﬁes distinct protein and lipid signatures for largeand small extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2017 ,6, 1305677. [CrossRef]135. Zhang, L.; Li, H.; Yuan, M.; Li, D.; Sun, C.; Wang, G. Serum Exosomal MicroRNAs as Potential Circulating Biomarkers forEndometriosis. Dis. Markers 2020 ,2020 , 2456340. [CrossRef]
136. Zhao, Y.; Gan, Y.; Xu, G.; Yin, G.; Liu, D. MSCs-Derived Exosomes Attenuate Acute Brain Injury and Inhibit MicroglialInﬂammation by Reversing CysLT2R-ERK1/2 Mediated Microglia M1 Polarization. Neurochem. Res. 2020 ,45, 1180–1190.[CrossRef]137. Leidal, A.M.; Debnath, J. Unraveling the mechanisms that specify molecules for secretion in extracellular vesicles. Methods 2020 ,177, 15–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]138. Zhou, M.; Tan, K.S.; Guan, W.-J.; Jiang, L.-J.; Deng, J.; Gao, W.-X.; Lee, Y.M.; Xu, Z.-F.; Luo, X.; Liu, C.; et al. Proteomics proﬁlingof epithelium-derived exosomes from nasal polyps revealed signaling functions affecting cellular proliferation. Respir. Med. 2020 ,162, 105871. [CrossRef]139. Peterka, O.; Jir ásko, R.; Chocholouškov á, M.; Kuchaˇ r, L.; Wolrab, D.; H ájek, R.; Vr ána, D.; Strouhal, O.; Melichar, B.; Holˇ capek, M.Lipidomic characterization of exosomes isolated from human plasma using various mass spectrometry techniques. Biochim. et
Biophys. Acta (BBA) Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 2020 ,1865 , 158634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]140. Tiruvayipati, S.; Wolfgeher, D.; Yue, M.; Duan, F.; Andrade, J.; Jiang, H.; Schuger, L. Variability in protein cargo detection intechnical and biological replicates of exosome-enriched extracellular vesicles. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0228871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]141. Breglio, A.M.; May, L.A.; Barzik, M.; Welsh, N.C.; Francis, S.P .; Costain, T.Q.; Wang, L.; Anderson, D.E.; Petralia, R.S.; Wang, Y.-X.;et al. Exosomes mediate sensory hair cell protection in the inner ear. J. Clin. Investig. 2020 ,130, 2657–2672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]142. Jones, L.B.; Kumar, S.; Curry, A.J.; Price, J.S.; Krendelchtchikov, A.; Crenshaw, B.J.; Bell, C.R.; Williams, S.D.; Tolliver, T.A.;Saldanha, S.N.; et al. Alcohol Exposure Impacts the Composition of HeLa-Derived Extracellular Vesicles. Biomedicines 2019 ,7, 78.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]143. Srivastava, P . INTERACTION OFHEATSHOCKPROTEINS WITHPEPTIDES ANDANTIGENPRESENTINGCELLS: Chaperoningof the Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2002 ,20, 395–425. [CrossRef]144. Zeng, F.; Morelli, A.E. Extracellular vesicle-mediated MHC cross-dressing in immune homeostasis, transplantation, infectiousdiseases, and cancer. Semin. Immunopathol. 2018 ,40, 477–490. [CrossRef]145. Stubbs, J.D.; Lekutis, C.; Singer, K.L.; Bui, A.; Yuzuki, D.; Srinivasan, U.; Parry, G. cDNA cloning of a mouse mammary epithelialcell surface protein reveals the existence of epidermal growth factor-like domains linked to factor VIII-like sequences. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. USA 1990 ,87, 8417–8421. [CrossRef] [PubMed]146. Orozco, A.F.; Lewis, D.E. Flow cytometric analysis of circulating microparticles in plasma. Cytom. Part A 2010 ,77, 502–514.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]147. Chu, Z.; Witte, D.P .; Qi, X. Saposin C–LBPA interaction in late-endosomes/lysosomes. Exp. Cell Res. 2005 ,303, 300–307. [CrossRef]148. Minciacchi, V .R.; Freeman, M.R.; Di Vizio, D. Extracellular Vesicles in Cancer: Exosomes, Microvesicles and the Emerging Role ofLarge Oncosomes. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2015 ,40, 41–51. [CrossRef]
Large Oncosomes. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2015 ,40, 41–51. [CrossRef]149. Subra, C.; Grand, D.; Laulagnier, K.; Stella, A.; Lambeau, G.; Paillasse, M.; De Medina, P .; Monsarrat, B.; Perret, B.; Silvente-Poirot,S.; et al. Exosomes account for vesicle-mediated transcellular transport of activatable phospholipases and prostaglandins. J. LipidRes. 2010 ,51, 2105–2120. [CrossRef]150. Fitzner, D.; Schnaars, M.; van Rossum, D.; Krishnamoorthy, G.; Dibaj, P .; Bakhti, M.; Regen, T.; Hanisch, U.-K.; Simons, M.Selective transfer of exosomes from oligodendrocytes to microglia by macropinocytosis. J. Cell Sci. 2011 ,124, 447–458. [CrossRef]151. Lydic, T.A.; Townsend, S.; Adda, C.G.; Collins, C.; Mathivanan, S.; Reid, G.E. Rapid and comprehensive “shotgun” lipidomeproﬁling of colorectal cancer cell derived exosomes. Methods 2015 ,87, 83–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Haraszti, R.A.; Didiot, M.-C.; Sapp, E.; Leszyk, J.; Shaffer, S.A.; Rockwell, H.E.; Gao, F.; Narain, N.R.; DiFiglia, M.; Kiebish, M.A.;et al. High-resolution proteomic and lipidomic analysis of exosomes and microvesicles from different cell sources. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2016 ,5, 32570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]153. Abels, E.R.; Breakeﬁeld, X.O. Introduction to Extracellular Vesicles: Biogenesis, RNA Cargo Selection, Content, Release, andUptake. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 2016 ,36, 301–312. [CrossRef]154. Chen, T.S.; Lai, R.C.; Lee, M.M.; Choo, A.B.H.; Lee, C.N.; Lim, S.K. Mesenchymal stem cell secretes microparticles enriched inpre-microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 ,38, 215–224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]155. Tan, S.S.; Chen, T.S.; Tan, K.H.; Lim, S.K. An Overview of the Proteomic and miRNA Cargo in MSC-Derived Exosomes.Mesenchymal Stem Cell Derived Exosomes 2015 , 21–36.156. Chen, T.S.; Lim, S.K. Measurement of Precursor miRNA in Exosomes from Human ESC-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.
Methods Mol. Biol. 2013 ,1024 , 69–86. [CrossRef]157. Smalheiser, N.R. Exosomal transfer of proteins and RNAs at synapses in the nervous system. Biol. Direct 2007 ,2, 35. [CrossRef][PubMed]158. Banerjee, J.; Sen, C.K. microRNA and Wound Healing. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2015 ,888, 291–305. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 38 of 48159. Liu, T.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, J.; Li, C.; Miao, Y.-R.; Lei, Q.; Li, Q.; Guo, A.-Y. EVmiRNA: A database of miRNA proﬁling inextracellular vesicles. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 ,47, D89–D93. [CrossRef]160. Vallabhaneni, K.C.; Penfornis, P .; Dhule, S.; Guillonneau, F.; Adams, K.V .; Mo, Y.Y.; Xu, R.; Liu, Y.; Watabe, K.; Vemuri, M.C.; et al.Extracellular vesicles from bone marrow mesenchymal stem/stromal cells transport tumor regulatory microRNA, proteins, andmetabolites. Oncotarget 2015 ,6, 4953–4967. [CrossRef]161. Lee, J.-K.; Park, S.-R.; Jung, B.-K.; Jeon, Y.-K.; Lee, Y.-S.; Kim, M.-K.; Kim, Y.-G.; Jang, J.-Y.; Kim, C.-W. Exosomes Derived fromMesenchymal Stem Cells Suppress Angiogenesis by Down-Regulating VEGF Expression in Breast Cancer Cells. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e84256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]162. Singla, D.K. Stem cells and exosomes in cardiac repair. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2016 ,27, 19–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Shao, L.; Zhang, Y.; Lan, B.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, L.; Xiao, P .; Meng, Q.; Geng, Y.-J.; Yu, X.-Y.; et al. MiRNA-SequenceIndicates That Mesenchymal Stem Cells and Exosomes Have Similar Mechanism to Enhance Cardiac Repair. BioMed Res. Int.2017 ,2017 , 4150705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]164. Zhao, B.; Li, X.; Shi, X.; Shi, X.; Zhang, W.; Wu, G.; Wang, X.; Su, L.; Hu, D. Exosomal MicroRNAs Derived from Human AmnioticEpithelial Cells Accelerate Wound Healing by Promoting the Proliferation and Migration of Fibroblasts. Stem Cells Int. 2018 ,2018 ,5420463. [CrossRef]165. Gao, S.; Chen, T.; Hao, Y.; Zhang, F.; Tang, X.; Wang, D.; Wei, Z.; Qi, J. Exosomal miR-135a derived from human amnionmesenchymal stem cells promotes cutaneous wound healing in rats and ﬁbroblast migration by directly inhibiting LATS2expression. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2020 ,11, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Lv‡, X.; Li ‡, Y.; Li ‡, H.; Zhou, L.; Wang, B.; Zhi, Z.; Tang, W. Molecular function predictions and diagnostic value analysis ofplasma exosomal miRNAs in Hirschsprung’s disease. Epigenomics 2020 ,12, 409–422. [CrossRef]167. Lv, Q.; Deng, J.; Chen, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liu, B.; Liu, J. Engineered Human Adipose Stem-Cell-Derived Exosomes Loaded withmiR-21-5p to Promote Diabetic Cutaneous Wound Healing. Mol. Pharm. 2020 ,17, 1723–1733. [CrossRef]168. Li, P .; Kaslan, M.; Lee, S.H.; Yao, J.; Gao, Z. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques. Theranostics 2017 ,7, 789–804. [CrossRef]169. Yang, F.; Liao, X.; Tian, Y.; Li, G. Exosome separation using microﬂuidic systems: Size-based, immunoafﬁnity-based and dynamicmethodologies. Biotechnol. J. 2017 ,12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]170. Livshits, M.A.; Khomyakova, E.; Evtushenko, E.; Lazarev, V .N.; Kulemin, N.; Semina, S.E.; Generozov, E.; Govorun, V .M. Isolation
of exosomes by differential centrifugation: Theoretical analysis of a commonly used protocol. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 17319. [CrossRef][PubMed]171. Lobb, R.; Becker, M.; Wen, S.W.; Wong, C.S.F.; Wiegmans, A.P .; Leimgruber, A.; Möller, A. Optimized exosome isolation protocolfor cell culture supernatant and human plasma. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 27031. [CrossRef] [PubMed]172. Cvjetkovic, A.; Lötvall, J.; Lässer, C. The inﬂuence of rotor type and centrifugation time on the yield and purity of extracellularvesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]173. Street, J.M.; Koritzinsky, E.H.; Glispie, D.M.; Yuen, P .S.T. Urine Exosome Isolation and Characterization. Methods Mol. Biol. 2017 ,1641 , 413–423. [PubMed]174. Yamashita, T.; Takahashi, Y.; Nishikawa, M.; Takakura, Y. Effect of exosome isolation methods on physicochemical properties ofexosomes and clearance of exosomes from the blood circulation. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2016 ,98, 1–8. [CrossRef]
175. Hong, C.-S.; Funk, S.; Muller, L.; Boyiadzis, M.; Whiteside, T.L. Isolation of biologically active and morphologically intactexosomes from plasma of patients with cancer. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 29289. [CrossRef]
exosomes from plasma of patients with cancer. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2016 ,5, 29289. [CrossRef]176. Quintana, J.F.; Makepeace, B.L.; A Babayan, S.; Ivens, A.; Pfarr, K.M.; Blaxter, M.; Debrah, A.; Wanji, S.; Ngangyung, H.F.; Bah,G.S.; et al. Extracellular Onchocerca-derived small RNAs in host nodules and blood. Parasites Vectors 2015 ,8, 58. [CrossRef]177. Zeringer, E.; Barta, T.; Li, M.; Vlassov, A.V . Strategies for Isolation of Exosomes. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2015 ,2015 , 319–323.[CrossRef]178. Bhattacharjee, C.; Singh, M. Studies on the applicability of artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) in continuous stirred ultraﬁltration.Chem. Eng. Technol. 2002 ,25, 1181–1192. [CrossRef]179. Yu, L.-L.; Zhu, J.; Liu, J.-X.; Jiang, F.; Ni, W.-K.; Qu, L.-S.; Ni, R.-Z.; Lu, C.-H.; Xiao, M.-B. A Comparison of Traditional and NovelMethods for the Separation of Exosomes from Human Samples. BioMed Res. Int. 2018 ,2018 , 3634563. [CrossRef]
180. Böing, A.N.; van der Pol, E.; Grootemaat, A.E.; Coumans, F.A.W.; Sturk, A.; Nieuwland, R. Single-step isolation of extracellularvesicles by size-exclusion chromatography. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3. [CrossRef]181. Foers, A.D.; Chatﬁeld, S.; Dagley, L.F.; Scicluna, B.J.; Webb, A.I.; Cheng, L.; Hill, A.F.; Wicks, I.P .; Pang, K.C. Enrichment ofextracellular vesicles from human synovial ﬂuid using size exclusion chromatography. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1490145.[CrossRef]182. Feng, Y.; Huang, W.; Wani, M.; Yu, X.; Ashraf, M. Ischemic Preconditioning Potentiates the Protective Effect of Stem Cells throughSecretion of Exosomes by Targeting Mecp2 via miR-22. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, e88685. [CrossRef]183. Dhondt, B.; Geeurickx, E.; Tulkens, J.; Van Deun, J.; Vergauwen, G.; Lippens, L.; Miinalainen, I.; Rappu, P .; Heino, J.; Ost, P .;et al. Unravelling the proteomic landscape of extracellular vesicles in prostate cancer by density-based fractionation of urine. J.
Extracell. Vesicles 2020 ,9, 1736935. [CrossRef]184. Rood, I.M.; Deegens, J.K.; Merchant, M.L.; Tamboer, W.P .; Wilkey, D.W.; Wetzels, J.F.; Klein, J.B. Comparison of three methodsfor isolation of urinary microvesicles to identify biomarkers of nephrotic syndrome. Kidney Int. 2010 ,78, 810–816. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 39 of 48185. La Shu, S.; Yang, Y.; Allen, C.L.; Hurley, E.; Tung, K.H.; Minderman, H.; Wu, Y.; Ernstoff, M.S. Purity and yield of melanomaexosomes are dependent on isolation method. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2020 ,9, 1692401. [CrossRef]186. Xu, L.; Ihara, K.-I.; Yoshimura, S.; Konno, D.; Tachibana, A.; Nakanishi, T.; Tachibana, T. Generation of the Rat MonoclonalAntibody Against the Extracellular Domain of Human CD63 by DNA Immunization. Monoclon. Antibodies Immunodiagn.Immunother. 2020 ,39, 74–76. [CrossRef]187. Xu, Y.; Shen, L.; Li, F.; Yang, J.; Wan, X.; Ouyang, M. microRNA-16-5p-containing exosomes derived from bone marrow-derivedmesenchymal stem cells inhibit proliferation, migration, and invasion, while promoting apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells bydownregulating ITGA2. J. Cell. Physiol. 2019 ,234, 21380–21394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Zarovni, N.; Corrado, A.; Guazzi, P .; Zocco, D.; Lari, E.; Radano, G.; Muhhina, J.; Fondelli, C.; Gavrilova, J.; Chiesi, A. Integratedisolation and quantitative analysis of exosome shuttled proteins and nucleic acids using immunocapture approaches. Methods2015 ,87, 46–58. [CrossRef]189. Karttunen, J.; Heiskanen, M.; Navarro-Ferrandis, V .; Das Gupta, S.; Lipponen, A.; Puhakka, N.; Rilla, K.; Koistinen, A.; Pitkänen,A. Precipitation-based extracellular vesicle isolation from rat plasma co-precipitate vesicle-free microRNAs. J. Extracell. Vesicles2019 ,8, 1555410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]190. Ludwig, A.-K.; De Miroschedji, K.; Doeppner, T.R.; Börger, V .; Ruesing, J.; Rebmann, V .; Durst, S.; Jansen, S.; Bremer, M.;Behrmann, E.; et al. Precipitation with polyethylene glycol followed by washing and pelleting by ultracentrifugation enrichesextracellular vesicles from tissue culture supernatants in small and large scales. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1528109. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]191. Doyle, L.M.; Wang, M.Z. Overview of Extracellular Vesicles, Their Origin, Composition, Purpose, and Methods for ExosomeIsolation and Analysis. Cells 2019 ,8, 727. [CrossRef]192. Van Deun, J.; Mestdagh, P .; Sormunen, R.; Cocquyt, V .; Vermaelen, K.; Vandesompele, J.; Bracke, M.; De Wever, O.; Hendrix, A.The impact of disparate isolation methods for extracellular vesicles on downstream RNA proﬁling. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3,10–3402. [CrossRef]193. Wang, C.; Chang, I.; Hou, P .; Tai, Y.; Li, W.; Hsu, P .; Wu, S.; Chiu, W.; Li, C.; Shan, Y.; et al. DUSP2 regulates extracellularvesicle-VEGF-C secretion and pancreatic cancer early dissemination. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2020 ,9, 1746529. [CrossRef]194. Guo, S.-C.; Tao, S.-C.; Dawn, H. Microﬂuidics-based on-a-chip systems for isolating and analysing extracellular vesicles. J.Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1508271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Iliescu, F.S.; Vrtaˇ cnik, D.; Neuzil, P .; Iliescu, C. Microﬂuidic Technology for Clinical Applications of Exosomes. Micromachines2019 ,10, 392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]196. Jia, Y.; Ni, Z.; Sun, H.; Wang, C. Microﬂuidic Approaches Toward the Isolation and Detection of Exosome Nanovesicles. IEEEAccess 2019 ,7, 45080–45098. [CrossRef]197. Dehdashtian, A.; Stringer, T.P .; Warren, A.J.; Mu, E.W.; Amirlak, B.; Shahabi, L. Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin. Cancer Treat.Res. 2018 , 15–26.198. Gantwerker, E.A.; Hom, D.B. Skin: Histology and Physiology of Wound Healing. Facial Plast. Surg. Clin. N. Am. 2011 ,19, 441–453.[CrossRef] [PubMed]199. Kolarsick, P .A.J.; Kolarsick, M.A.; Goodwin, C. Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin. J. Dermatol. Nurses’ Assoc. 2011 ,3, 203–213.[CrossRef]200. Dinh, T.; Braunagel, S.; Rosenblum, B.I. Growth Factors in Wound Healing. Clin. Podiatr. Med. Surg. 2015 ,32, 109–119. [CrossRef]
201. Li, M.; Wang, T.; Tian, H.; Wei, G.; Zhao, L.; Shi, Y. Macrophage-derived exosomes accelerate wound healing through theiranti-inﬂammation effects in a diabetic rat model. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2019 ,47, 3793–3803. [CrossRef]
anti-inﬂammation effects in a diabetic rat model. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2019 ,47, 3793–3803. [CrossRef]202. Lo Sicco, C.; Reverberi, D.; Balbi, C.; Ulivi, V .; Principi, E.; Pascucci, L.; Becherini, P .; Bosco, M.C.; Varesio, L.; Franzin, C.; et al.Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicles as Mediators of Anti-Inﬂammatory Effects: Endorsement of MacrophagePolarization. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2017 ,6, 1018–1028. [CrossRef] [PubMed]203. Monaco, J.L.; Lawrence, W.T. Acute wound healing. Clin. Plast. Surg. 2003 ,30, 1–12. [CrossRef]204. Osada-Oka, M.; Shiota, M.; Izumi, Y.; Nishiyama, M.; Tanaka, M.; Yamaguchi, T.; Sakurai, E.; Miura, K.; Iwao, H. Macrophage-derived exosomes induce inﬂammatory factors in endothelial cells under hypertensive conditions. Hypertens. Res. 2017 ,40,353–360. [CrossRef]205. Bannon, P .; Wood, S.; Restivo, T.; Campbell, L.; Hardman, M.J.; Mace, K.A. Diabetes induces stable intrinsic changes to myeloid
cells that contribute to chronic inﬂammation during wound healing in mice. Dis. Model. Mech. 2013 ,6, 1434–1447. [CrossRef]206. Hart, J. Inﬂammation 2: Its role in the healing of chronic wounds. J. Wound Care 2002 ,11, 245–249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]207. Liu, Y.-C.; Zou, X.-B.; Chai, Y.-F.; Yao, Y.-M. Macrophage Polarization in Inﬂammatory Diseases. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2014 ,10, 520–529.[CrossRef]208. Robson, M.C.; Steed, D.L.; Franz, M.G. Wound healing: Biologic features and approaches to maximize healing trajectories. Curr.Probl. Surg. 2001 ,38, 72–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]209. Velnar, T.; Bailey, T.; Smrkolj, V . The Wound Healing Process: An Overview of the Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms. J. Int. MedRes. 2009 ,37, 1528–1542. [CrossRef]210. Szpaderska, A.M.; DiPietro, L.A. Inﬂammation in surgical wound healing: Friend or foe? Surgery 2005 ,137, 571–573. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 40 of 48211. Cha, H.; Hong, S.; Park, J.H.; Park, H.H. Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes and Nanovesicles: Promotion of Cell Proliferation,Migration, and Anti-Senescence for Treatment of Wound Damage and Skin Ageing. Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 1135. [CrossRef]212. Eming, S.A.; Martin, P .; Tomic-Canic, M. Wound repair and regeneration: Mechanisms, signaling, and translation. Sci. Transl.Med. 2014 ,6, 265sr6. [CrossRef]213. Chen, C.-C.; Mo, F.-E.; Lau, L.F. The Angiogenic Factor Cyr61 Activates a Genetic Program for Wound Healing in Human SkinFibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 2001 ,276, 47329–47337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]214. Macedo, L.; Pinhal-Enﬁeld, G.; Alshits, V .; Elson, G.; Cronstein, B.; Leibovich, S.J. Wound Healing Is Impaired in MyD88-DeﬁcientMice: A Role for MyD88 in the Regulation of Wound Healing by Adenosine A2A Receptors. Am. J. Pathol. 2007 ,171, 1774–1788.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]215. Min, J.-K.; Lee, Y.-M.; Kim, J.H.; Kim, Y.-M.; Kim, S.W.; Lee, S.-Y.; Gho, Y.S.; Oh, G.T.; Kwon, Y.-G. Hepatocyte Growth FactorSuppresses Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-Induced Expression of Endothelial ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 by Inhibiting theNuclear Factor- κB Pathway. Circ. Res. 2005 ,96, 300–307. [CrossRef]216. Pola, R.; Ling, L.E.; Silver, M.; Corbley, M.J.; Kearney, M.; Pepinsky, R.B.; Shapiro, R.; Taylor, F.R.; Baker, D.P .; Asahara, T.; et al.The morphogen Sonic hedgehog is an indirect angiogenic agent upregulating two families of angiogenic growth factors. Nat.Med. 2001 ,7, 706–711. [CrossRef]217. Shiffman, M. Stem Cells in Aesthetic Procedures: Art, Science, and Clinical Techniques ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014.218. Zhang, Z.; Schluesener, H.J. Mammalian toll-like receptors: From endogenous ligands to tissue regeneration. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.2006 ,63, 2901–2907. [CrossRef]
2006 ,63, 2901–2907. [CrossRef]219. Ishida, Y.; Gao, J.-L.; Murphy, P .M. Chemokine Receptor CX3CR1 Mediates Skin Wound Healing by Promoting Macrophage andFibroblast Accumulation and Function. J. Immunol. 2007 ,180, 569–579. [CrossRef]220. Ishida, Y.; Kondo, T.; Kimura, A.; Matsushima, K.; Mukaida, N. Absence of IL-1 Receptor Antagonist Impaired Wound Healingalong with Aberrant NF- κB Activation and a Reciprocal Suppression of TGF- βSignal Pathway. J. Immunol. 2006 ,176, 5598–5606.[CrossRef]221. Barrientos, S.; Stojadinovic, O.; Golinko, M.S.; Brem, H.; Tomic-Canic, M. PERSPECTIVE ARTICLE: Growth factors and cytokinesin wound healing. Wound Repair Regen. 2008 ,16, 585–601. [CrossRef] [PubMed]222. Lamar, J.; Iyer, V .; DiPersio, C.M. Integrin α3β1 Potentiates TGF β-Mediated Induction of MMP-9 in Immortalized Keratinocytes.J. Investig. Dermatol. 2008 ,128, 575–586. [CrossRef]
223. Munger, J.S.; Sheppard, D. Cross Talk among TGF- Signaling Pathways, Integrins, and the Extracellular Matrix. Cold Spring Harb.Perspect. Biol. 2011 ,3, a005017. [CrossRef]224. Pastar, I.; Stojadinovic, O.; Krzyzanowska, A.; Barrientos, S.; Stuelten, C.; Zimmerman, K.; Blumenberg, M.; Brem, H.; Tomic-Canic,M. Attenuation of the Transforming Growth Factor β—Signaling Pathway in Chronic Venous Ulcers. Mol. Med. 2010 ,16, 92–101.[CrossRef]225. Philipp, K.; Riedel, F.; Germann, G.; Hormann, K.; Sauerbier, M. TGF- βantisense oligonucleotides reduce mRNA expression ofmatrix metalloproteinases in cultured wound-healing-related cells. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2005 ,15, 299–303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]226. Shapouri-Moghaddam, A.; Mohammadian, S.; Vazini, H.; Taghadosi, M.; Esmaeili, S.-A.; Mardani, F.; Seiﬁ, B.; Mohammadi,A.; Afshari, J.T.; Sahebkar, A. Macrophage plasticity, polarization, and function in health and disease. J. Cell. Physiol. 2018 ,233,6425–6440. [CrossRef]
6425–6440. [CrossRef]227. Stuelten, C.; Byﬁeld, S.D.; Arany, P .; Karpova, T.; Stetler-Stevenson, W.; Roberts, A.B. Breast cancer cells induce stromal ﬁbroblaststo express MMP-9 via secretion of TNF- αand TGF-β.J. Cell Sci. 2005 ,118, 2143–2153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
to express MMP-9 via secretion of TNF- αand TGF-β.J. Cell Sci. 2005 ,118, 2143–2153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]228. Yuan, W.; Varga, J. Transforming Growth Factor- βRepression of Matrix Metalloproteinase-1 in Dermal Fibroblasts InvolvesSmad3. J. Biol. Chem. 2001 ,276, 38502–38510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]229. Lin, Z.-Q.; Kondo, T.; Ishida, Y.; Takayasu, T.; Mukaida, N. Essential involvement of IL-6 in the skin wound-healing process asevidenced by delayed wound healing in IL-6-deﬁcient mice. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2003 ,73, 713–721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]230. Mast, B.A.; Schultz, G.S. Interactions of cytokines, growth factors, and proteases in acute and chronic wounds. Wound RepairRegen. 1996 ,4, 411–420. [CrossRef]231. McFarland-Mancini, M.M.; Funk, H.M.; Paluch, A.M.; Zhou, M.; Giridhar, P .V .; Mercer, C.; Kozma, S.C.; Drew, A.F. Differences inWound Healing in Mice with Deﬁciency of IL-6 versus IL-6 Receptor. J. Immunol. 2010 ,184, 7219–7228. [CrossRef]
232. Di-Poï, N.; Tan, N.S.; Michalik, L.; Wahli, W.; Desvergne, B. Antiapoptotic Role of PPAR βin Keratinocytes via TranscriptionalControl of the Akt1 Signaling Pathway. Mol. Cell 2002 ,10, 721–733. [CrossRef]233. Tan, N.S.; Michalik, L.; Di-Poï, N.; Desvergne, B.; Wahli, W. Critical roles of the nuclear receptor PPAR β(peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor β) in skin wound healing. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2004 ,32, 97–102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]234. Wiegand, C.; Schönfelder, U.; Abel, M.; Ruth, P .; Kaatz, M.; Hipler, U.-C. Protease and pro-inﬂammatory cytokine concentrationsare elevated in chronic compared to acute wounds and can be modulated by collagen type I in vitro .Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2009 ,302, 419–428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]235. Yan, C.; Gao, N.; Sun, H.; Yin, J.; Lee, P .; Zhou, L.; Fan, X.; Yu, F.-S. Targeting Imbalance between IL-1 βand IL-1 ReceptorAntagonist Ameliorates Delayed Epithelium Wound Healing in Diabetic Mouse Corneas. Am. J. Pathol. 2016 ,186, 1466–1480.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]236. Rodrigues, M.; Kosaric, N.; Bonham, C.A.; Gurtner, G.C. Wound Healing: A Cellular Perspective. Physiol. Rev. 2019 ,99, 665–706.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 41 of 48237. Rückerl, D.; Heßmann, M.; Yoshimoto, T.; Ehlers, S.; Hölscher, C. Alternatively activated macrophages express the IL-27 receptoralpha chain WSX-1. Immunobiology 2006 ,211, 427–436. [CrossRef]238. Yang, B.; Suwanpradid, J.; Sanchez, R.T.; Choi, H.W.; Hoang, P .; Wang, D.; Abraham, S.N.; MacLeod, A.S. IL-27 Facilitates SkinWound Healing through Induction of Epidermal Proliferation and Host Defense. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2017 ,137, 1166–1175.[CrossRef]239. Xu, H.; Fan, G. The Role of Cytokines in Modulating Vocal Fold Fibrosis: A Contemporary Review. Laryngoscope 2021 ,131,139–145. [CrossRef]240. Antsiferova, M.; E Klatte, J.; Bod ó, E.; Paus, R.; Jorcano, J.L.; Matzuk, M.M.; Werner, S.; Kögel, H. Keratinocyte-derived follistatinregulates epidermal homeostasis and wound repair. Lab. Investig. 2008 ,89, 131–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
241. Kuai, L.; Zhang, J.-T.; Deng, Y.; Xu, S.; Xu, X.-Z.; Wu, M.-F.; Guo, D.-J.; Chen, Y.; Wu, R.-J.; Zhao, X.-Q.; et al. Sheng-ji Hua-yuformula promotes diabetic wound healing of re-epithelization via Activin/Follistatin regulation. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.2018 ,18, 32. [CrossRef]242. Werner, S.; Alzheimer, C. Roles of activin in tissue repair, ﬁbrosis, and inﬂammatory disease. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2006 ,17,157–171. [CrossRef]243. Werner, S.; Beer, H.-D.; Mauch, C.; Lüscher, B.; Werner, S. The Mad1 transcription factor is a novel target of activin and TGF- βaction in keratinocytes: Possible role of Mad1 in wound repair and psoriasis. Oncogene 2001 ,20, 7494–7504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]244. Bikfalvi, A.; Klein, S.; Pintucci, G.; Rifkin, D.B. Biological Roles of Fibroblast Growth Factor-2*. Endocr. Rev. 1997 ,18, 26–45.[CrossRef] [PubMed]245. Greenhalgh, D.G.; Sprugel, K.H.; Murray, M.J.; Ross, R. PDGF and FGF stimulate wound healing in the genetically diabetic
mouse. Am. J. Pathol. 1990 ,136, 1235–1246. [PubMed]246. Pierce, G.F.; Berg, J.V .; Rudolph, R.; Tarpley, J.; Mustoe, T.A. Platelet-derived growth factor-BB and transforming growth factorbeta 1 selectively modulate glycosaminoglycans, collagen, and myoﬁbroblasts in excisional wounds. Am. J. Pathol. 1991 ,138,629–646. [PubMed]247. Powers, C.J.; McLeskey, S.W.; Wellstein, A. Fibroblast growth factors, their receptors and signaling. Endocrine-Related Cancer 2000 ,7, 165–197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]248. Soares, C.D.; Morais, T.M.L.; Ara újo, R.M.F.G.; Meyer, P .F.; Oliveira, E.A.F.; Silva, R.M.V .; Carreiro, E.M.; Carreiro, E.P .; Belloco,V .G.; Mariz, B.A.L.A.; et al. Effects of subcutaneous injection of ozone during wound healing in rats. Growth Factors 2019 ,37,95–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]249. Pengzong, Z.; Yuanmin, L.; Xiaoming, X.; Shang, D.; Wei, X.; Zhigang, L.; Dongzhou, D.; Wenjing, Y.; Jianbiao, Y.; Yang, X.; et al.
Wound Healing Potential of the Standardized Extract of Boswellia serrata on Experimental Diabetic Foot Ulcer via Inhibition ofInﬂammatory, Angiogenetic and Apoptotic Markers. Planta Medica 2019 ,85, 657–669. [CrossRef]250. Dinh, P .-U.C.; Paudel, D.; Brochu, H.; Popowski, K.D.; Gracieux, M.C.; Cores, J.; Huang, K.; Hensley, M.T.; Harrell, E.; Vandergriff,A.C.; et al. Inhalation of lung spheroid cell secretome and exosomes promotes lung repair in pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Nat. Commun.2020 ,11, 1064. [CrossRef]251. Jiang, C.K.; Magnaldo, T.; Ohtsuki, M.; Freedberg, I.M.; Bernerd, F.; Blumenberg, M. Epidermal growth factor and transforminggrowth factor alpha speciﬁcally induce the activation- and hyperproliferation-associated keratins 6 and 16. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA 1993 ,90, 6786–6790. [CrossRef]252. Oda, K.; Matsuoka, Y.; Funahashi, A.; Kitano, H. A comprehensive pathway map of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling.Mol. Syst. Biol. 2005 ,1, 2005.0010. [CrossRef]
Mol. Syst. Biol. 2005 ,1, 2005.0010. [CrossRef]253. Shirakata, Y.; Kimura, R.; Nanba, D.; Iwamoto, R.; Tokumaru, S.; Morimoto, C.; Yokota, K.; Nakamura, M.; Sayama, K.; Mekada,
Mol. Syst. Biol. 2005 ,1, 2005.0010. [CrossRef]253. Shirakata, Y.; Kimura, R.; Nanba, D.; Iwamoto, R.; Tokumaru, S.; Morimoto, C.; Yokota, K.; Nakamura, M.; Sayama, K.; Mekada,E.; et al. Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor accelerates keratinocyte migration and skin wound healing. J. Cell Sci. 2005 ,118, 2363–2370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]254. Zhu, Y.-Z.; Hu, X.; Zhang, J.; Wang, Z.-H.; Wu, S.; Yi, Y.-Y. Extracellular Vesicles Derived From Human Adipose-Derived StemCell Prevent the Formation of Hypertrophic Scar in a Rabbit Model. Ann. Plast. Surg. 2020 ,84, 602–607. [CrossRef]255. Braun, S.; Keller, U.A.D.; Steiling, H.; Werner, S. Fibroblast growth factors in epithelial repair and cytoprotection. Philos. Trans. R.Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 2004 ,359, 753–757. [CrossRef]256. Plichta, J.K.; Radek, K.A. Sugar-Coating Wound Repair. J. Burn. Care Res. 2012 ,33, 299–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
257. Seeger, M.; Paller, A.S. The Roles of Growth Factors in Keratinocyte Migration. Adv. Wound Care 2015 ,4, 213–224. [CrossRef][PubMed]258. Di, R.; Murray, A.F.; Xiong, J.; Esposito, D.; Komarnytsky, S.; Gianfagna, T.J.; Munafo, J.P . Lily steroidal glycoalkaloid promotesearly inﬂammatory resolution in wounded human ﬁbroblasts. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020 ,258, 112766. [CrossRef]259. Satish, L.; Wells, A.; Yager, D. Glu-Leu-Arg-Negative CXC Chemokine Interferon γInducible Protein-9 As a Mediator ofEpidermal–Dermal Communication During Wound Repair. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2003 ,120, 1110–1117. [CrossRef]260. Tortelli, F.; Pisano, M.; Briquez, P .S.; Martino, M.M.; Hubbell, J.A. Fibronectin Binding Modulates CXCL11 Activity and FacilitatesWound Healing. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e79610. [CrossRef]261. Rajesh, A.; Stuart, G.; Real, N.; Ahn, J.; Tschirley, A.; Wise, L.; Hibma, M. Depletion of langerin + cells enhances cutaneous wound
healing. Immunology 2020 ,160, 366–381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 42 of 48262. Kim, B.-S.; Breuer, B.; Arnke, K.; Ruhl, T.; Hofer, T.; Simons, D.; Knobe, M.; Ganse, B.; Guidi, M.; Beier, J.P .; et al. The effect of themacrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) on excisional wound healing in vivo .J. Plast. Surg. Hand Surg. 2020 ,54, 137–144.[CrossRef] [PubMed]263. Teng, M.; Huang, Y.; Zhang, H. Application of stems cells in wound healing-An update. Wound Repair Regen. 2014 ,22, 151–160.[CrossRef]264. Chen, L.; Tredget, E.E.; Wu, P .Y.G.; Wu, Y. Paracrine Factors of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Recruit Macrophages and EndothelialLineage Cells and Enhance Wound Healing. PLoS ONE 2008 ,3, e1886. [CrossRef]265. Yew, T.-L.; Hung, Y.-T.; Li, H.-Y.; Chen, H.-W.; Chen, L.-L.; Tsai, K.-S.; Chiou, S.-H.; Chao, K.-C.; Huang, T.-F.; Chen, H.-L.; et al.Enhancement of Wound Healing by Human Multipotent Stromal Cell Conditioned Medium: The Paracrine Factors and p38MAPK Activation. Cell Transplant. 2011 ,20, 693–706. [CrossRef]
266. Cardoso, R.M.S.; Rodrigues, S.C.; Gomes, C.F.; Duarte, F.V .; Romao, M.; Leal, E.C.; Freire, P .C.; Neves, R.; Sim ões-Correia, J.Development of an optimized and scalable method for isolation of umbilical cord blood-derived small extracellular vesicles forfuture clinical use. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2021 ,10, 910–921. [CrossRef] [PubMed]267. Hu, L.; Wang, J.; Zhou, X.; Xiong, Z.; Zhao, J.; Yu, R.; Huang, F.; Zhang, H.; Chen, L. Exosomes derived from human adiposemensenchymal stem cells accelerates cutaneous wound healing via optimizing the characteristics of ﬁbroblasts. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6,32993. [CrossRef]268. Ding, J.; Wang, X.; Chen, B.; Zhang, J.; Xu, J. Exosomes Derived from Human Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells Stimulatedby Deferoxamine Accelerate Cutaneous Wound Healing by Promoting Angiogenesis. BioMed Res. Int. 2019 ,2019 , 9742765.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]269. Goodarzi, P .; Larijani, B.; Alavi-Moghadam, S.; Tayanloo-Beik, A.; Mohamadi-Jahani, F.; Ranjbaran, N.; Payab, M.; Falahzadeh, K.;Mousavi, M.; Arjmand, B. Mesenchymal Stem Cells-Derived Exosomes for Wound Regeneration. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2018 ,1119 ,119–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]270. Han, G.; Ceilley, R. Chronic Wound Healing: A Review of Current Management and Treatments. Adv. Ther. 2017 ,34, 599–610.[CrossRef] [PubMed]271. McBride, J.D.; Jenkins, A.; Liu, X.; Zhang, B.; Lee, K.; Berry, W.L.; Janknecht, R.; Grifﬁn, C.T.; Aston, C.E.; Lyons, T.J.; et al.Elevated Circulation Levels of an Antiangiogenic SERPIN in Patients with Diabetic Microvascular Complications Impair WoundHealing through Suppression of Wnt Signaling. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2014 ,134, 1725–1734. [CrossRef]272. Ren, S.; Chen, J.; Duscher, D.; Liu, Y.; Guo, G.; Kang, Y.; Xiong, H.; Zhan, P .; Wang, Y.; Wang, C.; et al. Microvesicles from human
adipose stem cells promote wound healing by optimizing cellular functions via AKT and ERK signaling pathways. Stem Cell Res.Ther. 2019 ,10, 1–14. [CrossRef]273. Zhang, B.; Wang, M.; Gong, A.; Zhang, X.; Wu, X.; Zhu, Y.; Shi, H.; Wu, L.; Zhu, W.; Qian, H.; et al. HucMSC-ExosomeMediated-Wnt4 Signaling Is Required for Cutaneous Wound Healing. Stem Cells 2015 ,33, 2158–2168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]274. Hoang, D.H.; Nguyen, T.D.; Nguyen, H.-P .; Nguyen, X.-H.; Do, P .T.X.; Dang, V .D.; Dam, P .T.M.; Bui, H.T.H.; Trinh, M.Q.; Vu,D.M.; et al. Differential Wound Healing Capacity of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes Originated From Bone Marrow,Adipose Tissue and Umbilical Cord Under Serum- and Xeno-Free Condition. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2020 ,7, 119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]275. Kim, Y.-J.; Yoo, S.M.; Park, H.H.; Lim, H.J.; Kim, Y.-L.; Lee, S.; Seo, K.-W.; Kang, K.-S. Exosomes derived from human umbilical
cord blood mesenchymal stem cells stimulates rejuvenation of human skin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2017 ,493, 1102–1108.[CrossRef]276. Jiang, T.; Wang, Z.; Sun, J. Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes stimulate cutaneous wound healing
[CrossRef]276. Jiang, T.; Wang, Z.; Sun, J. Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes stimulate cutaneous wound healingmediates through TGF- β/Smad signaling pathway. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2020 ,11, 1–10. [CrossRef]277. Shi, A.; Li, J.; Qiu, X.; Sabbah, M.; Boroumand, S.; Huang, T.C.-T.; Zhao, C.; Terzic, A.; Behfar, A.; Moran, S.L. TGF- βloadedexosome enhances ischemic wound healing in vitro and in vivo. Theranostics 2021 ,11, 6616–6631. [CrossRef] [PubMed]278. Heo, J.S.; Kim, S.; Yang, C.E.; Choi, Y.; Song, S.Y.; Kim, H.O. Human Adipose Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes: A KeyPlayer in Wound Healing. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 2021 , 1–12. [CrossRef]279. Banerjee, J.; Chan, Y.C.; Sen, C.K. Micrornas in skin and wound healing. Physiol. Genom. 2011 ,43, 543–556. [CrossRef]280. Ferguson, S.W.; Wang, J.; Lee, C.J.; Liu, M.; Neelamegham, S.; Canty, J.M.; Nguyen, J. The microRNA regulatory landscape of
MSC-derived exosomes: A systems view. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1419. [CrossRef]281. Qiu, G.; Zheng, G.; Ge, M.; Wang, J.; Huang, R.; Shu, Q.; Xu, J. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles affect diseaseoutcomes via transfer of microRNAs. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2018 ,9, 320. [CrossRef]282. Reza, A.M.M.T.; Choi, Y.-J.; Yasuda, H.; Kim, J.-H. Human adipose mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomal-miRNAs are criticalfactors for inducing anti-proliferation signalling to A2780 and SKOV-3 ovarian cancer cells. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 38498. [CrossRef]283. Soliman, A.M.; Das, S.; Ghafar, N.A.; Teoh, S.L. Role of MicroRNA in Proliferation Phase of Wound Healing. Front. Genet. 2018 ,9.[CrossRef] [PubMed]284. Gil You, D.; Lim, G.T.; Kwon, S.; Um, W.; Oh, B.H.; Song, S.H.; Lee, J.; Jo, D.-G.; Cho, Y.W.; Park, J.H. Metabolically engineeredstem cell–derived exosomes to regulate macrophage heterogeneity in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci. Adv. 2021 ,7, 0083. [CrossRef]
285. Herter, E.K.; Land én, N.X. Non-Coding RNAs: New Players in Skin Wound Healing. Adv. Wound Care 2017 ,6, 93–107. [CrossRef][PubMed]286. Mulholland, E.; Dunne, N.; McCarthy, H.O. MicroRNA as Therapeutic Targets for Chronic Wound Healing. Mol. Ther. NucleicAcids 2017 ,8, 46–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 43 of 48287. Nahid, A.; Yao, B.; Dominguez-Gutierrez, P .R.; Kesavalu, L.; Satoh, M.; Chan, E.K.L. Regulation of TLR2-Mediated Tolerance andCross-Tolerance through IRAK4 Modulation by miR-132 and miR-212. J. Immunol. 2013 ,190, 1250–1263. [CrossRef]288. Essandoh, K.; Li, Y.; Huo, J.; Fan, G.-C. MiRNA-Mediated Macrophage Polarization and its Potential Role in the Regulation ofInﬂammatory Response. Shock 2016 ,46, 122–131. [CrossRef]289. Li, N.; Land én, N.X. MicroRNAs in skin wound healing. Eur. J. Dermatol. EJD 2017 ,27, 12–14. [CrossRef]290. Wang, Y.; Han, B.; Wang, Y.; Wang, C.; Zhang, H.; Xue, J.; Wang, X.; Niu, T.; Niu, Z.; Chen, Y. Mesenchymal stem cell–secretedextracellular vesicles carrying TGF- β1 up-regulate miR-132 and promote mouse M2 macrophage polarization. J. Cell. Mol. Med.2020 ,24, 12750–12764. [CrossRef]291. Chen, C.-Y.; Rao, S.-S.; Ren, L.; Hu, X.-K.; Tan, Y.-J.; Hu, Y.; Luo, J.; Liu, Y.-W.; Yin, H.; Huang, J.; et al. Exosomal DMBT1 from
human urine-derived stem cells facilitates diabetic wound repair by promoting angiogenesis. Theranostics 2018 ,8, 1607–1623.[CrossRef]292. Tao, S.-C.; Guo, S.-C.; Li, M.; Ke, Q.-F.; Guo, Y.-P .; Zhang, C.-Q. Chitosan Wound Dressings Incorporating Exosomes Derivedfrom MicroRNA-126-Overexpressing Synovium Mesenchymal Stem Cells Provide Sustained Release of Exosomes and HealFull-Thickness Skin Defects in a Diabetic Rat Model. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2016 ,6, 736–747. [CrossRef]293. Templeton, D.M.; Liu, Y. Genetic regulation of cell function in response to iron overload or chelation. Biochim. et Biophys. Acta(BBA) Gen. Subj. 2003 ,1619 , 113–124. [CrossRef]294. Luo, Z.; Wu, F.; Xue, E.; Huang, L.; Yan, P .; Pan, X.; Zhou, Y. Hypoxia preconditioning promotes bone marrow mesenchymalstem cells survival by inducing HIF-1 αin injured neuronal cells derived exosomes culture system. Cell Death Dis. 2019 ,10, 1–13.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]295. Wang, S.Y.; Kim, H.; Kwak, G.; Jo, S.D.; Cho, D.; Yang, Y.; Kwon, I.C.; Jeong, J.H.; Kim, S.H. Development of microRNA-21 mimicnanocarriers for the treatment of cutaneous wounds. Theranostics 2020 ,10, 3240–3253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]296. Yang, X.; Wang, J.; Guo, S.-L.; Fan, K.-J.; Li, J.; Wang, Y.-L.; Teng, Y.; Yang, X. miR-21 Promotes Keratinocyte Migration andRe-epithelialization During Wound Healing. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2011 ,7, 685–690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]297. Shi, R.; Jin, Y.; Hu, W.; Lian, W.; Cao, C.; Han, S.; Zhao, S.; Yuan, H.; Yang, X.; Shi, J.; et al. Exosomes derived frommmu_circ_0000250-modiﬁed adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells promote wound healing in diabetic mice by induc-ing miR-128-3p/SIRT1-mediated autophagy. Am. J. Physiol. Physiol. 2020 ,318, C848–C856. [CrossRef]298. Zhang, B.; Shi, Y.; Gong, A.; Pan, Z.; Shi, H.; Yang, H.; Fu, H.; Yan, Y.; Zhang, X.; Wang, M.; et al. HucMSC Exosome-Delivered
14-3-3ζOrchestrates Self-Control of the Wnt Response via Modulation of YAP During Cutaneous Regeneration. Stem Cells 2016 ,34, 2485–2500. [CrossRef]299. Choi, J.S.; Cho, W.L.; Choi, Y.J.; Kim, J.D.; Park, H.-A.; Kim, S.Y.; Park, J.H.; Jo, D.-G.; Cho, Y.W. Functional recovery in photo-damaged human dermal ﬁbroblasts by human adipose-derived stem cell extracellular vesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2019 ,8,1565885. [CrossRef]300. Ferreira, A.D.F.; Cunha, P .D.S.; Carregal, V .M.; Silva, P .D.C.D.; De Miranda, M.C.; Kunrath-Lima, M.; De Melo, M.I.A.; Faraco,C.C.F.; Barbosa, J.L.; Frezard, F.; et al. Extracellular Vesicles from Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal Cells AccelerateMigration and Activate AKT Pathway in Human Keratinocytes and Fibroblasts Independently of miR-205 Activity. Stem Cells Int.2017 ,2017 , 9841035. [CrossRef]301. Henriques-Antunes, H.; Cardoso, R.; Zonari, A.; Correia, J.S.; Leal, E.; Jim énez-Balsa, A.; Lino, M.M.; Barradas, A.; Kostic, I.;
2017 ,2017 , 9841035. [CrossRef]301. Henriques-Antunes, H.; Cardoso, R.; Zonari, A.; Correia, J.S.; Leal, E.; Jim énez-Balsa, A.; Lino, M.M.; Barradas, A.; Kostic, I.;Gomes, C.; et al. The Kinetics of Small Extracellular Vesicle Delivery Impacts Skin Tissue Regeneration. ACS Nano 2019 ,13,8694–8707. [CrossRef]302. Li, M.; Ke, Q.-F.; Tao, S.-C.; Guo, S.-C.; Rui, B.-Y.; Guo, Y.-P . Fabrication of hydroxyapatite/chitosan composite hydrogels loadedwith exosomes derived from miR-126-3p overexpressed synovial mesenchymal stem cells for diabetic chronic wound healing. J.Mater. Chem. B 2016 ,4, 6830–6841. [CrossRef]303. Huang, J.; Xiong, J.; Yang, L.; Zhang, J.; Sun, S.; Liang, Y. Cell-free exosome-laden scaffolds for tissue repair. Nanoscale 2021 ,13,8740–8750. [CrossRef]304. Cooper, D.R.; Wang, C.; Patel, R.; Trujillo, A.; Patel, N.A.; Prather, J.; Gould, L.J.; Wu, M.H. Human Adipose-Derived Stem Cell
Conditioned Media and Exosomes Containing MALAT1 Promote Human Dermal Fibroblast Migration and Ischemic WoundHealing. Adv. Wound Care 2018 ,7, 299–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]305. Fang, S.; Xu, C.; Zhang, Y.; Xue, C.; Yang, C.; Bi, H.; Qian, X.; Wu, M.; Ji, K.; Zhao, Y.; et al. Umbilical Cord-Derived MesenchymalStem Cell-Derived Exosomal MicroRNAs Suppress Myoﬁbroblast Differentiation by Inhibiting the Transforming Growth Factor-β/SMAD2 Pathway During Wound Healing. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2016 ,5, 1425–1439. [CrossRef]306. Ti, D.; Hao, H.; Tong, C.; Liu, J.; Dong, L.; Zheng, J.; Zhao, Y.; Liu, H.; Fu, X.; Han, W. LPS-preconditioned mesenchymal stromalcells modify macrophage polarization for resolution of chronic inﬂammation via exosome-shuttled let-7b. J. Transl. Med. 2015 ,13,308. [CrossRef]307. Bian, X.; Li, B.; Yang, J.; Ma, K.; Sun, M.; Zhang, C.; Fu, X. Regenerative and protective effects of dMSC-sEVs on high-glucose-
induced senescent ﬁbroblasts by suppressing RAGE pathway and activating Smad pathway. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2020 ,11, 1–16.[CrossRef] [PubMed]308. Kim, D.-K.; Nishida, H.; An, S.Y.; Shetty, A.K.; Bartosh, T.J.; Prockop, D.J. Chromatographically isolated CD63+CD81+ extracellularvesicles from mesenchymal stromal cells rescue cognitive impairments after TBI. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2016 ,113, 170–175.[CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 44 of 48309. Shi, Y.; Shi, H.; Nomi, A.; Lei-Lei, Z.; Zhang, B.; Qian, H. Mesenchymal stem cell–derived extracellular vesicles: A new impetus ofpromoting angiogenesis in tissue regeneration. Cytotherapy 2019 ,21, 497–508. [CrossRef]310. Forsberg, M.H.; Kink, J.A.; Hematti, P .; Capitini, C.M. Mesenchymal Stromal Cells and Exosomes: Progress and Challenges. Front.Cell Dev. Biol. 2020 ,8, 665. [CrossRef]311. Dabrowska, S.; Andrzejewska, A.; Lukomska, B.; Janowski, M. Neuroinﬂammation as a target for treatment of stroke usingmesenchymal stem cells and extracellular vesicles. J. Neuroinﬂamm. 2019 ,16, 178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]312. Kharazi, U.; Badalzadeh, R. A review on the stem cell therapy and an introduction to exosomes as a new tool in reproductivemedicine. Reprod. Biol. 2020 ,20, 447–459. [CrossRef]313. Rahmani, A.; Saleki, K.; Javanmehr, N.; Khodaparast, J.; Saadat, P .; Nouri, H.R. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular
vesicle-based therapies protect against coupled degeneration of the central nervous and vascular systems in stroke. Ageing Res.Rev. 2020 ,62, 101106. [CrossRef]314. Roura, S.; Mongui ó-Tortajada, M.; Munizaga-Larroud é, M.; Clos-Sansalvador, M.; Franquesa, M.; Rosell, A.; Borr às, F.E. Potentialof Extracellular Vesicle-Associated TSG-6 from Adipose Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in Traumatic Brain Injury. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2020 ,21, 6761. [CrossRef] [PubMed]315. Zhang, Y.; Chopp, M.; Zhang, Z.G.; Katakowski, M.; Xin, H.; Qu, C.; Ali, M.; Mahmood, A.; Xiong, Y. Systemic administration ofcell-free exosomes generated by human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells cultured under 2D and 3D conditionsimproves functional recovery in rats after traumatic brain injury. Neurochem. Int. 2017 ,111, 69–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]316. Zhang, L.; Li, Y.-J.; Wu, X.-Y.; Hong, Z.; Wei, W.-S. MicroRNA-181c negatively regulates the inﬂammatory response in oxygen-
glucose-deprived microglia by targeting Toll-like receptor 4. J. Neurochem. 2015 ,132, 713–723. [CrossRef] [PubMed]317. Zhang, Z.G.; Buller, B.; Chopp, M. Exosomes—Beyond stem cells for restorative therapy in stroke and neurological injury. Nat.Rev. Neurol. 2019 ,15, 193–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]318. Muhammad, S.A. Mesenchymal stromal cell secretome as a therapeutic strategy for traumatic brain injury. BioFactors 2019 ,45,880–891. [CrossRef] [PubMed]319. Kim, S.; Lee, S.K.; Kim, H.; Kim, T.M. Exosomes Secreted from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Mesenchymal Stem CellsAccelerate Skin Cell Proliferation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 ,19, 3119. [CrossRef]320. Xiong, Y.; Mahmood, A.; Chopp, M. Emerging potential of exosomes for treatment of traumatic brain injury. Neural Regen. Res.2017 ,12, 19–22. [CrossRef]321. Singh, M.; Pandey, P .K.; Bhasin, A.; Padma, M.V .; Mohanty, S. Application of Stem Cells in Stroke: A Multifactorial Approach.
Front. Neurosci. 2020 ,14, 473. [CrossRef]322. Yousif, G.; Qadri, S.; Haik, M.; Haik, Y.; Parray, A.S.; Shuaib, A. Circulating Exosomes of Neuronal Origin as Potential EarlyBiomarkers for Development of Stroke. Mol. Diagn. Ther. 2021 ,25, 163–180. [CrossRef]323. Hong, S.-B.; Yang, H.; Manaenko, A.; Lu, J.; Mei, Q.; Hu, Q. Potential of Exosomes for the Treatment of Stroke. Cell Transplant.2018 ,28, 662–670. [CrossRef]324. Zagrean, A.-M.; Hermann, D.M.; Opris, I.; Zagrean, L.; Popa-Wagner, A. Multicellular Crosstalk Between Exosomes and theNeurovascular Unit After Cerebral Ischemia. Therapeutic Implications. Front. Neurosci. 2018 ,12, 811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]325. Chang, Y.-H.; Wu, K.-C.; Harn, H.-J.; Lin, S.-Z.; Ding, D.-C. Exosomes and Stem Cells in Degenerative Disease Diagnosis andTherapy. Cell Transplant. 2018 ,27, 349–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]326. Chen, J.; Chopp, M. Exosome Therapy for Stroke. Stroke 2018 ,49, 1083–1090. [CrossRef]
327. Cunningham, C.J.; Redondo-Castro, E.; Allan, S.M. The therapeutic potential of the mesenchymal stem cell secretome in ischaemic
327. Cunningham, C.J.; Redondo-Castro, E.; Allan, S.M. The therapeutic potential of the mesenchymal stem cell secretome in ischaemicstroke. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2018 ,38, 1276–1292. [CrossRef]328. Najar, M.; Martel-Pelletier, J.; Pelletier, J.P .; Fahmi, H. Novel insights for improving the therapeutic safety and efﬁciency ofmesenchymal stromal cells. World J. Stem Cells 2020 ,12, 1474–1491. [CrossRef]329. Xin, H.; Li, Y.; Cui, Y.; Yang, J.J.; Zhang, Z.G.; Chopp, M. Systemic Administration of Exosomes Released from MesenchymalStromal Cells Promote Functional Recovery and Neurovascular Plasticity After Stroke in Rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 2013 ,33,1711–1715. [CrossRef]330. Zheng, X.; Hermann, D.M.; Bähr, M.; Doeppner, T.R. The role of small extracellular vesicles in cerebral and myocardial ischemia-Molecular signals, treatment targets, and future clinical translation. Stem Cells 2021 ,39, 403–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
331. Um, S.; Ha, J.; Choi, S.J.; Oh, W.; Jin, H.J. Prospects for the therapeutic development of umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymalstem cells. World J. Stem Cells 2020 ,12, 1511–1528. [CrossRef]332. Bang, O.Y.; Kim, E.H. Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicle Therapy for Stroke: Challenges and Progress. Front.Neurol. 2019 ,10, 211. [CrossRef]333. Asrani, S.K.; Devarbhavi, H.; Eaton, J.; Kamath, P .S. Burden of liver diseases in the world. J. Hepatol. 2019 ,70, 151–171. [CrossRef][PubMed]334. Bandopadhyay, M.; Bharadwaj, M. Exosomal miRNAs in hepatitis B virus related liver disease: A new hope for biomarker. GutPathog. 2020 ,12, 23. [CrossRef]335. Cho, Y.-E.; Kim, S.-H.; Lee, B.-H.; Baek, M.-C. Circulating Plasma and Exosomal microRNAs as Indicators of Drug-Induced OrganInjury in Rodent Models. Biomol. Ther. 2017 ,25, 367–373. [CrossRef]
336. Hu, C.; Li, L. Improvement of mesenchymal stromal cells and their derivatives for treating acute liver failure. J. Mol. Med. 2019 ,97, 1065–1084. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 45 of 48337. Mahmood, A.; Seetharaman, R.; Kshatriya, P .; Patel, D.; Srivastava, A.S. Stem Cell Transplant for Advanced Stage Liver Disorders:Current Scenario and Future Prospects. Curr. Med. Chem. 2020 ,27, 6276–6293. [CrossRef]338. Momen-Heravi, F.; Saha, B.; Kodys, K.; Catalano, D.; Satishchandran, A.; Szabo, G. Increased number of circulating exosomes andtheir microRNA cargos are potential novel biomarkers in alcoholic hepatitis. J. Transl. Med. 2015 ,13, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]339. Tomimaru, Y.; Eguchi, H.; Nagano, H.; Wada, H.; Kobayashi, S.; Marubashi, S.; Tanemura, M.; Tomokuni, A.; Takemasa, I.;Umeshita, K.; et al. Circulating microRNA-21 as a novel biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Hepatol. 2012 ,56, 167–175.[CrossRef]340. Chen, L.; Charrier, A.; Zhou, Y.; Chen, R.; Yu, B.; Agarwal, K.; Tsukamoto, H.; Lee, L.J.; Paulaitis, M.E.; Brigstock, D.R. Epigenetic
regulation of connective tissue growth factor by MicroRNA-214 delivery in exosomes from mouse or human hepatic stellate cells.Hepatology 2014 ,59, 1118–1129. [CrossRef]341. Chen, L.; Chen, R.; Velazquez, V .M.; Brigstock, D.R. Fibrogenic Signaling Is Suppressed in Hepatic Stellate Cells through Targetingof Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CCN2) by Cellular or Exosomal MicroRNA-199a-5p. Am. J. Pathol. 2016 ,186, 2921–2933.[CrossRef]342. Lee, Y.-S.; Kim, S.Y.; Ko, E.; Lee, J.-H.; Yi, H.-S.; Yoo, Y.J.; Je, J.; Suh, S.J.; Jung, Y.K.; Kim, J.H.; et al. Exosomes derived frompalmitic acid-treated hepatocytes induce ﬁbrotic activation of hepatic stellate cells. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 1–10. [CrossRef]343. Jun, J.H.; Kim, J.Y.; Choi, J.H.; Lim, J.-Y.; Kim, K.; Kim, G.J. Exosomes from Placenta-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells AreInvolved in Liver Regeneration in Hepatic Failure Induced by Bile Duct Ligation. Stem Cells Int. 2020 ,2020 , 5485738. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]344. Nojima, H.; Freeman, C.M.; Schuster, R.M.; Japtok, L.; Kleuser, B.; Edwards, M.J.; Gulbins, E.; Lentsch, A.B. Hepatocyte exosomesmediate liver repair and regeneration via sphingosine-1-phosphate. J. Hepatol. 2016 ,64, 60–68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]345. Tan, C.Y.; Lai, R.C.; Wong, W.; Dan, Y.Y.; Lim, S.-K.; Ho, H.K. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes promote hepaticregeneration in drug-induced liver injury models. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2014 ,5, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]346. Yan, Y.; Jiang, W.; Tan, Y.; Zou, S.; Zhang, H.; Mao, F.; Gong, A.; Qian, H.; Xu, W. hucMSC Exosome-Derived GPX1 Is Required forthe Recovery of Hepatic Oxidant Injury. Mol. Ther. 2017 ,25, 465–479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]347. Nong, K.; Wang, W.; Niu, X.; Hu, B.; Ma, C.; Bai, Y.; Wu, B.; Wang, Y.; Ai, K. Hepatoprotective effect of exosomes from human-induced pluripotent stem cell–derived mesenchymal stromal cells against hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats. Cytotherapy
2016 ,18, 1548–1559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]348. Virani, S.S.; Alonso, A.; Benjamin, E.J.; Bittencourt, M.S.; Callaway, C.W.; Carson, A.P .; Chamberlain, A.M.; Chang, A.R.; Cheng, S.;Delling, F.N.; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2020 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation2020 ,141, E139–E596. [CrossRef]349. Zamani, P .; Fereydouni, N.; Butler, A.E.; Navashenaq, J.G.; Sahebkar, A. The therapeutic and diagnostic role of exosomes incardiovascular diseases. Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 2019 ,29, 313–323. [CrossRef]350. Vagnozzi, R.J.; Maillet, M.; Sargent, M.A.; Khalil, H.; Johansen, A.K.Z.; Schwanekamp, J.A.; York, A.J.; Huang, V .; Nahrendorf,M.; Sadayappan, S.; et al. An acute immune response underlies the beneﬁt of cardiac stem cell therapy. Nat. Cell Biol. 2020 ,577,405–409. [CrossRef]351. Wysoczynski, M.; Khan, A.; Bolli, R. New Paradigms in Cell Therapy. Circ. Res. 2018 ,123, 138–158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
352. Bang, C.; Batkai, S.; Dangwal, S.; Gupta, S.K.; Foinquinos, A.; Holzmann, A.; Just, A.; Remke, J.; Zimmer, K.; Zeug, A.; et al.
352. Bang, C.; Batkai, S.; Dangwal, S.; Gupta, S.K.; Foinquinos, A.; Holzmann, A.; Just, A.; Remke, J.; Zimmer, K.; Zeug, A.; et al.Cardiac ﬁbroblast–derived microRNA passenger strand-enriched exosomes mediate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. J. Clin. Investig.2014 ,124, 2136–2146. [CrossRef]353. Barile, L.; Cervio, E.; Lionetti, V .; Milano, G.; Ciullo, A.; Biemmi, V .; Bolis, S.; Altomare, C.; Matteucci, M.; Di Silvestre, D.; et al.Cardioprotection by cardiac progenitor cell-secreted exosomes: Role of pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A. Cardiovasc. Res.2018 ,114, 992–1005. [CrossRef] [PubMed]354. Beltrami, C.; Besnier, M.; Shantikumar, S.; Shearn, A.I.; Rajakaruna, C.; Laftah, A.; Sessa, F.; Spinetti, G.; Petretto, E.; Angelini,G.; et al. Human Pericardial Fluid Contains Exosomes Enriched with Cardiovascular-Expressed MicroRNAs and PromotesTherapeutic Angiogenesis. Mol. Ther. 2017 ,25, 679–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
355. Minghua, W.; Zhijian, G.; Chahua, H.; Qiang, L.; Minxuan, X.; Luqiao, W.; Weifang, Z.; Peng, L.; Biming, Z.; Lingling, Y.;et al. Plasma exosomes induced by remote ischaemic preconditioning attenuate myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury bytransferring miR-24. Cell Death Dis. 2018 ,9, 1–14. [CrossRef]356. Pironti, G.; Strachan, R.T.; Abraham, D.; Yu, S.M.-W.; Chen, M.; Chen, W.; Hanada, K.; Mao, L.; Watson, L.J.; Rockman, H.A.Circulating Exosomes Induced by Cardiac Pressure Overload Contain Functional Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptors. Circulation2015 ,131, 2120–2130. [CrossRef]357. Qiao, L.; Hu, S.; Liu, S.; Zhang, H.; Ma, H.; Huang, K.; Li, Z.; Su, T.; Vandergriff, A.; Tang, J.; et al. microRNA-21-5p dysregulationin exosomes derived from heart failure patients impairs regenerative potential. J. Clin. Investig. 2019 ,129, 2237–2250. [CrossRef]
358. Rautou, P .-E.; Bresson, J.; Sainte-Marie, Y.; Vion, A.-C.; Paradis, V .; Renard, J.; Devue, C.; Heymes, C.; Letteron, P .; Elkrief, L.;et al. Abnormal Plasma Microparticles Impair Vasoconstrictor Responses in Patients With Cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2012 ,143,166–176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]359. Sahoo, S.; Klychko, E.; Thorne, T.; Misener, S.; Schultz, K.M.; Millay, M.; Ito, A.; Liu, T.; Kamide, C.; Agrawal, H.; et al. ExosomesFrom Human CD34 + Stem Cells Mediate Their Proangiogenic Paracrine Activity. Circ. Res. 2011 ,109, 724–728. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 46 of 48360. Yamaguchi, T.; Izumi, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Yamazaki, T.; Shiota, M.; Sano, S.; Tanaka, M.; Osada-Oka, M.; Shimada, K.; Miura,K.; et al. Repeated remote ischemic conditioning attenuates left ventricular remodeling via exosome-mediated intercellularcommunication on chronic heart failure after myocardial infarction. Int. J. Cardiol. 2015 ,178, 239–246. [CrossRef]361. Beretti, F.; Zavatti, M.; Casciaro, F.; Comitini, G.; Franchi, F.; Barbieri, V .; La Sala, G.B.; Maraldi, T. Amniotic ﬂuid stem cellexosomes: Therapeutic perspective. BioFactors 2018 ,44, 158–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]362. Mentkowski, K.; Snitzer, J.D.; Rusnak, S.; Lang, J.K. Therapeutic Potential of Engineered Extracellular Vesicles. AAPS J. 2018 ,20,50. [CrossRef]363. Giricz, Z.; Varga, Z.; Baranyai, T.; Sipos, P .; P álóczi, K.; Kittel, Á.; Buz ás, E.I.; Ferdinandy, P . Cardioprotection by remote ischemic
preconditioning of the rat heart is mediated by extracellular vesicles. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 2014 ,68, 75–78. [CrossRef]364. Sahoo, S.; Losordo, D. Exosomes and Cardiac Repair After Myocardial Infarction. Circ. Res. 2014 ,114, 333–344. [CrossRef][PubMed]365. Vicencio, J.M.; Yellon, D.M.; Sivaraman, V .; Das, D.; Boi-Doku, C.; Arjun, S.; Zheng, Y.; A Riquelme, J.; Kearney, J.; Sharma, V .;et al. Plasma Exosomes Protect the Myocardium From Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2015 ,65, 1525–1536.[CrossRef]366. Huang, P .; Wang, L.; Li, Q.; Tian, X.; Xu, J.; Xu, J.; Xiong, Y.; Chen, G.; Qian, H.; Jin, C.; et al. Atorvastatin enhances the therapeuticefﬁcacy of mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes in acute myocardial infarction via up-regulating long non-coding RNAH19. Cardiovasc. Res. 2020 ,116, 353–367. [CrossRef]367. Wang, X.; Chen, Y.; Zhao, Z.; Meng, Q.; Yu, Y.; Sun, J.; Yang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Li, J.; Ma, T.; et al. Engineered Exosomes With Ischemic
Myocardium-Targeting Peptide for Targeted Therapy in Myocardial Infarction. J. Am. Hear. Assoc. 2018 ,7, e008737. [CrossRef][PubMed]368. Pan, J.; Alimujiang, M.; Chen, Q.; Shi, H.; Luo, X. Exosomes derived from miR-146a-modiﬁed adipose-derived stem cells attenuateacute myocardial infarction −induced myocardial damage via downregulation of early growth response factor 1. J. Cell. Biochem.2019 ,120, 4433–4443. [CrossRef]369. Liu, J.; Jiang, M.; Deng, S.; Lu, J.; Huang, H.; Zhang, Y.; Gong, P .; Shen, X.; Ruan, H.; Jin, M.; et al. miR-93-5p-Containing ExosomesTreatment Attenuates Acute Myocardial Infarction-Induced Myocardial Damage. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 2018 ,11, 103–115.[CrossRef] [PubMed]370. Zhu, L.-P .; Tian, T.; Wang, J.-Y.; He, J.-N.; Chen, T.; Pan, M.; Xu, L.; Zhang, H.-X.; Qiu, X.-T.; Li, C.-C.; et al. Hypoxia-elicitedmesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes facilitates cardiac repair through miR-125b-mediated prevention of cell death in
myocardial infarction. Theranostics 2018 ,8, 6163–6177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]371. Li, J.; Xue, H.; Li, T.; Chu, X.; Xin, D.; Xiong, Y.; Qiu, W.; Gao, X.; Qian, M.; Xu, J.; et al. Exosomes derived from mesenchymalstem cells attenuate the progression of atherosclerosis in ApoE −/−mice via miR-let7 mediated inﬁltration and polarization ofM2 macrophage. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2019 ,510, 565–572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]372. de Couto, G.; Gallet, R.; Cambier, L.; Jaghatspanyan, E.; Makkar, N.; Dawkins, J.F.; Berman, B.P .; Marb án, E. Exosomal MicroRNATransfer Into Macrophages Mediates Cellular Postconditioning. Circulation 2017 ,136, 200–214. [CrossRef]373. Zhao, J.; Li, X.; Hu, J.; Chen, F.; Qiao, S.; Sun, X.; Gao, L.; Xie, J.; Xu, B. Mesenchymal stromal cell-derived exosomes attenuatemyocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury through miR-182-regulated macrophage polarization. Cardiovasc. Res. 2019 ,115,1205–1216. [CrossRef]
1205–1216. [CrossRef]374. Lankford, K.L.; Arroyo, E.J.; Nazimek, K.; Bryniarski, K.; Askenase, P .W.; Kocsis, J.D. Intravenously delivered mesenchymal stem
1205–1216. [CrossRef]374. Lankford, K.L.; Arroyo, E.J.; Nazimek, K.; Bryniarski, K.; Askenase, P .W.; Kocsis, J.D. Intravenously delivered mesenchymal stemcell-derived exosomes target M2-type macrophages in the injured spinal cord. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13, e0190358. [CrossRef]375. Beg, F.; Wang, R.; Saeed, Z.; Devaraj, S.; Masoor, K.; Nakshatri, H. Inﬂammation-associated microRNA changes in circulatingexosomes of heart failure patients. BMC Res. Notes 2017 ,10, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]376. Wang, C.; Zhang, C.; Liu, L.; A, X.; Chen, B.; Li, Y.; Du, J. Macrophage-Derived mir-155-Containing Exosomes Suppress FibroblastProliferation and Promote Fibroblast Inﬂammation during Cardiac Injury. Mol. Ther. 2017 ,25, 192–204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]377. Gao, W.; Liu, H.; Yuan, J.; Wu, C.; Huang, D.; Ma, Y.; Zhu, J.; Ma, L.; Guo, J.; Shi, H.; et al. Exosomes derived from maturedendritic cells increase endothelial inﬂammation and atherosclerosis via membrane TNF - αmediated NF - κB pathway. J. Cell.
Mol. Med. 2016 ,20, 2318–2327. [CrossRef]378. Bureau, U.C. Statistical Abstract of the United States 2012 . Available online: http://www.census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/statab/131ed.html (accessed on 31 July 2021).379. Riggs, B.L.; Melton, I.J. Thin bones may break without sticks or stones. Trends Endocrinol. Metabol. 1996 ,7, 152–153.380. Osteoporosis|The Second Fifty Years: Promoting Health and Preventing Disability|The National Academies Press. Availableonline: https://www.nap.edu/read/1578/chapter/8 (accessed on 23 April 2021).381. van der Eerden, B.C. MicroRNAs in the skeleton: Cell-restricted or potent intercellular communicators? Arch. Biochem. Biophys.2014 ,561, 46–55. [CrossRef]382. Xie, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Ge, W.; Tang, P . The roles of bone-derived exosomes and exosomal microRNAs in regulating boneremodelling. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2017 ,21, 1033–1041. [CrossRef]
383. Claes, L.; Recknagel, S.; Ignatius, A. Fracture healing under healthy and inﬂammatory conditions. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 2012 ,8,133–143. [CrossRef]384. Cui, Y.; Luan, J.; Li, H.; Zhou, X.; Han, J. Exosomes derived from mineralizing osteoblasts promote ST2 cell osteogenicdifferentiation by alteration of microRNA expression. FEBS Lett. 2016 ,590, 185–192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 47 of 48385. Kuang, M.-J.; Huang, Y.; Zhao, X.-G.; Zhang, R.; Ma, J.-X.; Wang, D.-C.; Ma, X.-L. Exosomes derived from Wharton’s jelly ofhuman umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells reduce osteocyte apoptosis in glucocorticoid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoralhead in rats via the miR-21-PTEN-AKT signalling pathway. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2019 ,15, 1861–1871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]386. Li, D.; Liu, J.; Guo, B.; Liang, C.; Dang, L.; Lu, C.; He, X.; Cheung, H.Y.-S.; Xu, L.; Lu, C.; et al. Osteoclast-derived exosomalmiR-214-3p inhibits osteoblastic bone formation. Nat. Commun. 2016 ,7, 10872. [CrossRef]387. Qin, Y.; Peng, Y.; Zhao, W.; Pan, J.; Ksiezak-Reding, H.; Cardozo, C.; Wu, Y.; Pajevic, P .D.; Bonewald, L.F.; Bauman, W.A.; et al.Myostatin inhibits osteoblastic differentiation by suppressing osteocyte-derived exosomal microRNA-218: A novel mechanism inmuscle-bone communication. J. Biol. Chem. 2017 ,292, 11021–11033. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
388. Ren, L.; Song, Z.-J.; Cai, Q.-W.; Chen, R.-X.; Zou, Y.; Fu, Q.; Ma, Y.-Y. Adipose mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes amelioratehypoxia/serum deprivation-induced osteocyte apoptosis and osteocyte-mediated osteoclastogenesis in vitro .Biochem. Biophys.Res. Commun. 2019 ,508, 138–144. [CrossRef]389. Sun, W.; Zhao, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, L.; Nie, G.; Peng, J.; Wang, A.; Zhang, P .; Tian, W.; Li, Q.; et al. Osteoclast-derived microRNA-containing exosomes selectively inhibit osteoblast activity. Cell Discov. 2016 ,2, 16015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]390. Yang, J.-X.; Xie, P .; Li, Y.-S.; Wen, T.; Yang, X.-C. Osteoclast-derived miR-23a-5p-containing exosomes inhibit osteogenic differenti-ation by regulating Runx2. Cell. Signal. 2020 ,70, 109504. [CrossRef]391. Xu, J.-F.; Yang, G.-H.; Pan, X.-H.; Zhang, S.-J.; Zhao, C.; Qiu, B.-S.; Gu, H.-F.; Hong, J.-F.; Cao, L.; Chen, Y.; et al. Altered MicroRNA
Expression Proﬁle in Exosomes during Osteogenic Differentiation of Human Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, e114627. [CrossRef]392. Lu, Z.; Chen, Y.; Dunstan, C.; Roohani-Esfahani, S.; Zreiqat, H. Priming Adipose Stem Cells with Tumor Necrosis Factor-AlphaPreconditioning Potentiates Their Exosome Efﬁcacy for Bone Regeneration. Tissue Eng. Part A 2017 ,23, 1212–1220. [CrossRef]393. Zhang, J.; Liu, X.; Li, H.; Chen, C.; Hu, B.; Niu, X.; Li, Q.; Zhao, B.; Xie, Z.; Wang, Y. Exosomes/tricalcium phosphate combinationscaffolds can enhance bone regeneration by activating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2016 ,7, 1–14.[CrossRef]394. Cappariello, A.; Loftus, A.; Muraca, M.; Maurizi, A.; Rucci, N.; Teti, A. Osteoblast-Derived Extracellular Vesicles Are BiologicalTools for the Delivery of Active Molecules to Bone. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2018 ,33, 517–533. [CrossRef]
395. Huynh, N.; VonMoss, L.; Smith, D.; Rahman, I.; Felemban, M.; Zuo, J.; Rody, J.W.; McHugh, K.; Holliday, L. Characterization ofRegulatory Extracellular Vesicles from Osteoclasts. J. Dent. Res. 2016 ,95, 673–679. [CrossRef]396. Furuta, T.; Miyaki, S.; Ishitobi, H.; Ogura, T.; Kato, Y.; Kamei, N.; Miyado, K.; Higashi, Y.; Ochi, M. Mesenchymal StemCell-Derived Exosomes Promote Fracture Healing in a Mouse Model. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2016 ,5, 1620–1630. [CrossRef]397. Zhang, S.; Chu, W.; Lai, R.C.; Lim, S.K.; Hui, J.H.P .; Toh, W. Exosomes derived from human embryonic mesenchymal stem cellspromote osteochondral regeneration. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2016 ,24, 2135–2140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]398. Grundnes, O.; Reikeraas, O. Effects of macrophage activation on bone healing. J. Orthop. Sci. 2000 ,5, 243–247. [CrossRef]399. Schmidt-Bleek, K.; Schell, H.; Schulz, N.; Hoff, P .; Perka, C.; Buttgereit, F.; Volk, H.-D.; Lienau, J.; Duda, G.N. Inﬂammatory phase
of bone healing initiates the regenerative healing cascade. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 ,347, 567–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
of bone healing initiates the regenerative healing cascade. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 ,347, 567–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed]400. Yu, B.; Zhang, X.; Li, X. Exosomes Derived from Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014 ,15, 4142–4157. [CrossRef][PubMed]401. Chen, W.; Huang, Y.; Han, J.; Yukai, H.; Li, Y.; Lu, Z.; Li, H.; Liu, Z.; Shi, C.; Duan, F.; et al. Immunomodulatory effects ofmesenchymal stromal cells-derived exosome. Immunol. Res. 2016 ,64, 831–840. [CrossRef]402. Zhang, W.; Wray, L.S.; Rnjak-Kovacina, J.; Xu, L.; Zou, D.; Wang, S.; Zhang, M.; Dong, J.; Li, G.; Kaplan, D.L.; et al. Vascularizationof hollow channel-modiﬁed porous silk scaffolds with endothelial cells for tissue regeneration. Biomaterials 2015 ,56, 68–77.[CrossRef]403. Deregibus, M.C.; Cantaluppi, V .; Calogero, R.; Lo Iacono, M.; Tetta, C.; Biancone, L.; Bruno, S.; Bussolati, B.; Camussi, G.
Endothelial progenitor cell–derived microvesicles activate an angiogenic program in endothelial cells by a horizontal transfer ofmRNA. Blood 2007 ,110, 2440–2448. [CrossRef]404. Bian, S.; Zhang, L.; Duan, L.; Wang, X.; Min, Y.; Yu, H. Extracellular vesicles derived from human bone marrow mesenchymalstem cells promote angiogenesis in a rat myocardial infarction model. J. Mol. Med. 2014 ,92, 387–397. [CrossRef]405. Zhang, H.; Liu, X.-B.; Huang, S.; Bi, X.-Y.; Wang, H.-X.; Xie, L.-X.; Wang, Y.-Q.; Cao, X.-F.; Lv, J.; Xiao, F.-J.; et al. MicrovesiclesDerived from Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells Stimulated by Hypoxia Promote Angiogenesis Both In Vitro andIn Vivo. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 ,21, 3289–3297. [CrossRef] [PubMed]406. Xie, H.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, L.; Lei, Q.; Zhao, A.; Wang, H.; Li, Q.; Cao, Y.; Zhang, W.J.; Chen, Z. Extracellular Vesicle-functionalized
Decalciﬁed Bone Matrix Scaffolds with Enhanced Pro-angiogenic and Pro-bone Regeneration Activities. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7,srep45622. [CrossRef] [PubMed]407. Qi, X.; Zhang, J.; Yuan, H.; Xu, Z.; Li, Q.; Niu, X.; Hu, B.; Wang, Y.; Li, X. Exosomes Secreted by Human-Induced Pluripotent StemCell-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Repair Critical-Sized Bone Defects through Enhanced Angiogenesis and Osteogenesis inOsteoporotic Rats. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2016 ,12, 836–849. [CrossRef] [PubMed]408. Wei, J.; Li, H.; Wang, S.; Li, T.; Fan, J.; Liang, X.; Li, J.; Han, Q.; Zhu, L.; Fan, L.; et al. let-7 Enhances Osteogenesis and BoneFormation While Repressing Adipogenesis of Human Stromal/Mesenchymal Stem Cells by Regulating HMGA2. Stem Cells Dev.2014 ,23, 1452–1463. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021 ,10, 1959 48 of 48409. Xu, S.; Santini, G.C.; De Veirman, K.; Broek, I.V .; Leleu, X.; De Becker, A.; Van Camp, B.; Vanderkerken, K.; Van Riet, I. Upregulationof miR-135b Is Involved in the Impaired Osteogenic Differentiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Derived from Multiple MyelomaPatients. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e79752. [CrossRef] [PubMed]410. Bakhshandeh, B.; Haﬁzi, M.; Ghaemi, N.; Soleimani, M. Down-regulation of miRNA-221 triggers osteogenic differentiation inhuman stem cells. Biotechnol. Lett. 2012 ,34, 1579–1587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]411. Sun, Y.; Xu, L.; Huang, S.; Hou, Y.; Liu, Y.; Chan, K.-M.; Pan, X.-H.; Li, G. mir-21 Overexpressing Mesenchymal Stem CellsAccelerate Fracture Healing in a Rat Closed Femur Fracture Model. BioMed Res. Int. 2015 ,2015 , 412327. [CrossRef]412. Li, H.; Liang, A.; Yang, F.; Wang, Z.; Fu, Q. MicroRNA-21 promotes osteogenic differentiation by targeting small mothers againstdecapentaplegic 7. Mol. Med. Rep. 2012 ,12, 1561–1567. [CrossRef]
413. Meng, Y.-B.; Li, X.; Li, Z.-Y.; Zhao, J.; Yuan, X.-B.; Ren, Y.; Cui, Z.-D.; Liu, Y.-D.; Yang, X.-J. microRNA-21 promotes osteogenicdifferentiation of mesenchymal stem cells by the PI3K/ β-catenin pathway. J. Orthop. Res. 2015 ,33, 957–964. [CrossRef]414. Chan, J.F.-W.; Yuan, S.; Kok, K.-H.; To, K.K.-W.; Chu, H.; Yang, J.; Xing, F.; Liu, J.; Yip, C.C.-Y.; Poon, R.W.-S.; et al. A familialcluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: A study of a familycluster. Lancet 2020 ,395, 514–523. [CrossRef]415. Wu, F.; Zhao, S.; Yu, B.; Chen, Y.-M.; Wang, W.; Song, Z.-G.; Hu, Y.; Tao, Z.-W.; Tian, J.-H.; Pei, Y.-Y.; et al. A new coronavirusassociated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature 2020 ,579, 265–269. [CrossRef]416. Zhu, N.; Zhang, D.; Wang, W.; Li, X.; Yang, B.; Song, J.; Zhao, X.; Huang, B.; Shi, W.; Lu, R.; et al. A Novel Coronavirus from
Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020 ,382, 727–733. [CrossRef] [PubMed]417. Chin, A.W.H.; Chu, J.T.S.; Perera, M.R.A.; Hui, K.P .Y.; Yen, H.-L.; Chan, M.C.W.; Peiris, M.; Poon, L.L.M. Stability of SARS-CoV-2in different environmental conditions. Lancet Microbe 2020 ,1, e10. [CrossRef]418. Bernardo, M.E.; Fibbe, W.E. Mesenchymal Stromal Cells: Sensors and Switchers of Inﬂammation. Cell Stem Cell 2013 ,13, 392–402.[CrossRef]419. DelaRosa, O.; S ánchez-Correa, B.; Morgado, S.; Ram írez, C.; Del R ío, B.; Menta, R.; Lombardo, E.; Tarazona, R.; Casado, J.G.Human Adipose-Derived Stem Cells Impair Natural Killer Cell Function and Exhibit Low Susceptibility to Natural Killer-Mediated Lysis. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 ,21, 1333–1343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]420. Raffaghello, L.; Bianchi, G.; Bertolotto, M.B.; Montecucco, F.; Busca, A.; Dallegri, F.; Ottonello, L.C.; Pistoia, V . Human Mesenchy-
mal Stem Cells Inhibit Neutrophil Apoptosis: A Model for Neutrophil Preservation in the Bone Marrow Niche. Stem Cells 2008 ,26, 151–162. [CrossRef] [PubMed]421. Hoffmann, M.; Kleine-Weber, H.; Krüger, N.; Müller, M.; Drosten, C.; Pöhlmann, S. The novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) usesthe sars-coronavirus receptor ace2 and the cellular protease tmprss2 for entry into target cells. bioRxiv 2020 . [CrossRef]422. Li, F.; Li, W.; Farzan, M.; Harrison, S.C. Structure of SARS Coronavirus Spike Receptor-Binding Domain Complexed with Receptor.Science 2005 ,309, 1864–1868. [CrossRef] [PubMed]423. Leng, Z.; Zhu, R.; Hou, W.; Feng, Y.; Yang, Y.; Han, Q.; Shan, G.; Meng, F.; Du, D.; Wang, S.; et al. Transplantation of ACE2-Mesenchymal Stem Cells Improves the Outcome of Patients with COVID-19 Pneumonia. Aging Dis. 2020 ,11, 216–228. [CrossRef]424. Liang, B.; Chen, J.; Li, T.; Wu, H.; Yang, W.; Li, Y.; Li, J.; Yu, C.; Nie, F.; Ma, Z.; et al. Clinical remission of a critically ill COVID-19
patient treated by human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells. Medicine 2020 ,99, 1–6. [CrossRef]
patient treated by human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells. Medicine 2020 ,99, 1–6. [CrossRef]425. Li, X.; Liu, L.; Yang, J.; Yu, Y.; Chai, J.; Wang, L.; Ma, L.; Yin, H. Exosome Derived From Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal StemCell Mediates MiR-181c Attenuating Burn-induced Excessive Inﬂammation. EBioMedicine 2016 ,8, 72–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]426. Long, Q.; Upadhya, D.; Hattiangady, B.; Kim, D.-K.; An, S.Y.; Shuai, B.; Prockop, D.J.; Shetty, A.K. Intranasal MSC-derivedA1-exosomes ease inﬂammation, and prevent abnormal neurogenesis and memory dysfunction after status epilepticus. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017 ,114, E3536–E3545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]427. Batrakova, E.V .; Kim, M. Using exosomes, naturally-equipped nanocarriers, for drug delivery. J. Control. Release 2015 ,219,396–405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
