elifesciences.orgRESEARCH ARTICLEEvolution of alternative biosyntheticpathways for vitamin C following plastidacquisition in photosynthetic eukaryotesGlen Wheeler1*, Takahiro Ishikawa2, Varissa Pornsaksit3, Nicholas Smirnoff3*1Marine Biological Association, Plymouth, United Kingdom;2Department of LifeScience and Biotechnology, Shimane University, Matsue, Japan;3Biosciences, Collegeof Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, United KingdomAbstract Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is an enzyme co-factor in eukaryotes that also plays a criticalrole in protecting photosynthetic eukaryotes against damaging reactive oxygen species derivedfrom the chloroplast. Many animal lineages, including primates, have become ascorbate auxotrophsdue to the loss of the terminal enzyme in their biosynthetic pathway,L-gulonolactone oxidase(GULO). The alternative pathways found in land plants and Euglena use a different terminal enzyme,
L-galactonolactone dehydrogenase (GLDH). The evolutionary processes leading to these differingpathways and their contribution to the cellular roles of ascorbate remain unclear. Here we presentmolecular and biochemical evidence demonstrating that GULO was functionally replaced with GLDHin photosynthetic eukaryote lineages following plastid acquisition. GULO has therefore been lostrepeatedly throughout eukaryote evolution. The formation of the alternative biosynthetic pathwaysin photosynthetic eukaryotes uncoupled ascorbate synthesis from hydrogen peroxide productionand likely contributed to the rise of ascorbate as a major photoprotective antioxidant.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.001IntroductionAscorbate (vitamin C) plays an essential role in eukaryotes as an enzyme co-factor in hydroxylationreactions, contributing to diverse processes such as the synthesis of collagen and the demethylation of
histones and nucleic acids ( Mandl et al., 2009 ;Blaschke et al., 2013 ). Ascorbate also plays anantioxidant role in eukaryotes to help protect against reactive oxygen species (ROS) derived frommetabolic activity. The majority of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) generated in some organelles is likelyreduced by other antioxidant systems, such as the peroxiredoxins and glutathione peroxidases in themitochondria, and catalases in the peroxisome ( Mhamdi et al., 2012 ;Sies, 2014 ). However, ascorbateplays an important role in protecting photosynthetic cells against ROS derived from the chloroplast(Smirnoff, 2011 ). Ascorbate peroxidase (APX), which is found in both the cytosol and the chloroplast ofphotosynthetic eukaryotes, is central to this photoprotective role. Thylakoid- and stroma-localised APXremoves H2O2produced by photosystem I through the activity of the ascorbate-glutathione cycle and
this process may account for 10% of photosynthetic electron transport flow. Ascorbate also playsa critical role in preventing lipid peroxidation in the thylakoid membranes and acts as a co-factor forviolaxanthin de-epoxidase in the xanthophyll cycle. In addition, ascorbate in the thylakoid lumen mayprevent photoinhibition in high light by directly donating electrons to the photosynthetic electrontransport chain ( Smirnoff, 2011 ). These roles have been demonstrated in a range of ascorbatedeficient plants that display sensitivity to high light and to oxidants ( Smirnoff, 2011 ).Photosynthetic eukaryotes arose following the endosymbiotic acquisition of a cyanobacterialancestor by a non-photosynthetic eukaryote in the Archaeplastida (Plantae) lineage ( Keeling, 2010 ).Several other eukaryote lineages, including the diatoms, haptophytes and euglenids, subsequently*For correspondence: glw@mba.ac.uk (GW); n.smirnoff@exeter.ac.uk (NS)Competing interests: Theauthors declare that no
Competing interests: Theauthors declare that nocompeting interests exist.Funding: See page 19Received: 07 January 2015Accepted: 12 March 2015Published: 13 March 2015Reviewing editor : JoergBohlmann, University of BritishColumbia, CanadaCopyright Wheeler et al. This
Funding: See page 19Received: 07 January 2015Accepted: 12 March 2015Published: 13 March 2015Reviewing editor : JoergBohlmann, University of BritishColumbia, CanadaCopyright Wheeler et al. Thisarticle is distributed under theterms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , whichpermits unrestricted use andredistribution provided that theoriginal author and source arecredited.Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 1o f2 5
gained plastids through a secondary endosymbiosis with either a red or green alga. These plastidendosymbioses were accompanied by lateral gene transfer on a massive scale from the symbiont to thehost nuclear genome (known as endosymbiotic gene transfer or EGT), giving rise to the complexphysiologies of photosynthetic eukaryotes ( Timmis et al., 2004 ). The plastids in the majorphotosynthetic eukaryote lineages are all ultimately derived from the primary endosymbiosis. Whilstacquisition of a photosynthetic endosymbiont may have been beneficial to the host cell in many ways,the plastid is also a major source of potentially damaging ROS ( Dorrell and Howe, 2012 ). There isevidence for extensive leakage of H2O2out of plastids via aquaporins, particularly at high light intensities(Mubarakshina et al., 2010 ;Naydov et al., 2012 ). Plastid acquisition is therefore associated witha greatly increased requirement for cellular antioxidant systems to prevent photodamage. Cyanobac-
teria do not possess APX or any of the known enzymes for ascorbate biosynthesis and minimise photo-oxidative stress using alternative mechanisms, such as peroxiredoxins, catalases and glutathioneperoxidases ( Z´amock ´ye ta l . ,2 0 1 0 ;Gest et al., 2013 ). This suggests that ascorbate was most likelyrecruited to its photoprotective role after the acquisition of the plastid in ancestral Archaeplastida ( Gestet al., 2013 ), although the evolutionary origins of ascorbate biosynthesis are unclear.There is no clear evidence for ascorbate biosy nthesis in prokaryotes (see ‘Materials andmethods’), suggesting that the ability to synthes ise ascorbate evolved in eukaryotes. The threeeukaryote lineages in which ascorbate biosynt hesis has been examined extensively (animals,plants and Euglena ) all exhibit different biosynthetic pathways ( Figure 1 ). These pathways mayhave arisen due to convergent evolution, or ma y represent modifications of an ancestral
pathway. An understanding of these evolutionar y relationships will provide insight into thecellular roles of ascorbate in eukaryotes, particularly in relation to plastid acquisition in thephotosynthetic lineages.eLife digest Animals, plants, algae and other eukaryotic organisms all need vitamin C to enablemany of their enzymes to work properly. Vitamin C also protects plant and algal cells from damageby molecules called reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can be produced when these cells harvestenergy from sunlight in a process called photosynthesis. Photosynthesis occurs inside structurescalled chloroplasts, and has evolved on multiple occasions in eukaryotes when non-photosyntheticorganisms acquired chloroplasts from other algae and then had to develop improved defencesagainst ROS.There are several steps involved in the production of vitamin C. In many animals, an enzyme called
GULO carries out the final step by converting a molecule known as an aldonolactone into vitamin C;this reaction also produces ROS as a waste product. The GULO enzyme is missing in humans,primates and some other groups of animals, so these organisms must get all the vitamin C they needfrom their diet.Plants and algae use a different enzyme—called GLDH—to make vitamin C from aldonolactone.GLDH is very similar to GULO, but it does not produce ROS as a waste product. It is not clear howthe different pathways have evolved, or why some animals have lost the ability to make their ownvitamin C.Here, Wheeler et al. used genetics and biochemistry to investigate the evolutionary origins of
vitamin C production in a variety of eukaryotic organisms. This investigation revealed that althoughGULO is missing from the insects and several other groups of animals, it is present in the spongesand many other eukaryotes. This suggests that GULO evolved in early eukaryotic organisms and hassince been lost by the different groups of animals. On the other hand, GLDH is only found in plantsand the other eukaryotes that can photosynthesize.
Wheeler et al.’s findings suggest that GULO has been lost and replaced by GLDH in all plants andalgae following their acquisition of chloroplasts. GDLH allows plants and algae to make vitamin Cwithout also producing ROS, which could explain why vitamin C has been able to take on an extrarole in these organisms. The results allow us to better understand the functions of vitamin C inphotosynthetic organisms and the processes associated with the acquisition of chloroplasts duringevolution.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.002Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 2o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Figure 1 . Major ascorbate biosynthetic pathways in eukaryotes. The scheme depicts the three major ascorbatebiosynthetic pathways found in eukaryotes ( Shigeoka et al., 1979 ;Wheeler et al., 1998 ;Linster and VanSchaftingen, 2007 ). The plant pathway (also known as the Smirnoff-Wheeler or D-mannose/ L-galactose pathway)involves no inversion of the carbon chain (i.e., C1 of D-glucose becomes C1 of L-ascorbate), whereas the euglenidand animal pathways involve inversion of the carbon chain in the conversion from uronic acid to aldonolactone(i.e., C1 of D-glucose becomes C6 of L-ascorbate). Our analyses focus on enzymes with a dedicated role in ascorbatebiosynthesis (shown in red): GULO— L-GulL oxidase; VTC2—GDP- L-galactose phosphorylase; VTC4— L-galactose-1-phosphate phosphatase; L-galDH— L-galactose dehydrogenase; GLDH— L-GalL dehydrogenase. The otherenzymes are: PGM—phosphoglucomutase; UGP—UDP- D-glucose pyrophosphorylase; UGDH—UDP- D-glucoseFigure 1. continued on next page
Figure 1. continued on next pageWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 3o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Animals synthesise ascorbate via D-glucuronic acid and L-gulonolactone ( L-GulL), with L-gulonolactoneoxidase (GULO) catalysing the oxidation of L-GulL to ascorbate. Many animal lineages have lost theability to synthesise ascorbate, including haplorhine primates, guinea pigs, teleost fish, some bats andpasserine birds. In all of the animal ascorbate auxotrophs that have been examined, the geneencoding GULO is lost ( Nishikimi et al., 1992 ,1994 ;Cui et al., 2011a ;Drouin et al., 2011 ). GULOuses molecular O2as its electron acceptor, resulting in H 2O2production, which may have contributedto selective pressure to lose this enzyme in some animals ( B´anhegyi et al., 1996 ;Mandl et al., 2009 ).The inability of many invertebrates to synthesise ascorbate led to early speculation that ascorbatesynthesis may have evolved later in metazoan evolution ( Chatterjee, 1973 ). However, whilst the loss
ofGULO in vertebrate lineages has been extensively examined ( Yang, 2013 ), little is known about itsdistribution in invertebrates or the non-metazoan members of the holozoa. This information is requiredto identify the selective pressures underlying the evolution of ascorbate auxotrophy in animals.Two alternative routes to ascorbate biosynthesis have been identified in photosyntheticeukaryotes, which both employ L-galactonolactone dehydrogenase (GLDH) as the terminal enzymeinstead of GULO. A pathway via D-galacturonic acid and L-galactonolactone ( L-GalL) was identified inEuglena (Shigeoka et al., 1979 ). This pathway is analogous to the animal pathway and also appears tobe functional in some stramenopile algae ( Helsper et al., 1982 ;Gr¨un and Loewus, 1984 ). In contrast,ascorbate biosynthesis in land plants was found to occur via a different route using D-mannose andL-galactose ( Wheeler et al., 1998 ). Green algae also use the ‘plant pathway’ ( Running et al., 2003 ;
Urzica et al., 2012 ), but evidence is lacking for the nature of ascorbate biosynthesis in many otherevolutionarily important lineages, most notably the rhodophytes (red algae).This paper focuses on the distribution of the three major pathways of ascorbate biosynthesisdescribed above. Alternative routes of ascorbate biosynthesis have been described in trypanosomesand also in the fungi, which synthesise a range of ascorbate analogues (see ‘Materials and methods’)(Loewus, 1999 ;Logan et al., 2007 ). There is some evidence for the operation of alternative routes toascorbate in land plants ( Wolucka and Van Montagu, 2003 ;Lorence et al., 2004 ;Badejo et al.,2012 ), although molecular genetic evidence from Arabidopsis indicates that the D-mannose/L-galactose pathway is the primary route of ascorbate biosynthesis (see ‘Materials and methods’)(Conklin et al., 1999 ;Dowdle et al., 2007 ).The three major pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis therefore all utilise different routes to
synthesise an aldonolactone precursor ( L-gulonolactone, L-GulL or L-galactonolactone, L-GalL), whichis converted to ascorbate by either GULO (animal pathway) or GLDH (plant and euglenid pathways)(Shigeoka et al., 1979 ;Wheeler et al., 1998 ;Loewus, 1999 ). GULO and GLDH exhibit significantsequence similarity and are both members of the vanillyl alcohol oxidase (VAO) family of flavoproteins(Leferink et al., 2008 ). These similar enzymes exhibit important biochemical differences. GULO canoxidise L-GulL and L-GalL, whereas GLDH is highly specific for L-GalL ( Smirnoff, 2001 ). GULO localisesto the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), whereas GLDH is associated with complex I in themitochondrial electron transport chain ( Schertl et al., 2012 ). Importantly, GLDH does not generateH2O2,as it uses cytochrome crather than O 2as an electron acceptor.Despite the importance of ascorbate in eukaryote physiology, it is not known how the different
pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis arose in animals, plants and algae or relate to its differing cellular
pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis arose in animals, plants and algae or relate to its differing cellularroles. This manuscript examines the origins of ascorbate biosynthesis in eukaryotes and seeks toaddress the following important gaps in our current knowledge: (1) what is the wider distribution ofGULO loss and ascorbate auxotrophy in the metazoa? (2) do all photosynthetic eukaryotes use analternative terminal enzyme to animals? (3) why do two different pathways using GLDH exist inphotosynthetic eukaryotes? (4) which pathway is used in the rhodophytes? Using a combination ofmolecular and biochemical analyses, we present evidence that GULO is an ancestral gene ineukaryotes that has been functionally replaced by GLDH in the photosynthetic lineages, resulting inthe development of their alternative biosynthetic pathways.Figure 1. Continueddehydrogenase; UGUR—UDP-glucuronidase; GlcUAR— D-glucuronate reductase; SMP30—regucalcin/lactonase;
GAE—UDP- D-glucuronate-4-epimerase; GalUAR— D-galacturonate reductase. Enzyme names are not listed for stepswhere multiple enzymes may be involved or where specific enzymes have not been identified.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.003Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 4o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
ResultsDistribution of GULO and GLDH in eukaryote genomesTo examine the origins of ascorbate biosynthesis in eukaryotes we analysed the distribution of GULOand GLDH in eukaryote genomes. We found that GULO and GLDH have a mutually exclusivedistribution ( Figure 2 ).GULO is absent from many metazoan genomes, including all insects,supporting earlier biochemical evidence that insects are predominately ascorbate auxotrophs(Supplementary file 1 )(Chatterjee, 1973 ;Dadd, 1973 ). However, GULO is present in basally derivedmetazoans, including sponges and cnidarians, and is also present in a filasterean ( Capsasporaowczarzaki ) and in fungi ( Supplementary file 1 ). This suggests that ascorbate synthesis via GULO is anancestral trait in the Opisthokonta that has been lost in many lineages.GULO is also present the Apusomonadida ( Thecamonas trahens ), a sister group to theOpisthokonts, and in members of the Amoebozoa and Excavata. Surprisingly, we also found GULO
in basally derived Archaeplastida including the glaucophyte, Cyanophora paradoxa , and therhodophytes Galdieria sulphuraria andGaldieria phlegrea . The glaucophytes occupy a key positionin the evolution of photosynthetic eukaryotes as they diverged from the other Archaeplastida beforethe split of the red and green algal lineages and have highly unusual chloroplasts (termed cyanelles)that retain several features of the cyanobacterial endosymbiont ( Price et al., 2012 ).GULO is absentfrom all other Archaeplastida genomes, although an enzyme family exhibiting weak similarity to GULOhas been reported in Arabidopsis (Maruta et al., 2010 ). However, this enzyme forms a distinctphylogenetic clade from all other GULO and GLDH sequences and its role in de novo ascorbatebiosynthesis remains unclear.GLDH was found in all Archaeplastida genomes, except for Cyanophora andGaldieria , and in allphotosynthetic lineages that have acquired a plastid via secondary endosymbiosis (including
stramenopiles, cryptophytes, haptophytes, chlorarachniophytes and euglenids). GLDH was presentin several non-photosynthetic organisms including the oomycetes, the foraminifera and in thechoanoflagellates, Monosiga brevicollis and Salpingoeca rosetta . The evolutionary history of algalplastids acquired by secondary endosymbiosis remains uncertain and there is some evidence that non-photosynthetic stramenopile (e.g., oomycetes) and rhizarian (e.g., foraminifera) lineages may haveonce acquired a plastid that was subsequently lost ( Tyler et al., 2006 ;Keeling, 2010 ;Gl¨ockner et al.,2014 ).Further identification of GLDH orGULO in the transcriptomes of 165 eukaryotes within the MarineMicrobial Eukaryote Trancriptome dataset ( Keeling et al., 2014 ) confirmed that GLDH was foundprimarily in photosynthetic organisms (Supplementary file 2 ), but also in the non-photosynthetic
stramenopiles such as oomycetes, biocosoecids and labryinthulids and in an acanthoecid choano-flagellate. The presence of GULO was restricted to non-photosynthetic organisms, including theheterotrophic flagellate Palpitomonas bilix , which is a non-photosynthetic relative of the Cryptophytealgae ( Yabuki et al., 2014 ). The exception was the presence of GULO in the chromerids, Chromeravelia andVitrella brassicaformis , which are photosynthetic relatives of the Apicomplexa ( Janouskovecet al., 2010 ).Further searches of Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) and Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly (TSA)databases identified a GULO sequence in the green alga, Chlorokybus atmophyticus (JO192417.1)(Leliaert et al., 2012 ;Timme et al., 2012 ).Chlorokybus represents a basal lineage in the charophytealgae, which are a sister group to the land plants ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 ).GLDH wasidentified in the other charophytes Klebsormidium flaccidum ,Nitella mirabilis and Nitella hyalina
(JO285109.1, JV744884.1, JO253095.1). These searches also revealed the presence of GULO in the
identified in the other charophytes Klebsormidium flaccidum ,Nitella mirabilis and Nitella hyalina(JO285109.1, JV744884.1, JO253095.1). These searches also revealed the presence of GULO in thecraspedid choanoflagellate, Monosiga ovata (DC478225.1). The Craspedida subgroup of thechoanoflagellates is divided into two major clades; clade I contains M. brevicollis and S. rosetta(which both possess GLDH ) and clade II contains M. ovata (Jeuck et al., 2014 ).We conclude that nearly all photosynthetic eukaryotes use GLDH rather than GULO as the terminalenzyme in ascorbate biosynthesis. The exceptions are the basally derived Archaeplastida(Cyanophora ,Galdieria and Chlorokybus ) and the chromerids ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ).No photosynthetic organisms were found to lack both GULO andGLDH , although both genes wereabsent in many non-photosynthetic organisms, including all insects, Daphnia ,Paramecium and
Dictyostelium . The genomes of many parasitic groups also appear to lack both enzymes including theWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 5o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Figure 2 . Coulson plot indicating the taxonomic distribution of the different ascorbate pathways. 40 eukaryotegenomes were analysed for the presence of genes in the ascorbate biosynthetic pathways. The two potentialterminal enzymes in the pathway are boxed. GLDH is common to both the ‘plant’ and ‘euglenid’ type pathways.A schematic tree depicts the currently accepted phylogenetic relationships between organisms. The predicted routeof ascorbate biosynthesis in each organism is shown. Note that ‘euglenid’ and ‘rhodophyte’ type pathways cannotcurrently be distinguished from sequence analysis alone and the predictions are based on biochemical evidence.Asterisk denotes a genome assembly was not available for Euglena gracilis and its transcriptome was analysed(‘Materials and methods’). Grey circles in VTC4 represent the presence of a highly similar enzyme, myo-inositol-1-phosphate phosphatase that exhibitsL-galactose-1-phosphatase activity. GULO in trypanosomes and yeasts acts to
oxidise the alternative substrates L-galactonolactone or D-arabinonolactone respectively. VTC3 is not a biosyntheticenzyme, but represents a dual function Ser/Thr protein kinase/protein phosphatase 2C that may play a regulatoryrole in the plant pathway ( Conklin et al., 2013 ). Black cross represents a pseudogene encoding a non-functionalFigure 2. continued on next pageWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 6o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
diplomonads, parabasalids and apicomplexa (e.g., Giardia intestinalis ,Trichomonas vaginalis andPlasmodium falciparum ). Since all documented pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis require eitherGULO or GLDH, organisms lacking both of these enzymes are likely to be ascorbate auxotrophs(Chatterjee, 1973 ).Phylogenetic analyses of GULO and GLDHA maximum likelihood tree of GULO andGLDH sequences was produced using the other members ofthe VAO family as an outgroup to root the tree. GLDH is highly conserved and the phylogeneticanalyses strongly support a monophyletic origin for all GLDH sequences (100% bootstrap support,posterior probability =1) (Figure 3 ). The monophyly of eukaryote GULO sequences is well supported(85% bootstrap support, posterior probability =1). This clade includes trypanosome L-GalL oxidaseand ascomycete D-arabinonolactone oxidase ( Huh et al., 1994 ;Logan et al., 2007 ), indicating that
although these enzymes exhibit altered substrate specificity they should be considered within theGULO clade for our evolutionary analyses. There is also moderate support for the monophyly ofGULO andGLDH as a clade within the VAO family, supporting hypotheses that these enzymes mayhave originated from a gene duplication event. GLDH is highly unusual amongst the VAO flavoproteinfamily in that it does not use O 2as an electron acceptor, but mutation of a single highly conservedalanine residue in GLDH is required to convert it from a dehydrogenase to an oxidase ( Leferink et al.,2009 ). The phylogenies within the GULO clade and the GLDH clade are poorly resolved, and so thetrees do not provide evidence on the likelihood of lateral gene transfer, such as endosymbiotic genetransfer (EGT) or horizontal gene transfer (HGT), of either gene. Further phylogenetic analyses,individually examining each gene using unrooted trees with much greater taxonomic sampling, were
unable to provide greater resolution ( Figure 3—figure supplement 1 ).Distribution of GLDH-dependent pathways in photosynthetic organismsMany of the enzymes preceding GULO or GLDH in the animal and euglenid pathways play other roleswithin the cell, for example, in uronic acid metabolism or providing pentose intermediates ( Linsterand Van Schaftingen, 2007 ). The presence or absence of these genes is therefore not solely relatedto ascorbate biosynthesis. However, the plant pathway of ascorbate biosynthesis contains a number ofdedicated enzyme steps, allowing a much clearer examination of its distribution. This also enablesa distinction to be made between the plant- and euglenid-type pathways, as both utilise GLDH as theterminal enzyme. Plants and green algae use GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase (VTC2) and L-galactosedehydrogenase to generate L-GalL ( Gatzek et al., 2002 ;Running et al., 2003 ;Dowdle et al., 2007 ;
Laing et al., 2007 ;Linster et al., 2007 ), whereas euglenids use D-galacturonate reductase ( Figure 1 )(Ishikawa et al., 2006 ). We found that L-galactose dehydrogenase is present in all rhodophytes andViridiplantae, except the prasinophytes Ostreococcus andMicromonas (see ‘Materials and methods’).Sequences exhibiting similarity to L-galactose dehydrogenase were also found in the diatoms and insome metazoa, but as some of these species are ascorbate auxotrophs, it appears that this enzymemay play alternative metabolic roles. VTC2 is found exclusively in the Viridiplantae (includingChlorokybus ), indicating that the definitive ‘plant’ pathway is restricted to this lineage ( Figure 2 ;Supplementary files 3, 4 ). Biochemical evidence from euglenids and stramenopiles ( Shigeoka et al.,1979 ;Helsper et al., 1982 ;Grun and Loewus, 1984 ) suggests that organisms that lack VTC2 butpossess GLDH are likely to operate a ‘euglenid’ pathway, withD-galacturonic acid acting as the
D-galacturonic acid acting as theprecursor of L-GalL. However, it is not clear whether this is also the case in the rhodophytes. AllFigure 2. Continued
D-galacturonic acid acting as theprecursor of L-GalL. However, it is not clear whether this is also the case in the rhodophytes. AllFigure 2. Continuedenzyme. Organisms with sequenced genomes that were found to lack both of the terminal enzymes in the knownpathways (GULO and GLDH) are likely to be ascorbate auxotrophs and were not included in the plot. These includeGiardia intestinalis ,Trichomonas vaginalis ,Entamoeba invadens ,Plasmodium falciparum andPerkinsus marinus .DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.004The following figure supplements are available for figure 2:Figure supplement 1 . Distribution of GULO and GLDH in the Archaeplastida.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.005Figure supplement 2 . Distribution of the different ascorbate pathways.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.006Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 7o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Figure 3 . Phylogenetic analysis of L-gulonolactone oxidase and L-galactonolactone dehydrogenase. A maximumlikelihood phylogenetic tree demonstrating the relationships between aldonolactone oxidoreductases involved inascorbate biosynthesis. A multiple sequence alignment of 263 amino acid residues was used with alditol oxidasesfrom the vanillyl alcohol oxidase (VAO) family acting as the outgroup. Photosynthetic organisms are shown in green.Figure 3. continued on next pageWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 8o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
rhodophytes possess a sequence that is highly similar to characterised L-galactose dehydrogenases fromplants and bacteria ( Gatzek et al., 2002 ;Hobbs et al., 2014 )a n d L-galactose residues are a majorconstituent of red algal polysaccharides ( Percival, 1979 ). We therefore examined whether rhodophytescould synthesise ascorbate via a modified ‘plant’ pathway using an alternative route to L-galactose.Biochemical analysis of pathways in rhodophytesWe used the macroalga, Porphyra umbilicalis , to examine whether rhodophytes can utilise L-galactosein ascorbate synthesis. We detected NAD+-dependent L-galactose dehydrogenase activity inPorphyra thallus extracts ( Figure 4A ). Feeding 10 mM L-galactose to Porphyra thallus slices increasedthe concentration of ascorbate (detected as dehydroascorbate by GC-MS) ( Figure 4B ). As red algaesynthesise GDP- L-galactose from GDP- D-mannose ( Su and Hassid, 1962 ), rhodophytes likely use
a modified ‘plant pathway’ to synthesise ascorbate, employing an unidentified enzyme activity togenerateL-galactose from GDP- L-galactose instead of VTC2.We then examined ascorbate biosynthesis in Galdieria , which differs from all other rhodophytes(Supplementary file 4 ) in that it possesses GULO rather than GLDH .L-galactose, L-GalL and L-GulLwere all effective precursors of ascorbate in G. sulphuraria (Figure 4C ), suggesting that L-galactose isconverted to L-GalL, which may then be converted to ascorbate by GULO. A positional isotopiclabelling approach indicated that label from D-[1-13C]-glucose was incorporated primarily into carbon1 (C1) of ascorbate ( Figure 4D ,Figure 4—figure supplement 1 ). This labelling pattern is expectedfor the plant pathway, while the reduction of a uronic acid intermediate in the animal or euglenidpathways would result in the transfer of label from C1 of glucose into C6 of ascorbate/
dehydroascorbate ( Loewus, 1999 ).G. sulphuraria therefore uses a similar pathway to otherrhodophytes, employing GULO instead of GLDH.In combination, these data identify a clear difference between the Archaeplastida and thephotosynthetic lineages that have acquired a plastid via secondary endosymbiosis. Whilst both groupsuse GLDH as the terminal enzyme for ascorbate synthesis, they differ in the route toL-GalL, TheArchaeplastida generate L-GalL via L-galactose (without inversion of the carbon chain of glucose),whereas photosynthetic eukaryotes with secondary plastids synthesise L-GalL via D-galacturonate,resulting in inversion of the carbon chain.Distribution of ascorbate-dependent antioxidant systemsWe have found that nearly all photosynthetic eukaryotes use GLDH to synthesise ascorbate,suggesting that this distribution may be linked to the photoprotective role of ascorbate. We therefore
determined the distribution of ascorbate-dependent antioxidant mechanisms in eukaryote genomes.Three main isoforms of APX are found in eukaryotes (APX, APX-R and APX-CCX, a hybrid enzymecontaining both ascorbate and cytochrome cperoxidase domains) ( Zamocky et al., 2010 ;Lazzarottoet al., 2011 ;Fawal et al., 2013 ). APX and APX-R are found in nearly all photosynthetic eukaryotesand in the choanoflagellates, M. brevicollis andS. rosetta .Euglena andEmiliania do not possess APXor APX-R, although both possess APX-CCX, which is also found in some fungi and in Capsaspora(Figure 5 ). The only photosynthetic eukaryote in this analysis that lacks any isoform of APX wasC. paradoxa .Cyanophora also lacks all of the remaining enzymes of the plant ascorbate-glutathionecycle: monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDHAR), dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR) andglutathione reductase (GR). The ascorbate-dependent xanthophyll cycle is not present in
glaucophytes and so Cyanophora does not require ascorbate for non-photochemical quenching(Figure 5 ). Moreover, the cellular concentration of ascorbate in Cyanophora is either very low or
glaucophytes and so Cyanophora does not require ascorbate for non-photochemical quenching(Figure 5 ). Moreover, the cellular concentration of ascorbate in Cyanophora is either very low orabsent, as we could not detect ascorbate in Cyanophora extracts using GC-MS (data not shown). It isFigure 3. ContinuedThere is strong support for a monophyletic origin for GLDH in eukaryotes. Bootstrap values >80% are shown abovenodes (100 bootstraps) and Bayesian posterior probabilities >0.95 are shown below (10000000 generations), exceptfor selected key nodes (circled) where all values are displayed.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.007The following figure supplement is available for figure 3:Figure supplement 1 . Phylogenetic analysis ofL-galactonolactone dehydrogenase.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.008Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 9o f2 5Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
possible that ascorbate analogues are present that we could not identify. However, in combinationwith the lack of the plant ascorbate-glutathione cycle and the xanthophyll cycle, we conclude thatCyanophora is unlikely to rely on ascorbate to detoxify peroxides derived from photosynthesis.Cyanophora does however contain several glutathione peroxidases, peroxiredoxins and catalase, aswell as a unique peroxidase (symerythrin) similar to rubrerythrin of prokaryotes ( Cooley et al., 2011 ).These data suggest that glaucophytes rely on alternative mechanisms to detoxify peroxides derivedfrom photosynthesis. As cyanobacteria also do not appear to use ascorbate for photoprotectionFigure 4 . Biochemical evidence for a modified D-mannose/ L-galactose pathway in rhodophytes. ( A) Crude extractsofPorphyra umbilicalis thallus demonstrate L-galactose dehydrogenase activity using 5 mM L-galactose ( L-Gal) as
a substrate. No activity was demonstrated with 5 mM L-fucose (6-deoxy- L-galactose) as a substrate. The result isrepresentative of three different enzyme preparations. ( B) Feeding 10 mM L-Gal to Porphyra thallus for 24 hr resultedin an accumulation of ascorbate (detected as dehydroascorbate—DHA). D-mannose (10 mM) did not cause anincrease in ascorbate in Porphyra , but exogenous D-mannose does not elevate ascorbate in land plants even thoughit is an intermediate in ascorbate biosynthesis. The bar chart shows mean peak areas of selected fragments ( ±s.d.).n=3. (C) Feeding ascorbate precursors (25 mM) to Galdieria sulphararia from both the plant and animal pathwaysresults in increased cellular ascorbate (detected as dehydroascorbate using GC-MS) ( ±s.d.). The extent of theincrease in cellular ascorbate is influenced by the rate of conversion of the intermediate and the rate of its uptakeinto the cell. n =3. (D) Feeding
D-[1-13C]-glucose (25 mM) to Galdieria sulphararia results in enrichment of13C in the316/317 m/z fragment of dehydroascorbate (which includes C1), but not in the 245/246 m/z or 157/158 m/z fragment(which exclude C1) ( ±s.d.). In contrast, feeding D-[6-13C]-glucose (25 mM) labels all fragments, suggesting that theyall include C6. In combination, this labelling pattern indicates plant-like non-inversion of the carbon chain in theconversion of hexoses to ascorbate. n =3.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.009The following figure supplement is available for figure 4:Figure supplement 1 . Positional isotopic labelling of ascorbate biosynthesis.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.010Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 10 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
(Bernroitner et al., 2009 ;Latifi et al., 2009 ), the photoprotective role of ascorbate may thereforehave emerged in the Archaeplastida after the divergence of the glaucophytes.DiscussionDistribution of pathways in eukaryotesAscorbate (vitamin C) is a very familiar metabolite to humans, so it is perhaps surprising that so manyaspects of its biosynthesis and metabolism remain uncharacterised. The biosynthetic pathway ofFigure 5 . Coulson plot showing the distribution of photoprotective ascorbate-dependent enzymes. Eukaryotegenomes were analysed for the presence of enzymes from the plant ascorbate-glutathione cycle, the xanthophyllcycle and other ascorbate-dependent enzymes. We found that eukaryotes possess two distinct isoforms of GSHreductase. PeroxiBase was used to distinguish between the different forms of ascorbate peroxidase ( Fawal et al.,2013 ). Boxes highlight the terminal enzymes in the biosynthetic pathway and the ascorbate peroxidase family
(APX, APX-R and APX-CCX). MDHAR—monodehydroascorbate reductase; DHAR—dehydroascorbate reductase;GR-I—glutathione reductase isoform I; GR-II—glutathione reductase isoform II; APX—ascorbate peroxidase;APX-R—ascorbate peroxidase-related; APX-CCX—hybrid ascorbate peroxidase/cytochrome c peroxidase;VDE—violaxanthin de-epoxidase; VDE-like—violaxanthin de-epoxidase like; AO—ascorbate oxidase.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.011Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 11 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
ascorbate in plants, which supplies the vast majority of ascorbate in the human diet, remained elusivefor many years ( Wheeler et al., 1998 ) and the major role of ascorbate in DNA demethylation emergedonly very recently ( Blaschke et al., 2013 ). In order to better understand the cellular roles of ascorbate,we have examined the distribution of the three major pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis ineukaryotes. We identify that the Opisthonkonts (animals and fungi), the Amoebozoa and the non-photosynthetic representatives of the Excavata and CCTH (Hacrobia) use GULO for ascorbatebiosynthesis. In contrast, the photosynthetic organisms in the Archaeplastida, CCTH (Hacrobia), SARand the photosynthetic members of the Excavata (euglenids) use GLDH . In these photosyntheticorganisms, the combination of molecular and biochemical evidence suggests that the non-inversionpathway via L-galactose (plant pathway) is restricted to Archaeplastida, whereas the inversionpathway via
pathway viaD-galacturonate (euglenid pathway) is used by photosynthetic eukaryotes that acquiredplastids via secondary endosymbiosis. The important exceptions to these trends are: firstly, that GLDHis found in several non-photosynthetic organisms, notably in some choanoflagellates (Opisthokonts)and stramenopiles and secondly, that GULO is found in several basally derived members of theArchaeplastida.The evolutionary origins of GULO and GLDHThe processes underlying the distribution of the different terminal enzymes are therefore central toour understanding of the evolution of ascorbate biosynthesis. The mutually exclusive distribution oftwo highly conserved and functionally similar genes in eukaryotes may be explained by either of twoevolutionary scenarios: an ancient gene duplication in the last common eukaryote ancestor (ancient
paralogy) followed by differential loss of either gene, or lateral gene transfer of a novel gene followedby functional replacement of the ancestral gene ( Keeling and Inagaki, 2004 ). It is likely that one ofthese evolutionary scenarios underlies the distribution of GULO and GLDH amongst eukaryotes(Figure 6 ).The model of ancient paralogy requires that both genes were present in the last commoneukaryote ancestor, where they both presumably contributed to ascorbate biosynthesis, and werethen differentially lost by every eukaryote lineage. This requires that these two functionally similarenzymes co-existed in multiple lineages throughout eukaryote evolution without significant functionaldivergence. The distribution of GULO andGLDH in the Archaeplastida and in the choanoflagellatessuggests that these enzymes may have coexisted for a time in these lineages ( Figure 2—figuresupplement 1 ). However, there are no clear examples of extant eukaryotes that possess both
enzymes, which would be expected if they have co-existed extensively throughout eukaryoteevolution. The ancient paralogy model also requires extensive loss of both GULO andGLDH . There isclear evidence for multiple independent losses of GULO in animals and indications that GULO activitymay be deleterious under certain conditions, providing a potential selective pressure for gene loss(B´anhegyi et al., 1996 ;Hiller et al., 2012 ). Similar evidence for the loss of GLDH in eukaryotes islacking. In addition, Arabidopsis mutants that lack GLDH cannot correctly assemble mitochondrialcomplex I ( Pineau et al., 2008 ), suggesting that loss of GLDH is likely to have many wider impacts onmetabolism.The broad distribution of GULO supports an ancient evolutionary origin for this gene. It is presentin all of the eukaryote supergroups, including basally-derived lineages within the CCTH (Hacrobia) and
Archaeplastida and also in the Apusomonads. Although GLDH is also present in most of the eukaryotesupergroups (except the Amoebozoa), its distribution is primarily restricted to lineages that have
Archaeplastida and also in the Apusomonads. Although GLDH is also present in most of the eukaryotesupergroups (except the Amoebozoa), its distribution is primarily restricted to lineages that haveacquired a plastid or to isolated lineages (e.g., choanoflagellates). Whilst we cannot discount anancient origin for GLDH in the last common eukaryote ancestor, its distribution may also bereasonably explained by the lateral gene transfer model.In the lateral gene transfer scenario, either GULO orGLDH could represent a novel gene that arosein a specific lineage and was then acquired by other eukaryotes through horizontal gene transfer(HGT) or endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT). However, the distribution of GULO cannot bereasonably explained by lateral gene transfer, as this requires HGT on a massive scale specifically intonon-photosynthetic eukaryotes. In contrast, the distribution of GLDH can be largely explained by EGT
during plastid acquisition. GLDH may have arisen specifically in ancestral Archaeplastida after thedivergence of the glaucophytes and functionally replaced the ancestral gene ( GULO ).GLDH couldthen have been transferred to the other photosynthetic lineages via EGT, resulting in the replacementofGULO in lineages that acquired their plastids via secondary endosymbiosis ( Figure 7 ). The presenceWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 12 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
ofGLDH in some non-photosynthetic eukaryotesmay be explained by the evolutionary acquisitionof a plastid that was subsequently lost. Forexample, there is some evidence to supportplastid loss in non-photosynthetic stramenopiles,although the number and timing of plastidacquisition events via secondary endosymbiosisremains a subject of significant debate ( Keeling,2010 ). The choanoflagellates have not acquireda plastid at any stage, but there is evidence forlarge scale horizontal gene transfer (HGT) fromalgae into this lineage, including the HGT of APX(Nedelcu et al., 2008 ). Choanoflagellates maytherefore have acquired GLDH via HGT alongwith these other algal genes. EGT of GLDH isa more parsimonious scenario than ancientparalogy, as it requires fewer independent lossevents. However, the poor resolution of thephylogenies within the GLDH clade means thatdirect evidence for either EGT or HGT betweenlineages is lacking.Evolution of alternative pathways
Evolution of alternative pathwaysBoth the ancient paralogy and EGT evolutionaryscenarios are plausible in the wider context ofascorbate biosynthesis. However, the EGT sce-nario provides a clear rationale to explain whyphotosynthetic eukaryotes with primary plastidsexhibit a different pathway from those withsecondary plastids. Our biochemical evidencesuggests that ancestral Archaeplastida devel-oped a non-inversion pathway viaL-galactosethat employed the broad specificity of GULO tooxidiseL-GalL. The development of GLDH inancestral Archaeplastida would have led to theeventual replacement of GULO in all red andgreen algal lineages, except Galdieria andChlorokybus , resulting in the non-inversionplant-type pathway found in extant Archaeplas-tida. In the photosynthetic eukaryotes with secondary plastids, it is likely that the host initiallysynthesised ascorbate via an animal-type pathway (involving inversion of chain and GULO) and that
the red or green algal symbiont used a plant-type pathway (involving non-inversion of the carbonchain and GLDH). However, neither pathway appears to operate in photosynthetic eukaryotes withsecondary plastids, which instead use a euglenid-type pathway. We propose that EGT of GLDH fromthe symbiont could have resulted in functional replacement of GULO in the animal-type pathway ofthe host, leading to a hybrid biosynthetic pathway that employedD-galacturonate rather thanD-glucuronate as an intermediate in order to provide L-GalL as a substrate for GLDH. The hybridpathway therefore involves inversion of the carbon chain of D-glucose and GLDH. The generation ofa hybrid pathway suggests that photosynthetic eukaryotes with secondary plastids only acquiredGLDH by EGT rather than the entire plant pathway.In conclusion, the distribution of GULO andGLDH in eukaryotes may be explained by either of two
evolutionary models; ancient paralogy followed by differential gene loss or EGT of GLDH followed byGULO loss. We favour the EGT scenario as the most parsimonious and the most consistent with thebiochemical evidence, but we cannot rule out either scenario based on the current evidence.Therefore our evolutionary analyses do not allow us to definitively identify the origin of GLDH .Figure 6 . Evolutionary scenarios for GULO andGLDH .The scheme illustrates two most likely evolutionaryscenarios responsible for the distribution of GULO andGLDH in eukaryotes. In the ancient paralogy scenario,an ancient gene duplication in the last commoneukaryote ancestor results in the presence of twofunctionally similar genes, GULO andGLDH , followedby differential loss of either gene in each lineage. In theendosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) scenario, GULOrepresents the ancestral gene and GLDH representsa novel gene that arose in a specific lineage. EGT of
GLDH (red dashed arrow) to other photosyntheticlineages (green ovals) enables functional replacement ofthe ancestral gene. Note that GULO represents anancestral gene in both of these evolutionary scenarios.
lineages (green ovals) enables functional replacement ofthe ancestral gene. Note that GULO represents anancestral gene in both of these evolutionary scenarios.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.012Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 13 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
However, they do enable clear conclusions to be made on the loss of GULO . Both evolutionary modelssupport GULO as an ancestral gene in the last common eukaryote ancestor, indicating that GULO hasbeen lost in almost all photosynthetic eukaryotes. Therefore, we can conclude that photosyntheticeukaryotes encountered strong selective pressure to replace the function of GULO in ascorbatebiosynthesis.Selective pressures underlying evolution of ascorbate biosynthesisThe critical role of ascorbate in photoprotection has been demonstrated in a diversity ofphotosynthetic eukaryotes, including land plants, green algae, diatoms and euglenids ( Lavaud andKroth, 2006 ;Ishikawa et al., 2010 ;Mellado et al., 2012 ;Urzica et al., 2012 ). Our analyses indicateFigure 7 . A proposed evolutionary model of ascorbate biosynthesis. The scheme illustrates the proposed events in
the EGT evolutionary model of eukaryote ascorbate biosynthesis. In this scenario, ancestral eukaryotes synthesisedascorbate via GULO. GLDH arose in the Archaeplastida following primary endosymbiosis of a cyanobacterium, afterthe divergence of the glaucophyte lineage. GLDH functionally replaced GULO in the red and green algal lineages,coinciding with the rise of the photoprotective role of ascorbate. Plastid acquisition via secondary endosymbiosis ofeither a green or red alga resulted in endosymbiotic gene transfer of GLDH and replacement of GULO . As theseorganisms became the dominant primary producers in many ecosystems, a series of trophic interactions (dottedlines) resulted in the loss of GULO in non-photosynthetic organisms, either by providing a ready supply of dietary
ascorbate (resulting in ascorbate auxotrophy in heterotrophic organisms) or through putative horizontal genetransfer of GLDH (e.g., choanoflagellates). For clarity, not all potential trophic interactions are shown.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.013Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 14 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
that many photosynthetic eukaryotes possessed GULO prior to plastid acquisition, whereas almost allextant photosynthetic lineages use GLDH to synthesise ascorbate. The selective pressure to replaceGULO in ascorbate biosynthesis following plastid acquisition could therefore be linked to thephotoprotective role of ascorbate. One intriguing possibility is that the production of H2O2by GULOmay have limited the ability of the host cell to protect itself against ROS derived from the chloroplast.Ancestral eukaryotes developed multiple antioxidant mechanisms to protect themselves from ROSderived from organelles such as the peroxisome and the mitochondria. However, the acquisition ofa photosynthetic cyanobacterial endosymbiont in the Archaeplastida would have resulted in a greatlyincreased requirement for cellular antioxidants to protect the host cell from H 2O2secreted by theplastid. Ascorbate, synthesised in the host cell but not in the cyanobacterial endosymbiont, appears to
have been recruited to this role after the divergence of the glaucophytes. The recruitment ofascorbate as a major cellular antioxidant in photosynthetic eukaryotes may have led to an increasedrequirement for ascorbate biosynthesis. However, ascorbate biosynthesis via GULO results in theproduction of H2O2in the ER lumen. In mammalian cells, this results in a damaging depletion andoxidation of the glutathione pool when ascorbate synthesis is increased by feeding L-GulL ( B´anhegyiet al., 1996 ;Pusk ´as et al., 1998 ). Ancestral photosynthetic eukaryotes may have been unable tobalance their increasing requirements for ascorbate biosynthesis with maintenance of the redox statuswithin the ER, providing selective pressure to uncouple ascorbate biosynthesis from H 2O2production.This hypothesis is consistent with the presence of GULO rather than GLDH in the glaucophytes.As glaucophytes do not appear to use ascorbate for photoprotection, ascorbate biosynthesis would not
have been subjected to the same selective pressures as other photosynthetic eukaryotes. This rationalemay also apply to the retention of GULO inGaldieria , which is likely to have both possessed both GULOandGLDH .Galdieria is photosynthetic and expresses a functional APX ( Sano et al., 2001 ), but it is verysensitive to even moderate light intensities and grows primarily in an endolithic environment utilisingheterotrophic carbon sources ( Oesterhelt et al., 2007 ). Thus, photo-oxidative stress in thisenvironment may be minimal, reducing the selective pressure in Galdieria to replace GULO .Evolution of ascorbate auxotrophy in animalsThe evolution of vitamin auxotrophy underpins many important nutritional and ecological interactionsbetween organisms ( Helliwell et al., 2013 ). The selective pressures resulting in GULO loss in animalsrepresent a combination of the costs of ascorbate synthesis (including detoxification of H 2O2derived
from GULO), the physiological requirements for ascorbate and the ecological factors that determinethe supply of dietary ascorbate throughout their life cycle. The development of the photoprotectiverole of ascorbate in photosynthetic eukaryotes would have significantly altered its availability to manyheterotrophic organisms. The leaves of land plants have particularly high cellular concentrations ofascorbate relative to other photosynthetic eukaryotes ( Gest et al., 2013 ), which may result from theirinability to remove intracellular H2O2viadiffusion to an aquatic medium. Our dataset reveals that inalmost all documented cases of ascorbate auxotrophy in animals, the major source of dietaryascorbate derives from GLDH rather than GULO ( Table 1 ). This is the case even for insectivorousanimals, as insects appear to lack GULO and must also obtain ascorbate in their diet, primarily fromland plants. Thus, the replacement of GULO with GLDH in photosynthetic organisms may have
animals, as insects appear to lack GULO and must also obtain ascorbate in their diet, primarily fromland plants. Thus, the replacement of GULO with GLDH in photosynthetic organisms may haveultimately been an important contributory factor in the loss of GULO in many animal auxotrophs.The pseudogenisation of GULO in primates, bats and guinea pigs is one of the best known examplesof evolutionary gene loss ( Drouin et al., 2011 ). Through a wider analysis of ascorbate biosynthesis, wehave identified that GULO has also been lost in photosynthetic eukaryotes. Photosynthetic eukaryotesfunctionally replaced GULO with an alternative terminal enzyme, GLDH , which uncoupled ascorbatebiosynthesis from H 2O2production and potentially aided the important photoprotective role ofascorbate. These developments in photosynthetic eukaryotes may have ultimately contributed to theloss of GULO in many herbivorous animals, by influencing their supply of dietary ascorbate.Materials and methods
Materials and methodsBioinformaticsA broad range of eukaryote genomes were selected for detailed analyses ( Supplementary file 5 ).Sequence similarity searches were used to identify candidate genes involved in ascorbatebiosynthesis. Genomic searches were initially performed using BLASTP with mouse or ArabidopsisWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 15 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
proteins. All instances of protein absence were confirmed using TBLASTN against the genome withadditional searches using sequences from closely related organisms. Sequence similarity searches oftranscriptomic datasets were used to identify trends in the presence of ascorbate biosynthesis genes,but were not used to infer absence. Proteins recovered from sequence similarity searches wereidentified using a combination of BLAST score, manual inspection of conserved residues in multiplesequence alignments and their position in phylogenetic trees generated by both neighbour-joiningand maximum likelihood method within the MEGA5 software package ( Tamura et al., 2011 ).For detailed phylogenetic analysis of GULO and GLDH , multiple sequence alignments weregenerated using MUSCLE. Poorly aligned regions were removed by manual inspection and thealignments were further refined using GBLOCKS 0.91b to remove ambiguously aligned sites ( Talavera
and Castresana, 2007 ), resulting in an alignment of 263 amino acids. ProtTest ( Abascal et al., 2005 )was used to determine the best substitution model (WAG with gamma and invariant sites) ( Whelanand Goldman, 2001 ). Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were generated using PhyML3.0software with 100 bootstraps. Bayesian posterior probabilities were calculated using BEAST v1.8(Drummond et al., 2012 ), running for 10,000,000 generations, with a burn-in of 1,000,000generations. As the phylogenetic relationships within the GLDH clade were not well resolved, furtherunrooted phylogenetic analyses of GLDH were performed using an individual multiple sequencealignment to allow more positions to be used.Biochemical analyses of ascorbate metabolism in rhodophytesGaldieria sulphararia 074G was grown in Galdieria Medium (GM) (CCCryo, Potsdam-Golm, Germany)at 30˚C, light intensity 50 μmol m−2s−1.Porphyra umbilicalis was collected from Maer Rocks, Exmouth,
UK (50˚ 36 ′31.6 ′′N3 ˚2 3 ′27.0 ′′W). L-Galactose dehydrogenase activity was measured in ammoniumsulphate (50% saturation) precipitates of Porphyra thallus protein extracts ( Gatzek et al., 2002 ). ToTable 1 . Dietary sources of ascorbate in animal auxotrophsAnimal auxotrophPrimary dietary sourceof ascorbateUltimate dietary sourceof ascorbateEnzyme forascorbate synthesis ReferencesPrimates Land plants GLDH ( Milton and Jenness, 1987 )Guinea pig Land plants GLDHBats Land plants GLDH ( Birney et al., 1976 ;Milton andJenness, 1987 ;Cui et al., 2011b )Insects Land plants GLDHFish Phytoplankton GLDHBlood GULOPasserine birds Land plants GLDH ( Drouin et al., 2011 )Insects Land plants GLDHSmall vertebrates GULOTeleost fish Zooplankton (crustacea) Phytoplankton GLDH ( Dabrowski, 1990 )Phytoplankton GLDHCrustacea Phytoplankton GLDH ( Desjardins et al., 1985 ;Hapette andPoulet, 1990 )Phytophagous insects Land plants GLDH ( Pierre, 1962 ;Dadd, 1973 )
Major sources of dietary ascorbate were identified in known animal auxotrophs. This information allows us to assess which terminal enzyme contribut ed tothe production of dietary ascorbate. In nearly all cases the major source of dietary ascorbate is most likely to have been derived from GLDH. Phylogene ticanalyses suggest GULO has been lost on multiple independent occasions throughout the Chiroptera (bats). Although ancestral bats may have beenprimarily insectivores, various sources of dietary ascorbate may have contributed to GULO loss. The passerine birds that are unable to synthesiseascorbate are primarily herbivores or insectivores. However, some members of the Lanius genus (shrikes) feed also on small vertebrates, in addition toinsects. Most teleost fish are believed to be ascorbate auxotrophs due to loss of GULO. As zooplankton (primarily crustacea) are also ascorbate auxtr ophs,
phytoplankton are likely to be the ultimate source of dietary ascorbate. Reports suggest the ability of crustacea to synthesise ascorbate is either a bsent or
phytoplankton are likely to be the ultimate source of dietary ascorbate. Reports suggest the ability of crustacea to synthesise ascorbate is either a bsent orvery weak, although the taxonomic sampling and currently available genomic resources are limited. Most, but not all, phytophagous insects have a die taryrequirement for ascorbate, and we did not find GULO in any insect genomes. Note also that some species of insect (e.g., cockroaches) may obtainascorbate from eukaryote endosymbionts, which may allow them to survive on ascorbate-poor diets.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.014Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 16 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
determine the impact of exogenous precursors on ascorbate, Galdieria cultures or slices of Porphyrathallus were incubated with sugars or aldonic acid lactones (25 mM Galdieria ,1 0m M Porphyra ) for24 hr in GM or artificial sea water (Instant Ocean, Aquarium Systems, Sarrebourg, France). Galdieriacultures (15 ml) were harvested by centrifugation and extracted with 0.5 ml 80% methanol containing0.1% formic acid using sonication in the presence of glass beads. Porphyra thallus was powdered inliquid nitrogen followed by homogenisation in 80% methanol (0.1 g thallus in 0.5 ml extractant).Homogenates were centrifuged (10 min at 16,000 ×g, 4˚C). Supernatants (100 μl) were dried into glassvials, methoximated trimethylsilyl derivatives were prepared ( Lisec et al., 2006 ) and analysed byaccurate mass GC-EI-qToF MS (Agilent 7200, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).Derivatives were injected (0.2–0.4 μl, 1/2 to 1/50 split ratio) onto a Zebron SemiVolatiles GC column
(30 m analytical +10 m guard length, 0.25 mm internal diameter, 0.25 μm film thickness,Phenomenex, Macclesfield, UK) using He carrier gas (1.2 ml min−1). Injector temperature was 250˚Cand column temperature program was 70˚C for 4 min, followed by an increase to 310˚C at 15˚C/min.The column was held at the final temperature for 6 min. Compounds were fragmented at 70 eV andMS spectra were collected (50–600 amu at 5 spectra s−1). Ascorbate is oxidised to dehydroascorbate(DHA) during derivatisation and DHA was identified by co-chromatography and comparison ofaccurate mass spectra with an ascorbate standard. The position of stable isotope incorporation from[1-13C]-D-glucose and [6-13C]-D-glucose into ascorbate was identified using mass spectra obtainedfrom injection of [1-13C]-ascorbate derivatives. C6 of DHA was found in fragments with m/z values of157.046 and 245.1029, while m/z 316.1038 contained C1 and C6.13C enrichment was assessed by the
relative abundance of m+1 for each fragment relative to the12C ascorbate standard.13C-labelledcompounds were obtained from Omicron Biochemicals (South Bend, IN, USA) and all other chemicalswere from Sigma–Aldrich (Dorset, UK).Molecular analysesReverse transcriptase PCR was used to verify the expression of GULO inC. paradoxa (CCAP 981/1)and confirm its coding sequence. RNA was prepared using the TRIzol method (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK)from C. paradoxa cultures grown in standard medium (MWC), at 20˚C, 16:8 light:dark, lightintensity 50 μmol m−2s−1. Reverse-transcriptase PCR was performed using a gene specific primer(GGAACTCCTCGAACTTGGGG) for reverse transcription, followed by amplification of a 1017 basepair region using the following PCR primers: GTCGCCCCTTCTGAGCATAG (forward) andCATGAGCGCGTCGAAGTCT (reverse). NCBI accession number KJ957823.Euglena transcriptome sequencingEuglena gracilis (strain Z) was grown in Koren-Hutner medium (KH) under continuous illumination
(24μmol m−2s−1) at 26˚C. RNA was harvested by the TRIzol method and used to prepare cDNA.Paired end reads were generated by Illumina sequencing technology resulting in a total of193,472,913 reads. De novo assembly was carried out using Trinity ( Haas et al., 2013 ), followed byfurther clustering with TGICL ( Pertea et al., 2003 ).Alternative routes for ascorbate biosynthesisThe three major routes of ascorbate biosynthesis described in Figure 1 are well supported bybiochemical and molecular evidence. However, there is some evidence to suggest that some classesof eukaryotes may use alternative routes to ascorbate or use multiple routes. These pathways arereviewed comprehensively elsewhere ( Loewus, 1999 ;Smirnoff, 2000 ;Linster et al., 2007 ) but theimplications for our findings are highlighted below.Land plantsAscorbate in land plants is synthesised predominately via a non-inversion pathway through GDP- D-
mannose and L-galactose in which carbon atom 1 (C1) of the precursor hexose remains as C1 in
Ascorbate in land plants is synthesised predominately via a non-inversion pathway through GDP- D-mannose and L-galactose in which carbon atom 1 (C1) of the precursor hexose remains as C1 inascorbate ( Loewus and Jang, 1958 ;Loewus, 1999 ). Genetic evidence from a range of ascorbate-deficient Arabidopsis mutants indicates that the D-mannose/ L-galactose pathway is the primary routeof ascorbate biosynthesis ( Conklin et al., 1999 ,2006 ;Dowdle et al., 2007 ;Smirnoff, 2011 ). Forexample, Arabidopsis vtc2 vtc5 double mutants lacking GDP- L-Gal phosphorylase activity are notviable unless supplemented with ascorbate, suggesting no other route can supply sufficient ascorbateto rescue this defect ( Dowdle et al., 2007 ). However, a number of other routes to ascorbate in plantsWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 17 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
have been proposed. Plants can potentially use D-galacturonate as an ascorbate precursor, and thisalternative route may contribute to ascorbate synthesis in certain tissue types, such as fruits(Isherwood and Mapson, 1956 ;Badejo et al., 2012 ). GDP- L-gulose, formed during the activity ofGDP-mannose epimerase in vitro ( Wolucka and Van Montagu, 2003 ), could provide L-GulL, whichcould contribute to ascorbate synthesis via the GULO-like enzymes found in land plants ( Marutaet al., 2010 ). Overexpression of Arabidopsis GULO-like genes in tobacco cell lines increased cellularascorbate concentration in the presence of exogenous L-GulL ( Maruta et al., 2010 ). Oxidation ofmyo -inositol is another potential source of L-GulL ( Lorence et al., 2004 ;Lisko et al., 2013 ). However,more definitive biochemical and genetic evidence for these alternative pathways is required in orderto assess whether these pathways contribute significantly to ascorbate biosynthesis in plants. The
evidence for the alternative pathways is largely based on increased ascorbate production after ectopicexpression of genes or addition of exogenous substrates. This approach leaves open the possibilitythat these pathways are not active in wild type plants. The critical experiments, in which the proposedenzymes are mutated or knocked out, have not been reported.Our evolutionary analyses indicate that GULO andGLDH co-existed in ancestral Archaeplastida,suggesting that multiple pathways of ascorbate biosynthesis were operational in these organisms. Whilstthe ‘plant pathway’ via GLDH is clearly the primary biosynthetic route in extant land plants, the presenceof minor alternative pathways such as those listed above may reflect this ancestry of shared pathways.PrasinophytesThe genomes of the prasinophyte algae Ostreococcus and Micromonas are unusual amongst theViridiplantae in that they lack L-galactose dehydrogenase and GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase
(Urzica et al., 2012 ). However, it is likely that these prasinophytes can generate GDP- D-mannose,either through an unidentified alternative enzyme activity (as proposed in brown algae [ Michel et al.,2010 ]) or through the transferase activity of VTC2. Furthermore, we identified L-fucose (6-deoxy- L-galactose) dehydrogenase in all Ostreococcus andMicromonas genomes. L-fucose dehydrogenasealso exhibits activity with L-galactose ( Schachter et al., 1969 ) and it therefore may functionally replaceL-galactose dehydrogenase in these prasinophytes. Analysis of the Marine Microbial EukaryoteTranscriptome dataset revealed that L-fucose dehydrogenase is present in many other prasinophytesincluding members of the Prasinococcales, Pycnococcaceae and the Pyramimonadaceae. The onlyprasinophyte identified with L-galactose dehydrogenase was Nephroselmis pyriformis (Nephroselmi-dophyceae). The Chlorodendrophyceae lineage containing Tetraselmis spp. also possess L-galactosedehydrogenase.
dehydrogenase.TrypanosomesGULO from trypanosomes exhibits activity with D-AraL or L-GalL but not L-GulL, and is therefore referredto as L-GalL oxidase ( Wilkinson et al., 2005 ;Logan et al., 2007 ;Kudryashova et al., 2011 ). The sourceof L-GalL in trypanosomes has not been determined. We did not find evidence for L-galactosedehydrogenase or the other enzymes in the D-mannose/ L-galactose pathway in trypanosome genomes.FungiThe fungi synthesise a range of ascorbate analogues, including 6-deoxy- L-ascorbate, ascorbateglycosides and the five carbon analogue, D-erythroascorbate ( Loewus, 1999 ). Yeasts synthesiseD-erythroascorbate from D-arabinose via D-AraL and these final steps are therefore analogous to theD-mannose/ L-galactose pathway. Deletion of ALO1 encoding D-AraL oxidase in Saccharomycescerevisiae results in increased sensitivity to oxidative stress but the mutants are still viable ( Huh et al.,
1994 ). Until both the biosynthesis and the physiological roles of these analogues are better understood,
1994 ). Until both the biosynthesis and the physiological roles of these analogues are better understood,it is difficult to understand how the biosynthesis of the fungal ascorbate analogues may have evolved.ProkaryotesThere is little evidence to suggest that prokaryotes synthesise ascorbate de novo. GULO andGLDHare essentially absent from prokaryotes. Extensive sequence similarity searches identified a singleGULO sequence in the cyanobacterium Rivularia sp PCC 7116 (WP_015122198.1), but all othercyanobacteria lack GULO . An enzyme exhibiting L-GulL dehydrogenase activity has been cloned fromMycobacterium tuberculosis and a similar enzyme is present in a range of other prokaryotes ( Woluckaand Communi, 2006 ). While the presence of this enzyme suggests some prokaryotes have thecapacity for ascorbate synthesis, specific evidence for in vivo ascorbate biosynthesis is lacking. Thereis a single report indicating that some cyanobacteria contain very low concentrations of ascorbate
Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 18 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
(Tel-Or et al., 1986 ), although the analytical method used (2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine) may not besufficiently specific for ascorbate at these concentrations ( Roe, 1961 ). Prokaryotes lack ascorbateperoxidase and it is likely that early reports of ascorbate peroxidase activity in cyanobacteria were dueto the activity of other forms of peroxidase ( Bernroitner et al., 2009 ).ChromeridsThe chromerids are photosynthetic relatives of the apicomplexa ( Janouskovec et al., 2010 ) and arethe only organisms in our analyses that have acquired a plastid via secondary endosymbiosis andretained GULO .C. velia utilises the xanthophyll cycle for non-photochemical quenching ( Kotabov ´aet al., 2011 ), suggesting that ascorbate performs a photoprotective role in chromerids by acting asa co-factor for violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE). We found homologues of VDE and VDE-like proteinsin the C. velia transcriptome, as well as monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDHAR). The presence of
GULO rather than GLDH inC. velia may relate to the unusual mitochondria of apicomplexans.Apicomplexans lack complex I of the mitochondrial electron transport chain ( Danne et al., 2013 ),which may have influenced their ability to acquire and/or utilise GLDH, as GLDH is incorporated intocomplex I in land plants ( Schertl et al., 2012 ). However, the genomes of the parasitic apicomplexa allappear to lack both GULO andGLDH . It should be noted that dinoflagellates also lack mitochondrialcomplex I but possess GLDH (Supplementary file 2 ).AcknowledgementsThe authors acknowledge funding from the Exeter University Science Strategy Fund, Biotechnologyand Biological Sciences Research Council (BB/G021678) and the Natural Environment ResearchCouncil (NE/J021008/1). Hannah Florance (Exeter University Mass Spectrometry Facility) providedanalytical assistance. The Euglena transcriptome was sequenced by the Exeter University Sequencing
Service with assistance from Konrad Paszkiewicz and Karen Moore. Access to the Marine MicrobialEukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project (MMETSP) was provided by National Center forGenome Resources. This paper is dedicated to the memory of Frank A Loewus (1919–2014) whopioneered research into ascorbate biosynthesis.Additional informationFundingFunder Grant reference AuthorBiotechnology and BiologicalSciences Research Council(BBSRC)BB/G021678 Nicholas SmirnoffNatural Environment ResearchCouncil (NERC)NE/J021008/1 Glen WheelerUniversity of Exeter Science Strategy Fund Nicholas SmirnoffThe funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or thedecision to submit the work for publication.Author contributionsGW, NS, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting orrevising the article; TI, VP, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of dataAdditional files
Additional filesSupplementary files·Supplementary file 1. Distribution of GULO andGLDH in opisthokont and apusomonad genomes.Genomes of the opisthokonts (including animals and fungi) were examined for the presence of GULOand GLDH . Strikethrough indicates non-functional pseudogenes. The absence of GULO is welldocumented in the known ascorbate auxotrophs such as haplorhine primates, guinea pigs, bats,teleost fish and passerine birds. Some fungi (e.g., ascomycetes) useD-arabinonolactone oxidase toproduce five carbon ascorbate analogue, erythroascorbate. D-arabinonolactone oxidase has differentWheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 19 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
substrate specificity to GULO, but exhibits a high degree of sequence similarity and has been classedas GULO in the table.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.015·Supplementary file 2. Identification of GULO and GLDH in marine microbial eukaryotetranscriptomes. Data from the Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project(MMETSP, http://marinemicroeukaryotes.org/) were analysed for the terminal enzymes in ascorbatebiosynthesis. This dataset contains 679 transcriptomes from 320 different species. Sequence similaritysearches used a stringent length cut off to avoid ambiguous results from incompletely sequenced geneproducts (minimum length 300 amino acids). Using these criteria, we identified GULO orGLDH in 165species. Although the absence of a gene in a transcriptome cannot be used to infer absence, we foundno examples of organisms that possess both GULO andGLDH , even when a more relaxed length
criterion was used (minimum length 100 amino acids). Note that the underlined GLDH sequences fromthe ciliates Myrionecta andStrombidinopsis are 100% identical to sequences recovered from their prey(respectively Geminigera cryophila andIsochrysis galbana ). These sequences may therefore be due tocontamination. Alternatively, as both these ciliates exhibit kleptoplasty, the presence of algal GLDHsequences in the ciliate transcriptome may also represent examples of plastid-related nuclear genesthat are retained and transcribed to aid plastid function ( Johnson et al., 2007 ). In the latter scenario,these ciliates could therefore use GLDH to temporarily synthesise ascorbate during plastid acquisition.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.016·Supplementary file 3. Identification of VTC2 in marine microbial eukaryote transcriptomes. Datafrom the Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project (MMETSP) was analysed forVTC2 , encoding GDP-
L-galactose phosphorylase, the first committed step in land plant ascorbatebiosynthesis. Sequence similarity searches used a stringent cut off to avoid ambiguous results fromincompletely sequenced gene products (minimum length 300 amino acids). VTC2 was identified in 37species, all of which belong to the Chlorophyta. Genes exhibiting weak similarity to GDP-L-galactosephosphorylase, which may represent homologues of GDP- D-glucose phosphorylase ( Adler et al.,2011 ), were not included in these results.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.017·Supplementary file 4. Distribution of ascorbate biosynthetic genes in Archaeplastida tran-scriptomes. Rhodophyte transcriptomes from the Marine Microbial Eukaryote TranscriptomeSequencing Project (MMETSP) or Genbank ( Chan et al., 2011 ,2012 ) were examined for thepresence of ascorbate biosynthesis genes. The rhodophytes transcriptomes all exhibit the pathwayfound in the genomes of Cyanidioschyzon merolae ,Chondrus crispus andPorphyridium purpureum ,
possessing GLDH rather than GULO .C. atmophyticus is a green alga belonging to the Streptophytelineage containing land plants and charophyte algae. The Chlorokybus transcriptome appears uniqueamongst the Viridiplantate in that it contains GULO rather than GLDH . All of the other enzymes of theplant pathway are present.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.018·Supplementary file 5. Genome resources used in this study. A list of the eukaryote genomes used tostudy the distribution of genes relating to ascorbate biosynthesis and metabolism.DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369.019Major datasetThe following previously published dataset was used:Author(s) Year Dataset titleDataset IDand/or URLDatabase, license, andaccessibility informationKeelingPJ2014 Marine Microbial EukaryoteTranscriptome SequencingProjecthttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/?term=PRJNA231566Publicly available at the NCBIBioProject database(PRJNA231566).References
BioProject database(PRJNA231566).ReferencesAbascal F , Zardoya R, Posada D. 2005. ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of protein evolution. Bioinformatics21:2104–2105. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti263 .
ReferencesAbascal F , Zardoya R, Posada D. 2005. ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of protein evolution. Bioinformatics21:2104–2105. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti263 .Adler LN , Gomez TA, Clarke SG, Linster CL. 2011. A novel GDP-D-glucose phosphorylase involved in qualitycontrol of the nucleoside diphosphate sugar pool in Caenorhabditis elegans and mammals. The Journal ofBiological Chemistry 286:21511–21523. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.238774 .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 20 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Badejo AA , Wada K, Gao Y, Maruta T, Sawa Y, Shigeoka S, Ishikawa T. 2012. Translocation and the alternativeD-galacturonate pathway contribute to increasing the ascorbate level in ripening tomato fruits together with theD-mannose/L-galactose pathway. Journal of Experimental Botany 63:229–239. doi: 10.1093/jxb/err275 .B´anhegyi G , Csala M, Braun L, Garz ´o T, Mandl J. 1996. Ascorbate synthesis-dependent glutathione consumptionin mouse liver. FEBS Letters 381:39–41. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(96)00077-4 .Bernroitner M , Zamocky M, Furtmuller PG, Peschek GA, Obinger C. 2009. Occurrence, phylogeny, structure, andfunction of catalases and peroxidases in cyanobacteria. Journal of Experimental Botany 60:423–440. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern309 .Birney EC , Jenness R, Ayaz KM. 1976. Inability of bats to synthesise L-ascorbic acid. Nature 260:626–628. doi: 10.1038/260626a0 .Blaschke K , Ebata KT, Karimi MM, Zepeda-Mart ´ınez JA, Goyal P, Mahapatra S, Tam A, Laird DJ, Hirst M, Rao A,
Lorincz MC, Ramalho-Santos M. 2013. Vitamin C induces Tet-dependent DNA demethylation and a blastocyst-like state in ES cells. Nature 500:222–226. doi: 10.1038/nature12362 .Chan CX , Blouin NA, Zhuang Y, Z ¨auner S, Prochnik SE, Lindquist E, Lin S, Benning C, Lohr M, Yarish C, Gantt E,Grossman AR, Lu S, M ¨uller K, Stiller JW, Brawley SH, Bhattacharya D. 2012. Porphyra (Bangiophyceae)transcriptomes provide insights into red algal development and metabolism. Journal of Phycology 48:1328–1342. doi: 10.1111/j.1529-8817.2012.01229.x .Chan CX , Yang EC, Banerjee T, Yoon HS, Martone PT, Estevez JM, Bhattacharya D. 2011. Red and Green algalmonophyly and extensive gene sharing found in a rich repertoire of red algal genes. Current Biology 21:328–333.doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.037 .Chatterjee IB . 1973. Evolution and the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid. Science 182:1271–1272. doi: 10.1126/science.182.4118.1271 .
science.182.4118.1271 .Conklin PL , DePaolo D, Wintle B, Schatz C, Buckenmeyer G. 2013. Identification of Arabidopsis VTC3 as a putativeand unique dual function protein kinase::protein phosphatase involved in the regulation of the ascorbic acid poolin plants. Journal of Experimental Botany 64:2793–2804. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert140 .Conklin PL , Gatzek S, Wheeler GL, Dowdle J, Raymond MJ, Rolinski S, Isupov M, Littlechild JA, Smirnoff N. 2006.Arabidopsis thaliana VTC4 encodes L-galactose-1-phosphatase, a plant ascorbic acid biosynthetic enzyme. TheJournal of Biological Chemistry 281:15662–15670. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M601409200 .Conklin PL , Norris SR, Wheeler GL, Williams EH, Smirnoff N, Last RL. 1999. Genetic evidence for the role of GDP-mannose in plant ascorbic acid (vitamin C) biosynthesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA96:4198–4203. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.7.4198 .
96:4198–4203. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.7.4198 .Cooley RB , Arp DJ, Karplus PA. 2011. Symerythrin structures at atomic resolution and the origins of rubrerythrinsand the ferritin-like superfamily. Journal of Molecular Biology 413:177–194. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.08.019 .Cui J , Pan YH, Zhang Y, Jones G, Zhang S. 2011a. Progressive pseudogenization: vitamin C synthesis and its loss inbats. Molecular Biology and Evolution 28:1025–1031. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq286 .Cui J , Yuan X, Wang L, Jones G, Zhang S. 2011b. Recent loss of vitamin C biosynthesis ability in bats. PLOS ONE 6:e27114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027114 .Dabrowski K . 1990. Gulonolactone oxidase is missing in teleost fish. The direct spectrophotometric assay.Biological Chemistry Hoppe-Seyler 371:207–214. doi: 10.1515/bchm3.1990.371.1.207 .Dadd RH . 1973. Insect nutrition: current developments and metabolic implications. Annual Review of Entomology18:381–420. doi: 10.1146/annurev.en.18.010173.002121 .
Danne JC , Gornik SG, Macrae JI, McConville MJ, Waller RF. 2013. Alveolate mitochondrial metabolic evolution:dinoflagellates force reassessment of the role of parasitism as a driver of change in apicomplexans. Molecular
dinoflagellates force reassessment of the role of parasitism as a driver of change in apicomplexans. MolecularBiology and Evolution 30:123–139. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss205 .Desjardins LM , Castell JD, Kean JC. 1985. Synthesis of dehydroascorbic acid by subadult lobsters ( Homarusamericanus ).Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42:370–373. doi: 10.1139/F85-048 .Dorrell RG , Howe CJ. 2012. What makes a chloroplast? Reconstructing the establishment of photosyntheticsymbioses. Journal of Cell Science 125:1865–1875. doi: 10.1242/jcs.102285 .Dowdle J , Ishikawa T, Gatzek S, Rolinski S, Smirnoff N. 2007. Two genes in Arabidopsis thaliana encoding GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase are required for ascorbate biosynthesis and seedling viability. The Plant Journal 52:673–689. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03266.x .Drouin G , Godin JR, Pag ´e B. 2011. The genetics of vitamin C loss in vertebrates. Current genomics 12:371–378.doi: 10.2174/138920211796429736 .
doi: 10.2174/138920211796429736 .Drummond AJ , Suchard MA, Xie D, Rambaut A. 2012. Bayesian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST 1.7.Molecular Biology and Evolution 29:1969–1973. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss075 .Fawal N , Li Q, Savelli B, Brette M, Passaia G, Fabre M, Math ´e C, Dunand C. 2013. PeroxiBase: a database for large-scale evolutionary analysis of peroxidases. Nucleic Acids Research 41:D441–D444. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1083 .Gatzek S , Wheeler GL, Smirnoff N. 2002. Antisense suppression of L-galactose dehydrogenase in Arabidopsisthaliana provides evidence for its role in ascorbate synthesis and reveals light modulated l-galactose synthesis.The Plant Journal 30:541–553. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313X.2002.01315.x .Gest N , Gautier H, Stevens R. 2013. Ascorbate as seen through plant evolution: the rise of a successful molecule?Journal of Experimental Botany 64:33–53. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers297 .
Gl¨ockner G ,H¨ulsmann N, Schleicher M, Noegel AA, Eichinger L, Gallinger C, Pawlowski J, Sierra R, Euteneuer U,Pillet L, Moustafa A, Platzer M, Groth M, Szafranski K, Schliwa M. 2014. The genome of the ForaminiferanReticulomyxa filosa .Current Biology 24:11–18. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.027 .Gr¨un M , Loewus FA. 1984. L-Ascorbic-acid biosynthesis in the euryhaline diatom Cyclotella cryptica .Planta 160:6–11. doi: 10.1007/BF00392459 .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 21 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Haas BJ , Papanicolaou A, Yassour M, Grabherr M, Blood PD, Bowden J, Couger MB, Eccles D, Li B, Lieber M,Macmanes MD, Ott M, Orvis J, Pochet N, Strozzi F, Weeks N, Westerman R, William T, Dewey CN, Henschel R,Leduc RD, Friedman N, Regev A. 2013. De novo transcript sequence reconstruction from RNA-seq using theTrinity platform for reference generation and analysis. Nature Protocols 8:1494–1512. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2013.084 .Hapette AM , Poulet SA. 1990. Application of high-performance liquid-chromatography to the determination ofascorbic-acid in marine plankton. Journal of Liquid Chromatography 13:357–370. doi: 10.1080/01483919008049549 .Helliwell KE , Wheeler GL, Smith AG. 2013. Widespread decay of vitamin-related pathways: coincidence orconsequence? Trends in Genetics 29:469–478. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.03.003 .Helsper JP , Kagan L, Hilby CL, Maynard TM, Loewus FA. 1982. L-Ascorbic acid biosynthesis in Ochromonas danica .Plant Physiology 69:465–468. doi: 10.1104/pp.69.2.465 .
Hiller M , Schaar BT, Indjeian VB, Kingsley DM, Hagey LR, Bejerano G. 2012. A ‘forward genomics’ approach linksgenotype to phenotype using independent phenotypic losses among related species. Cell Reports 2:817–823.doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.032 .Hobbs ME , Williams HJ, Hillerich B, Almo SC, Raushel FM. 2014. l-Galactose metabolism in Bacteroides vulgatusfrom the human gut microbiota. Biochemistry 53:4661–4670. doi: 10.1021/bi500656m .Huh WK , Kim ST, Yang KS, Seok YJ, Hah YC, Kang SO. 1994. Characterisation of D-arabinono-1,4-lactone oxidasefrom Candida albicans ATCC 10231. European Journal of Biochemistry 225:1073–1079. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.1073b.x .Isherwood FA , Mapson LW. 1956. Biological synthesis of ascorbic acid: the conversion of derivatives ofD-galacturonic acid into L-ascorbic acid by plant extracts. The Biochemical Journal 64:13–22.Ishikawa T , Tajima N, Nishikawa H, Gao Y, Rapolu M, Shibata H, Sawa Y, Shigeoka S. 2010. Euglena gracilis
ascorbate peroxidase forms an intramolecular dimeric structure: its unique molecular characterization. TheBiochemical Journal 426:125–134. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091406 .Ishikawa T , Masumoto I, Iwasa N, Nishikawa H, Sawa Y, Shibata H, Nakamura A, Yabuta Y, Shigeoka S. 2006.Functional characterization of D-galacturonic acid reductase, a key enzyme of the ascorbate biosynthesis pathway,from Euglena gracilis. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 70:2720–2726. doi: 10.1271/bbb.60327 .Janouskovec J , Horak A, Obornik M, Lukes J, Keeling PJ. 2010. A common red algal origin of the apicomplexan,dinoflagellate, and heterokont plastids. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 107:10949–10954. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1003335107 .Jeuck A , Arndt H, Nitsche F. 2014. Extended phylogeny of the Craspedida ( Choanomonada ).European Journal ofProtistology 50:430–443. doi: 10.1016/j.ejop.2014.06.001 .
Johnson MD , Oldach D, Delwiche CF, Stoecker DK. 2007. Retention of transcriptionally active cryptophyte nucleiby the ciliate Myrionecta rubra .Nature 445:426–428. doi: 10.1038/nature05496 .Keeling PJ . 2010. The endosymbiotic origin, diversification and fate of plastids. Philosophical Transactions of theRoyal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 365:729–748. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0103 .Keeling PJ , Burki F, Wilcox HM, Allam B, Allen EE, Amaral-Zettler LA, Armbrust EV, Archibald JM, Bharti AK, BellCJ, Beszteri B, Bidle KD, Cameron CT, Campbell L, Caron DA, Cattolico RA, Collier JL, Coyne K, Davy SK,Deschamps P, Dyhrman ST, Edvardsen B, Gates RD, Gobler CJ, Greenwood SJ, Guida SM, Jacobi JL, JakobsenKS, James ER, Jenkins B, John U, Johnson MD, Juhl AR, Kamp A, Katz LA, Kiene R, Kudryavtsev A, Leander BS,
KS, James ER, Jenkins B, John U, Johnson MD, Juhl AR, Kamp A, Katz LA, Kiene R, Kudryavtsev A, Leander BS,Lin S, Lovejoy C, Lynn D, Marchetti A, McManus G, Nedelcu AM, Menden-Deuer S, Miceli C, Mock T, MontresorM, Moran MA, Murray S, Nadathur G, Nagai S, Ngam PB, Palenik B, Pawlowski J, Petroni G, Piganeau G,Posewitz MC, Rengefors K, Romano G, Rumpho ME, Rynearson T, Schilling KB, Schroeder DC, Simpson AG,Slamovits CH, Smith DR, Smith GJ, Smith SR, Sosik HM, Stief P, Theriot E, Twary SN, Umale PE, Vaulot D, WawrikB, Wheeler GL, Wilson WH, Xu Y, Zingone A, Worden AZ. 2014. The Marine microbial eukaryote transcriptomesequencing project (MMETSP): Illuminating the functional diversity of eukaryotic life in the Oceans throughtranscriptome sequencing. PLOS Biology 12:e1001889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001889 .Keeling PJ , Inagaki Y. 2004. A class of eukaryotic GTPase with a punctate distribution suggesting multiple
functional replacements of translation elongation factor 1-alpha. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences of USA 101:15380–15385. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0404505101 .Kotabov ´aE,K aˇna R, Jare ˇsov´aJ ,P r ´aˇsil O. 2011. Non-photochemical fluorescence quenching in Chromera velia isenabled by fast violaxanthin de-epoxidation. FEBS Letters 585:1941–1945. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.05.015 .Kudryashova EV , Leferink NG, Slot IG, van Berkel WJ. 2011. Galactonolactone oxidoreductase from Trypanosomacruzi employs a FAD cofactor for the synthesis of vitamin C. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 1814 :545–552. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.03.001 .Laing WA , Wright MA, Cooney J, Bulley SM. 2007. The missing step of the L-galactose pathway of ascorbatebiosynthesis in plants, an L-galactose guanyltransferase, increases leaf ascorbate content. Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences of USA 104:9534–9539. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701625104 .
Latifi A , Ruiz M, Zhang CC. 2009. Oxidative stress in cyanobacteria. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 33:258–278.doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00134.x .Lavaud J , Kroth PG. 2006. In diatoms, the transthylakoid proton gradient regulates the photoprotective non-photochemical fluorescence quenching beyond its control on the xanthophyll cycle.Plant & Cell Physiology 47:1010–1016. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcj058 .Lazzarotto F , Teixeira FK, Rosa SB, Dunand C, Fernandes CL, Fontenele Ade V, Silveira JA, Verli H, Margis R,Margis-Pinheiro M. 2011. Ascorbate peroxidase-related (APx-R) is a new heme-containing protein functionallyassociated with ascorbate peroxidase but evolutionarily divergent. New Phytologist 191:234–250. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2011.03659.x .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 22 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Leferink NG , Fraaije MW, Joosten HJ, Schaap PJ, Mattevi A, van Berkel WJ. 2009. Identification of a gatekeeperresidue that prevents dehydrogenases from acting as oxidases. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 284:4392–4397. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808202200 .Leferink NG , Heuts DP, Fraaije MW, van Berkel WJ. 2008. The growing VAO flavoprotein family. Archives ofBiochemistry and Biophysics 474:292–301. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2008.01.027 .Leliaert F , Smith DR, Moreau H, Herron MD, Verbruggen H, Delwiche CF, De Clerck O. 2012. Phylogeny andmolecular evolution of the Green algae. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 31:1–46. doi: 10.1080/07352689.2011.615705 .Linster CL , Gomez TA, Christensen KC, Adler LN, Young BD, Brenner C, Clarke SG. 2007. Arabidopsis VTC2encodes a GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase, the last unknown enzyme in the Smirnoff-Wheeler pathway toascorbic acid in plants. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 282:18879–18885. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702094200 .
Linster CL , Van Schaftingen E. 2007. Vitamin C. Biosynthesis, recycling and degradation in mammals. The FEBSJournal 274:1–22. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2006.05607.x .Lisec J , Schauer N, Kopka J, Willmitzer L, Fernie AR. 2006. Gas chromatography mass spectrometry-basedmetabolite profiling in plants. Nature Protocols 1:387–396. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.59 .Lisko KA , Hubstenberger JF, Phillips GC, Belefant-Miller H, McClung A, Lorence A. 2013. Ontogenetic changes invitamin C in selected rice varieties. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 66:41–46. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.01.016.Loewus FA . 1999. Biosynthesis and metabolism of ascorbic acid in plants and of analogs of ascorbic acid in fungi.Phytochemistry 52:193–210. doi: 10.1016/S0031-9422(99)00145-4 .Loewus FA , Jang R. 1958. The conversion of C14-labeled sugars to L-ascorbic acid in ripening strawberries. II.Labeling patterns in the free sugars. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 232:505–519.
Logan FJ , Taylor MC, Wilkinson SR, Kaur H, Kelly JM. 2007. The terminal step in vitamin C biosynthesis inTrypanosoma cruzi is mediated by a FMN-dependent galactonolactone oxidase. The Biochemical Journal 407:419–426. doi: 10.1042/BJ20070766 .Lorence A , Chevone BI, Mendes P, Nessler CL. 2004. myo-inositol oxygenase offers a possible entry point intoplant ascorbate biosynthesis. Plant Physiology 134:1200–1205. doi: 10.1104/pp.103.033936 .Mandl J , Szarka A, Banhegyi G. 2009. Vitamin C: update on physiology and pharmacology. British Journal ofPharmacology 157:1097–1110. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00282.x .Maruta T , Ichikawa Y, Mieda T, Takeda T, Tamoi M, Yabuta Y, Ishikawa T, Shigeoka S. 2010. The contribution ofArabidopsis homologs of L-gulono-1,4-lactone oxidase to the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid. Bioscience,Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 74:1494–1497. doi: 10.1271/bbb.100157 .
Mellado M , Contreras RA, Gonzalez A, Dennett G, Moenne A. 2012. Copper-induced synthesis of ascorbate,glutathione and phytochelatins in the marine alga Ulva compressa (Chlorophyta). Plant Physiology andBiochemistry 51:102–108. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2011.10.007 .Mhamdi A , Noctor G, Baker A. 2012. Plant catalases: peroxisomal redox guardians. Archives of Biochemistry andBiophysics 525:181–194. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2012.04.015 .Michel G , Tonon T, Scornet D, Cock JM, Kloareg B. 2010. Central and storage carbon metabolism of the brownalga Ectocarpus siliculosus : insights into the origin and evolution of storage carbohydrates in Eukaryotes. TheNew Phytologist 188:67–81. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03345.x .Milton K , Jenness R. 1987. Ascorbic-acid content of Neotropical plant-parts available to wild monkeys and bats.Experientia 43:339–342. doi: 10.1007/Bf01945577 .Mubarakshina MM , Ivanov BN, Naydov IA, Hillier W, Badger MR, Krieger-Liszkay A. 2010. Production and
diffusion of chloroplastic H 2O2and its implication to signalling. Journal of Experimental Botany 61:3577–3587.doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq171 .
diffusion of chloroplastic H 2O2and its implication to signalling. Journal of Experimental Botany 61:3577–3587.doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq171 .Naydov IA , Mubarakshina MM, Ivanov BN. 2012. Formation kinetics and H 2O2distribution in chloroplasts andprotoplasts of photosynthetic leaf cells of higher plants under illumination. Biochemistry Biokhimiia 77:143–151.doi: 10.1134/S0006297912020046 .Nedelcu AM , Miles IH, Fagir AM, Karol K. 2008. Adaptive eukaryote-to-eukaryote lateral gene transfer: stress-related genes of algal origin in the closest unicellular relatives of animals. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21:1852–1860. doi: 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2008.01605.x .Nishikimi M , Fukuyama R, Minoshima S, Shimizu N, Yagi K. 1994. Cloning and chromosomal mapping of thehuman nonfunctional gene for L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase, the enzyme for L-ascorbic acid biosynthesismissing in man. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 269:13685–13688.
Nishikimi M , Kawai T, Yagi K. 1992. Guinea pigs possess a highly mutated gene for L-gulono-gamma-lactoneoxidase, the key enzyme for L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis missing in this species. The Journal of BiologicalChemistry 267:21967–21972.Oesterhelt C , Schmalzlin E, Schmitt JM, Lokstein H. 2007. Regulation of photosynthesis in the unicellularacidophilic red alga Galdieria sulphuraria .The Plant Journal 51:500–511. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03159.x .Percival E . 1979. Polysaccharides of green, red and brown seaweeds - their basic structure, biosynthesis andfunction. British Phycological Journal 14:103–117. doi: 10.1080/00071617900650121 .Pertea G , Huang X, Liang F, Antonescu V, Sultana R, Karamycheva S, Lee Y, White J, Cheung F, Parvizi B, Tsai J,Quackenbush J. 2003. TIGR Gene Indices clustering tools (TGICL): a software system for fast clustering of largeEST datasets. Bioinformatics 19:651–652. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg034 .
Pierre LL . 1962. Synthesis of ascorbic acid by the normal fatbody of the cockroach, Leucophaea maderae (F.), andby its symbionts. Nature 193:904–905. doi: 10.1038/193904b0 .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 23 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Pineau B , Layoune O, Danon A, De Paepe R. 2008. L-galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase is required for theaccumulation of plant respiratory complex I. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 283:32500–32505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805320200 .Price DC , Chan CX, Yoon HS, Yang EC, Qiu H, Weber AP, Schwacke R, Gross J, Blouin NA, Lane C, Reyes-Prieto A,Durnford DG, Neilson JA, Lang BF, Burger G, Steiner JM, L ¨offelhardt W, Meuser JE, Posewitz MC, Ball S, Arias MC,Henrissat B, Coutinho PM, Rensing SA, Symeonidi A, Doddapaneni H, Green BR, Rajah VD, Boore J, BhattacharyaD. 2012. Cyanophora paradoxa genome elucidates origin of photosynthesis in algae and plants. Science 335:843–847. doi: 10.1126/science.1213561 .Roe JH . 1961. Comparative analyses for ascorbic acid by the 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine method with the couplingreaction at different temperatures: a procedure for determining specificity. The Journal of Biological Chemistry236:1611–1613.
236:1611–1613.Running JA , Burlingame RP, Berry A. 2003. The pathway of L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis in the colourless microalgaPrototheca moriformis .Journal of Experimental Botany 54:1841–1849. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erg207 .Pusk ´as F , Braun L, Csala M, Kardon T, Marcolongo P, Benedetti A, Mandl J, B ´anhegyi G. 1998. Gulonolactoneoxidase activity-dependent intravesicular glutathione oxidation in rat liver microsomes. FEBS Letters 430:293–296. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(98)00678-4 .Sano S , Ueda M, Kitajima S, Takeda T, Shigeoka S, Kurano N, Miyachi S, Miyake C, Yokota A. 2001.Characterization of ascorbate peroxidases from unicellular red alga Galdieria partita. Plant & Cell Physiology 42:433–440. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pce054 .Schachter H , Sarney J, McGuire EJ, Roseman S. 1969. Isolation of diphosphopyridine nucleotide-dependentL-fucose dehydrogenase from pork liver. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 244:4785–4792.
Schertl P , Sunderhaus S, Klodmann J, Grozeff GE, Bartoli CG, Braun HP. 2012. L-galactono-1,4-lactonedehydrogenase (GLDH) forms part of three subcomplexes of mitochondrial complex I in Arabidopsis thaliana .The Journal of Biological Chemistry 287:14412–14419. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.305144 .Shigeoka S , Nakano Y, Kitaoka S. 1979. The biosynthetic pathway of L-ascorbic acid in Euglena gracilis Z.Journal ofNutritional Science and Vitaminology 25:299–307. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.25.299 .Sies H . 2014. Role of metabolic H 2O2generation: redox signaling and oxidative stress. The Journal of BiologicalChemistry 289:8735–8741. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R113.544635 .Smirnoff N . 2000. Ascorbate biosynthesis and function in photoprotection. Philosophical Transactions of the RoyalSociety of London Series B, Biological Sciences 355:1455–1464. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2000.0706 .Smirnoff N . 2001. L-ascorbic acid biosynthesis. Vitamins and Hormones 61:241–266. doi: 10.1016/S0083-6729(01)61008-2 .
61008-2 .Smirnoff N . 2011. Vitamin C: the metabolism and functions of ascorbic acid in plants. Advances in BotanicalResearch 59:107–177. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385853-5.00003-9 .Su JC , Hassid WZ. 1962. Carbohydrates and nucleotides in the red alga Porphyra perforata . I. Isolation andidentification of carbohydrates. Biochemistry 1:468–474. doi: 10.1021/bi00909a016 .Talavera G , Castresana J. 2007. Improvement of phylogenies after removing divergent and ambiguously alignedblocks from protein sequence alignments. Systematic Biology 56:564–577. doi: 10.1080/10635150701472164 .Tamura K , Peterson D, Peterson N, Stecher G, Nei M, Kumar S. 2011. MEGA5: molecular evolutionary geneticsanalysis using maximum likelihood, evolutionary distance, and maximum parsimony methods. Molecular Biologyand Evolution 28:2731–2739. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr121 .Tel-Or E , Huflejt ME, Packer L. 1986. Hydroperoxide metabolism in cyanobacteria. Archives of Biochemistry and
Biophysics 246:396–402. doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(86)90485-6 .Timme RE , Bachvaroff TR, Delwiche CF. 2012. Broad Phylogenomic sampling and the sister lineage of land plants.
Biophysics 246:396–402. doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(86)90485-6 .Timme RE , Bachvaroff TR, Delwiche CF. 2012. Broad Phylogenomic sampling and the sister lineage of land plants.PLOS ONE 7:e29696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029696 .Timmis JN , Ayliffe MA, Huang CY, Martin W. 2004. Endosymbiotic gene transfer: organelle genomes forgeeukaryotic chromosomes. Nature Reviews Genetics 5:123–135. doi: 10.1038/nrg1271 .Tyler BM , Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang RH, Aerts A, Arredondo FD, Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon JL,Chapman J, Damasceno CM, Dorrance AE, Dou D, Dickerman AW, Dubchak IL, Garbelotto M, Gijzen M, GordonSG, Govers F, Grunwald NJ, Huang W, Ivors KL, Jones RW, Kamoun S, Krampis K, Lamour KH, Lee MK,McDonald WH, Medina M, Meijer HJ, Nordberg EK, Maclean DJ, Ospina-Giraldo MD, Morris PF, Phuntumart V,
Putnam NH, Rash S, Rose JK, Sakihama Y, Salamov AA, Savidor A, Scheuring CF, Smith BM, Sobral BW, Terry A,Torto-Alalibo TA, Win J, Xu Z, Zhang H, Grigoriev IV, Rokhsar DS, Boore JL. 2006. Phytophthora genomesequences uncover evolutionary origins and mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science 313:1261–1266. doi: 10.1126/science.1128796 .Urzica EI , Adler LN, Page MD, Linster CL, Arbing MA, Casero D, Pellegrini M, Merchant SS, Clarke SG. 2012.Impact of oxidative stress on ascorbate biosynthesis in Chlamydomonas via regulation of the VTC2geneencoding a GDP-L-galactose phosphorylase. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 287:14234–14245. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.341982 .Wheeler GL , Jones MA, Smirnoff N. 1998. The biosynthetic pathway of vitamin C in higher plants. Nature 393:365–369. doi: 10.1038/30728 .Whelan S , Goldman N. 2001. A general empirical model of protein evolution derived from multiple protein families
using a maximum-likelihood approach. Molecular Biology and Evolution 18:691–699. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a003851 .Wilkinson SR , Prathalingam SR, Taylor MC, Horn D, Kelly JM. 2005. Vitamin C biosynthesis in trypanosomes: a rolefor the glycosome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of USA 102:11645–11650. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504251102 .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 24 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
Wolucka BA , Communi D. 2006. Mycobacterium tuberculosis possesses a functional enzyme for the synthesisof vitamin C, L-gulono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase. T h eF E B SJ o u r n a l 273:4435–4445. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2006.05443.x .Wolucka BA , Van Montagu M. 2003. GDP-mannose 3’,5’-epimerase forms GDP-L-gulose, a putative intermediatefor the de novo biosynthesis of vitamin C in plants. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 278:47483–47490.doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309135200 .Yabuki A , Kamikawa R, Ishikawa SA, Kolisko M, Kim E, Tanabe AS, Kume K, Ishida K, Inagki Y. 2014. Palpitomonasbilix represents a basal cryptist lineage: insight into the character evolution in Cryptista. Scientific Reports 4:4641.doi: 10.1038/srep04641 .Yang H . 2013. Conserved or lost: molecular evolution of the key gene GULO in vertebrate vitamin C biosynthesis.Biochemical Genetics 51:413–425. doi: 10.1007/s10528-013-9574-0 .
Yoon HS , Hackett JD, Bhattacharya D. 2006. A genomic and phylogenetic perspective on endosymbiosis and algalorigin. Journal of Applied Phycology 18:475–481. doi: 10.1007/s10811-006-9054-6 .Z´amock ´yM, Furtmuller PG, Obinger C. 2010. Evolution of structure and function of Class I peroxidases. Archives ofBiochemistry and Biophysics 500:45–57. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.03.024 .Wheeler et al . eLife 2015;4:e06369. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06369 25 of 25Research article Genomics and evolutionary biology |Plant biology
