/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Lin, T.-Y.; Chan, H.-T.; Hsia,C.-H.; Lai, C.-F. Facial SkincareProducts’ Recommendation withComputer Vision Technologies.Electronics 2022 ,11, 143.https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11010143Academic Editor: Byung Cheol SongReceived: 21 October 2021Accepted: 29 December 2021Published: 3 January 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).electronicsArticleFacial Skincare Products’ Recommendation with ComputerVision TechnologiesTing-Yu Lin1, Hung-Tse Chan2, Chih-Hsien Hsia2,*
Ting-Yu Lin1, Hung-Tse Chan2, Chih-Hsien Hsia2,*and Chin-Feng Lai1,*1Department of Engineering Science, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan;tonylin0413@gmail.com2Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Ilan University,Yilan City 26047, Taiwan; m11002113@mail.ntust.edu.tw*Correspondence: chhsia625@gmail.com (C.-H.H.); cinfon@gmail.com (C.-F.L.)Abstract: Acne is a skin issue that plagues many young people and adults. Even if it is cured, it leavesacne spots or acne scars, which drives many individuals to use skincare products or undertake medicaltreatment. On the contrary, the use of inappropriate skincare products can exacerbate the condition ofthe skin. In view of this, this work proposes the use of computer vision (CV) technology to realize anew business model of facial skincare products. The overall framework is composed of a ﬁnger vein
identiﬁcation system, skincare products’ recommendation system, and electronic payment system. Aﬁnger vein identiﬁcation system is used as identity veriﬁcation and personalized service. A skincareproducts’ recommendation system provides consumers with professional skin analysis through skintype classiﬁcation and acne detection to recommend skincare products that ﬁnally improve skin issuesof consumers. An electronic payment system provides a variety of checkout methods, and the systemwill check out by ﬁnger-vein connections according to membership information. Experimental resultsshowed that the equal error rate (EER) comparison of the FV-USM public database on the ﬁnger-veinsystem was the lowest and the response time was the shortest. Additionally, the comparison of theskin type classiﬁcation accuracy was the highest.Keywords: electronics payment system; ﬁnger-vein; skincare; skin type classiﬁcation; acne detection1. Introduction
1. IntroductionSince most people have not received professional medical knowledge training, if theyuse inappropriate products at will, they will easily become self-defeating and make theskin condition more serious, which will cost much money and time to remedy, and evenlead to repeated skin issues such as acne. Acne is also called pimples, and the main causeof acne is excessive sebum secretion, which tends to occur in places with more sebaceousglands. According to the global acne market report for 2016–2026 [ 1], acne is one of themost common diseases for which dermatologists provide treatment assistance and morethan 90% of the world’s population suffer from acne symptoms.The sales’ channels of skincare products are mainly physical stores, which can befurther divided into open drugstores and skincare products’ counters. Open drugstoreshave a leisure and free shopping environment, but the advice obtained by consulting the
store staff may not be rigorous, and skincare products’ counters are prone to frequentsales’ promotion by the clerks, which reduces the clients’ willingness to purchase. Online
store staff may not be rigorous, and skincare products’ counters are prone to frequentsales’ promotion by the clerks, which reduces the clients’ willingness to purchase. Onlineshopping products often contain defects and counterfeit products, which are prone tothe risk of harm. The recent prevalence of unmanned stores has many similarities withthe above factors. The unmanned automated business model can effectively reduce laborcosts, cash exchanges, and contact between cashiers and customers to maintain hygieneand safety and provide better personalized services. According to the power of artiﬁcialintelligence (AI) for cosmetics brands [ 2], a personalized recommendation system hasbecome a future trend, which not only stimulates more consumption power but alsoElectronics 2022 ,11, 143. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11010143 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 2 of 13strengthens the relationship with consumers. In view of this, this work proposes to realizea new business model of facial skincare products with computer vision (CV) technology.Based on the concept of unmanned stores, a fast and contactless ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcationsystem was designed to allow consumers to instantly verify their membership. Thisidentiﬁcation system can also be used as a checkout feature to save time for taking outwallets and credit cards, and thereby improves shopping efﬁciency by saving time inqueuing. At the same time, it can also record the purchasing habits of consumers to providemore consumer-friendly commodities of preferences and needs.The skincare products’ recommendation system in this work adopts machine learning(ML) and deep learning (DL) methods. Compared with traditional CV technologies, itimproves the issue of environmental constraints and low recognition rate. In recent years,
many studies have been adopting DL methods to discuss skin quality as well. As thesymptoms of various skin diseases are similar, it is difﬁcult for doctors to distinguish withnaked eyes. Junayed et al. [ 3] used a convolutional neural network (CNN) to developa deep residual neural network (DRNN), which can identify ﬁve types of acne to assistdoctors in diagnosis. As skin cancer is steadily increasing around the world, preventivemedicine is also becoming increasingly important. Vesal et al. [ 4] used U-Net [ 5] to identifyskin lesions before skin cancer, and the experimental results reached 93% on the sensitivity(SE) target. Hameed et al. [ 6] used CNN and support vector machine (SVM) [ 7] to identifyskin diseases with an accuracy rate of 90%. The above studies showed that the featuresobtained by CNN can enhance the classiﬁcation effect of a variety of skin diseases. Due tothe increasing types of skin diseases, there have been more and more studies discussing
skin pigmented lesions in recent years. Goyal et al. [ 8] identiﬁed skin melanoma by aregion-based convolutional neural network (R-CNN) [ 9], and the accuracy rate reached98%. Adegun et al. [ 10] used a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) and the sub-network in the encoder/decoder architecture to identify pigmented tumors on the skinsurface, and the accuracy rate reached 96%. As mentioned above, using DL methods toidentify the state of skin quality is not only less restricted by a speciﬁc environment, butalso easier for us to recognize ambiguous skin features, and the accuracy is also sufﬁcientfor the practical stage, as shown in Table 1. Therefore, we proposed to use multi-featureclassiﬁcation by the ML method and pixel-wise segmentation by the DL method.Table 1. Comparison of various methods of skincare products’ recommendation system.Method Environmental Impact AccuracyTraditional CV High LowML & DL Low High
Traditional CV High LowML & DL Low HighOne of the risks of traditional identity identiﬁcation methods is that the clients mayforget their own passwords. Therefore, a variety of biometric methods [ 11] have beendeveloped to use physiological features that do not need to be carried to reduce unnecessaryrisks. The comparison of identiﬁcation methods is shown in Table 2. In the method ofbiometric recognition, face recognition [ 12,13] is susceptible to masks, face movement, andlight sources in the process of capturing images, which leads to illegible results. Finger-print [ 14] and palmprint recognition [ 15] uses touch input to capture texture, so oil orsweat on hands may affect its recognition. Besides, ﬁngerprints are human external featureand they are easy to be copied and obtained by people with bad intentions. Although irisrecognition [ 16] has a high accuracy, long-term use will cause discomfort. The biological
features of the above recognition methods are all outside of the body surface, and thereare still some unreliable external factors in use. Finger-vein identiﬁcation [ 17] is based on
features of the above recognition methods are all outside of the body surface, and thereare still some unreliable external factors in use. Finger-vein identiﬁcation [ 17] is based onthe biological features of the body surface, and it requires a living body to be recognized.Therefore, it is not easy to be copied or abrased. At the same time, its contactless natureavoids safety of health issues, and it is not easy to interfere with recognition in face of dirt
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 3 of 13and oil stains. As a result of the above reasons, we decided to use ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcationas a security system in this work.Table 2. The comparison of biometrics’ identiﬁcation method.Method DefectPassword Risk of forgetting, loss, and theftFace recognition [12,13]Susceptible to masks, face movement, and lightsources for recognitionFinger-print recognition [14] Susceptible to oil or sweat for recognitionIris recognition [16] Uncomfortable for long-term useFinger-vein recognition [17] NoneThe remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We describe the proposed methodin Section 2, present experimental results in Section 3, and draw conclusions in Section 4.2. Proposed MethodThe main architecture of this work is composed of a ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation system,a skincare products’ recommendation system, and an electronic payment system, as shownin Figure 1. The ﬁrst subsystem is the ﬁnger-vein recognition system, which is used as
identity veriﬁcation and a personalized service. The second subsystem is the skincareproducts’ recommendation system, which provides consumers with professional skinanalysis through skin type classiﬁcation and acne detection to improve skin issues ofconsumers and recommends skincare products ﬁnally. The third subsystem is the electronicpayment system, which provides a variety of checkout methods, and the system will checkout by ﬁnger-vein connections according to membership information.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 3 of 13   recognized. Therefore, it is not easy to be co pied or abrased. At the same time, its contact-less nature avoids safety of health issues, and it is not easy to interfere with recognition in face of dirt and oil stains. As a result of the above reasons, we decided to use finger-vein identification as a security system in this work. Table 2. The comparison of biometri cs’ identification method. Method Defect Password Risk of forgetting, loss, and theft
Password Risk of forgetting, loss, and theft Face recognition [12,13] Susceptible to masks, face movement, and light sources for recognition Finger-print recognition[14] Susceptible to oil or sweat for recognition Iris recognition[16] Uncomfortable for long-term use Finger-vein recognition[17] None The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We describe the proposed method in Section 2, present experimental results in Section 3, and draw conclusions in Section 4. 2. Proposed Method The main architecture of this work is comp osed of a finger-vein identification system, a skincare products’ recommendation system, and an electronic payment system, as shown in Figure 1. The first subsystem is the finger-vein recognition system, which is used as identity verification and a personalized se rvice. The second subsystem is the skincare products’ recommendation system, which provides consumers with professional skin
analysis through skin type classification and acne detection to improve skin issues of con-sumers and recommends skincare products fina lly. The third subsystem is the electronic payment system, which provides a variety of  checkout methods, and the system will check out by finger-vein connections ac cording to membership information. Member registrationMain procedureAuthenticationProduct recommendationsCheckoutFinger vein identification systemClassifiertrainingIdentificationIdentificationSkin care productsrecommendation systemSkin type classificationAcnedetectionElectronic payment systemSave payment information and classifier to databaseLink to database and payInput finger vein imageInput finger vein imageInput finger vein imageInput facial imageInput payment informationOutput identification result Figure 1. Flowchart of the main architecture. 2.1. Finger-Vein Identification System
2.1. Finger-Vein Identification System When the finger is irradiated with near-i nfrared light (NIR), the hemoglobin in the venous red blood cells absorb s the near-infrared light and presents a shadow. Based on
When the finger is irradiated with near-i nfrared light (NIR), the hemoglobin in the venous red blood cells absorb s the near-infrared light and presents a shadow. Based on this principle, the near-infrared vein image can be obtained. Finger-vein identification method has the characteristics of being contactl ess, fast, and stable as well as satisfying the conditions of hygiene, real time, and co rrectness simultaneously, making users have a better experience. The flowchart of the finger-vein recognition system is shown in Figure Figure 1. Flowchart of the main architecture.2.1. Finger-Vein Identiﬁcation SystemWhen the ﬁnger is irradiated with near-infrared light (NIR), the hemoglobin in thevenous red blood cells absorbs the near-infrared light and presents a shadow. Based onthis principle, the near-infrared vein image can be obtained. Finger-vein identiﬁcationmethod has the characteristics of being contactless, fast, and stable as well as satisfying the
conditions of hygiene, real time, and correctness simultaneously, making users have a betterexperience. The ﬂowchart of the ﬁnger-vein recognition system is shown in Figure 2. Thesystem ﬁrst uses 13/7 discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [ 18] to reduce the dimensionalityof the infrared image captured by the raspberry pi camera, retaining the features while
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 4 of 13shrinking the image, thereby improving computation speed. Then, parametric-orientedhistogram equalization (POHE) [ 19] is used for image enhancement to solve the issue ofdifﬁcult extraction of features due to light sources, making subsequent features easier toextract. Finally, it uses Gabor ﬁlters [ 20,21] to extract vein features to input the data into theSVM model for training. The system can use a pre-trained model to efﬁciently and quicklycomplete membership registration or identiﬁcation.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 4 of 13   2. The system first uses 13/7 discrete wave let transform (DWT) [18] to reduce the dimen-sionality of the infrared image captured by th e raspberry pi camera, retaining the features while shrinking the image, thereby improvin g computation speed. Then, parametric-ori-ented histogram equalization (POHE) [19] is  used for image enhancement to solve the
issue of difficult extraction of features due to light sources, making subsequent features easier to extract. Finally, it uses Gabor filter s [20,21] to extract vein features to input the data into the SVM model for training. The sy stem can use a pre-trained model to effi-ciently and quickly complete membersh ip registration or identification. StartInput finger vein imageExtract ROI image13/7 DWTPOHEGabor filterImage binarizationSVMmodelFinger vein databaseEndIdentificationTrainingInference Figure 2. Flowchart of the finger-vein identification system. 2.1.1. Image Pre-Processing This system uses two-dimensional masked  13/7 DWT in the image pre-processing step to extract the converted Low-Low (LL) band coefficient information [22,23] for sub-sequent use. DWT uses a double-layer, low-pass filter and has the characteristic of energy concentration. It uses adjacent pixels to  perform a two-dimensional convolution opera-
tion. The image input from an infrared camera can preserve more features to a low-di-mension image after convolution operation, and dimensionality-reduced images also greatly improve the effectiveness of subsequent feature extraction work. 2.1.2. Contrast Enhancement Histogram equalization (HE) is a method to enhance the contrast of local images. HE also includes local histogram equalization (LHE) and global histogram equalization (GHE). In LHE, each pixel is computed sepa rately with a different conversion function; so, it has a better image enhancement effect. However, the computational performance is not suitable for real-time recognition system s. Although GHE has higher computational performance, its enhancement effect is not ideal. In view of this, POHE used in this system not only achieves the effect of LHE contrast enhancement, but also consumes a smaller amount of computing power. The method
adopts the concept of integral image and simp lifies the transformation function of LHE. First, calculate integral image Ii,j1 and Ii,j2. The calculation method is shown in Equation (1). Then, each pixel is independently enhanced, and finally the enhancement method is shown in Equations (2) and (3) [19]. 𝐼௜,௝(௞)=෍෍ 𝑥 ௠,௡௞௝௡ୀ଴௜௠ୀ଴= 𝑥௜,௝௞+𝐼௜ିଵ,௝(௞)+𝐼௜,௝ିଵ(௞)−𝐼௜ିଵ,௝ିଵ(௞) (1)where 𝐼௜,௝(௞) can be denoted as integral image. 𝑓൫𝑥௜,௝൯ =  𝐿×𝑐൫ 𝑥 ௜,௝൯ (2)Figure 2. Flowchart of the ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation system.2.1.1. Image Pre-ProcessingThis system uses two-dimensional masked 13/7 DWT in the image pre-processing stepto extract the converted Low-Low (LL) band coefﬁcient information [ 22,23] for subsequentuse. DWT uses a double-layer, low-pass ﬁlter and has the characteristic of energy concen-tration. It uses adjacent pixels to perform a two-dimensional convolution operation. Theimage input from an infrared camera can preserve more features to a low-dimension image
after convolution operation, and dimensionality-reduced images also greatly improve theeffectiveness of subsequent feature extraction work.2.1.2. Contrast Enhancement
after convolution operation, and dimensionality-reduced images also greatly improve theeffectiveness of subsequent feature extraction work.2.1.2. Contrast EnhancementHistogram equalization (HE) is a method to enhance the contrast of local images. HEalso includes local histogram equalization (LHE) and global histogram equalization (GHE).In LHE, each pixel is computed separately with a different conversion function; so, it has abetter image enhancement effect. However, the computational performance is not suitablefor real-time recognition systems. Although GHE has higher computational performance,its enhancement effect is not ideal.In view of this, POHE used in this system not only achieves the effect of LHE contrastenhancement, but also consumes a smaller amount of computing power. The methodadopts the concept of integral image and simpliﬁes the transformation function of LHE.First, calculate integral image Ii,j1and Ii,j2.The calculation method is shown in Equation (1).
Then, each pixel is independently enhanced, and ﬁnally the enhancement method is shownin Equations (2) and (3) [19].I(k)i,j=i∑m=0j∑n=0xkm,n=xki,j+I(k)i−1,j+I(k)i,j−1−I(k)i−1,j−1(1)where I(k)i,jcan be denoted as integral image.f(xi,j)=L×c(xi,j)(2)
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 5 of 13where c(xi,j)denotes the cumulative distribution function, Lis the distribution of originalimage, and f(xi,j)is the resulting pixel after equalization.cGaussian(xi,j)=12[1+er f(xi,j−µesti,j√2σ)](3)where µesti,jdenotes the mean in a kernel and σis sigma in a kernel for the transformationfunction of POHE.2.1.3. Feature Extraction and SVM TrainingThe Gabor wavelet ﬁlter method is very similar to the visual stimulus response in thehuman visual system. It has the characteristics of achieving the best localization in thespatial domain and the frequency domain, and it is also sensitive to the edges of the image.It can be used at different scales and directions of the frequency domain to extract featuresand, thus, is suitable for extracting vein pattern features. The method ﬁrst divides the signalinto many small time intervals, and analyzes the time intervals by Fourier transform [ 24].
The deﬁnition of the two-dimensional Gabor ﬁlter [ 25] is shown in Equation (4), and theresults of image pre-processing and feature extraction are shown in Figure 3.G(x,y,θ,µ,σ)=12πσ2exp{−x2+y22σ}exp{2πiµ(xcosθ+ysinθ)} (4)where θrepresents the orientation of the normal to the parallel stripes of a Gabor function,µis mean, and σis the standard deviation of the Gaussian envelope.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 5 of 13   where 𝑐൫𝑥 ௜,௝൯ denotes the cumulative distribution function, L is the distribution of origi-nal image, and 𝑓൫𝑥 ௜,௝൯ is the resulting pixel after equalization. 𝑐ீ௔௨௦௦௜௔௡ ൫𝑥௜,௝൯ = 12ቈ1 +  𝑒𝑟𝑓 ቆ𝑥௜,௝−𝜇௜,௝௘௦௧√2𝜎ቇ቉ (3)where 𝜇௜,௝௘௦௧ denotes the mean in a kernel and 𝜎 is sigma in a kernel for the transfor-mation function of POHE. 2.1.3. Feature Extraction and SVM Training The Gabor wavelet filter method is very similar to the visual stimulus response in the human visual system. It has the characteristic s of achieving the best localization in the
spatial domain and the frequency domain, and it is also sensitive to the edges of the image. It can be used at different scales and directions  of the frequency domain to extract features and, thus, is suitable for extracting vein pa ttern features. The method first divides the sig-nal into many small time intervals, and anal yzes the time intervals by Fourier transform [24]. The definition of the two-dimensional Gabor filter [25] is shown in Equation (4), and the results of image pre-processing and feature extraction are shown in Figure 3. G൫x, y, θ, µ, σ൯ = 12πσ2expቊ-x2 + y22σቋexp{2πiµ(xcosθ + ysinθ)} (4)where θ represents the orientation of the normal to the parallel stripes of a Gabor func-tion, µ is mean, and  σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian envelope.  Figure 3. Image pre-processing an d feature extraction. After the step of feature extraction, we us ed the Otsu method [26] for image binari-
zation, and then input vein features into SV M model for training. The system may operate a pre-trained model efficiently and inference for identification to complete membership registration or electronic payment quickly. 2.1.4. Identification SVM is a well-developed, supervised learni ng method. After SVM prediction is per-formed, we can obtain experimental data results of a false acceptance rate (FAR) and false rejection rate (FRR) with different thresholds . The data points are plotted as the linear graph is called the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC). When the curves of FAR and FRR are equal at a certain point, the data at that point are the equal error rate (EER). EER is a target used to evaluate the effect of  finger-vein identification. The feature score of LINEAR core function, which is adopted by this system, is higher than that of other methods. We can, therefore, infer that the identification result operated by LINEAR core function is better.
function is better.   Figure 3. Image pre-processing and feature extraction.
methods. We can, therefore, infer that the identification result operated by LINEAR core function is better.   Figure 3. Image pre-processing and feature extraction.After the step of feature extraction, we used the Otsu method [ 26] for image binariza-tion, and then input vein features into SVM model for training. The system may operatea pre-trained model efﬁciently and inference for identiﬁcation to complete membershipregistration or electronic payment quickly.2.1.4. IdentiﬁcationSVM is a well-developed, supervised learning method. After SVM prediction isperformed, we can obtain experimental data results of a false acceptance rate (FAR) andfalse rejection rate (FRR) with different thresholds. The data points are plotted as the lineargraph is called the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC). When the curves of FARand FRR are equal at a certain point, the data at that point are the equal error rate (EER).
EER is a target used to evaluate the effect of ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation. The feature scoreof LINEAR core function, which is adopted by this system, is higher than that of othermethods. We can, therefore, infer that the identiﬁcation result operated by LINEAR corefunction is better.
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 6 of 132.2. Skincare Products Recommendation SystemThe skincare products’ recommendation system is divided into two parts: skin typeclassiﬁcation and acne detection. It is implemented by combining multi-feature processingwith the ML classiﬁcation technology and the DL semantic segmentation [ 27] technology.Finally, according to the analysis of skin type and acne status, facial skincare products arerecommended to consumers. The ﬂowchart of the skincare products’ recommendationsystem is shown in Figure 4.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 6 of 13   2.2. Skincare Products Recommendation System The skincare products’ recommendation system  is divided into two parts: skin type classification and acne detection. It is implemented by combining multi-feature pro-cessing with the ML classification technology and the DL semantic segmentation [27] tech-nology. Finally, according to the analysis of skin type and acne status, facial skincare prod-
ucts are recommended to consumers. The fl owchart of the skincare products’ recommen-dation system is shown in Figure 4. Skin care productMySQLdatabaseStartImage captureExtractfacial ROIHaar waveletFeature statisticSVM predictionNon-oil skinOil skinTexture feature statisticSVM predictionNeutral skinDry skinSemantic segmentation for acne detectionDefine Acne severity by calculating acne  areaExperimental resultanalysisProductrecommendation End Figure 4. Flowchart of skincare products’ recommendation system. 2.2.1. Image Capture and Extract Region of Interest (ROI) This system uses Logitech’s C310 camera to capture facial images, and then uses the cross-platform CV library (Open Source Comp uter Visual Library, OpenCV) facial recog-nition model to detect facial regions in the im age. Facemark [28] is then used to identify 68 features of the face, and, at the same time , marks the output on the display screen for
the user to confirm whether the facial contou r has been captured correctly. Then, it uses the four areas including left and right cheeks,  forehead, and chin as ROI image, which is prone to acne and oil, and finally outputs the ROI captured image to skin type classifica-tion and acne detection. 2.2.2. Skin Type Classification In the skin type classification part, the in put ROI image is converted into a grayscale image first, and then a two-level Haar [29] DWT is performed on the grayscale image to obtain seven sub-bands. The reason for choos ing Haar as the wavelet transform is that Haar wavelet is orthogonal and double-orthogonal simultaneously. Besides, the spatial Figure 4. Flowchart of skincare products’ recommendation system.2.2.1. Image Capture and Extract Region of Interest (ROI)This system uses Logitech’s C310 camera to capture facial images, and then usesthe cross-platform CV library (Open Source Computer Visual Library, OpenCV) facial
recognition model to detect facial regions in the image. Facemark [ 28] is then used toidentify 68 features of the face, and, at the same time, marks the output on the displayscreen for the user to conﬁrm whether the facial contour has been captured correctly. Then,it uses the four areas including left and right cheeks, forehead, and chin as ROI image,which is prone to acne and oil, and ﬁnally outputs the ROI captured image to skin typeclassiﬁcation and acne detection.2.2.2. Skin Type ClassiﬁcationIn the skin type classiﬁcation part, the input ROI image is converted into a grayscaleimage ﬁrst, and then a two-level Haar [ 29] DWT is performed on the grayscale image toobtain seven sub-bands. The reason for choosing Haar as the wavelet transform is thatHaar wavelet is orthogonal and double-orthogonal simultaneously. Besides, the spatial
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 7 of 13resolution is low and the quality is high [ 30]. According to the seven sub-bands afterHaar wavelet transformation, the system uses the LL band coefﬁcients in the two-leveltransformation [ 31] to calculate them in a histogram, and then uses the cumulative numberof the four selected intervals [ 32] in the histogram as parameters. The selected intervalincludes [110, 120), [120, 130), [180, 190), and [190, 200), and these four parameters are usedin the classiﬁcation of the ﬁrst stage of skin type classiﬁcation.The second stage of classiﬁcation is to use the ROI image transformed by Haar waveletto calculate texture features. According to the distance and angle between two pixels in theimage, the cumulative number with the same gray level is calculated and implemented bya co-occurrence matrix. Then, based on the co-occurrence matrix [ 32], contrast is calculated,as shown in Equation (5). Inverse difference moment (IDM) is calculated, as shown in
Equation (6). Entropy is calculated, as shown in Equation (7). They are ﬁnally used for thesecond stage of classiﬁcation.Constrast =Eg−1∑n=0n2×{Eg∑i=1Eg∑j=1p(i,j|d, 0◦)}|i+j=1| (5)IDM =∑i∑j11+ (i−j)2×p(i,j|d, 0◦) (6)Entropy =−∑i∑jp(i,j|d, 0◦)×log{p(i,j|d, 0◦)} (7)where dis the distance of two pixel, and Egis the value of maximum grayscale value minusminimum grayscale value.In the skin type classiﬁcation part, the linear SVM is used to classify the skin type.According to the four sub-band parameters after statistics as the ﬁrst type of feature, theoily skin and non-oily skin are ﬁrst distinguished, and then the texture feature is usedas the second type of feature to distinguish neutral skin and dry skin from non-oily skin.The advantage of SVM is that it can classify from explicit features and only takes a smallnumber of samples to train the classiﬁcation model; so, this model is used as the basis forclassiﬁcation.2.2.3. Acne Detection
classiﬁcation.2.2.3. Acne DetectionIn the part of acne detection, the captured ROI image is input to the DeepLab-v3+ [ 33]model for pixel-level prediction. First, the encoder adopts the atrous spatial pyramidpooling (ASPP) architecture and calculates the multi-dimensional features with differentconvolution rates. Then, it performs bilinear upsampling on the acquired features andconcatenates them with bottom layer features, which have the same spatial resolution. Afterconcatenation, convolution is used to reﬁne the features, and then a bilinear upsamplingis performed. In order to reduce the computational complexity, this system separates thestandard convolution into a depth separable convolution and performs spatial convolutionindependently for each layer of input channel; pointwise convolution is used for combiningthe output of convolution.In the part of acne statistics, we analyze the segmented images and calculate the
proportion of the acne area occupying the ROI image area. Finally, the user’s acne severityis determined according to the calculated acne ratio value and the resulting image is dividedinto areas of mild, moderate, and serious acne. The higher the ratio, the more serious theissue is. We classify the severity of acne according to the proportion of acne occupying theROI image: 25% is mild, 50% is moderate, and more than 75% is severe. Because there is noclinically correct acne detection label, we self-label the acne data on the Internet and test itto get an 80% segmentation accuracy.
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 8 of 132.2.4. User InterfaceIn this work, facial care products were used as the products of the vending machine,as shown in Figure 5. When the user operates the vending machine, the lens of thevending machine will detect whether there is a user, and then the voice system will informthe user of the operation steps. The user stands at a speciﬁed distance and aligns therecognition display screen through the voice system, and the system can perform skin typeclassiﬁcation and acne detection. Finally, the system analyzes the user’s facial status basedon the classiﬁcation and detection results, and provides recommendations for skincareproducts. At this time, the user can choose whether to buy skincare products. If the userwould like to purchase products, the user only needs to click on the screen directly topurchase. This facial skincare product vending machine provides electronic payment and
checkout features. After the checkout, the skincare products will be placed in the pick-upport for the purchaser to pick up. This composite system not only avoids the cost of storerent, but also make it relatively more convenient for management and replenishment. Itcan also cooperate with major skincare product brands to put on vending machines. Itsfuture development is worth looking forward to.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 8 of 13   2.2.4. User Interface In this work, facial care products were used as the products of the vending machine, as shown in Figure 5. When the user operates the vending machine, the lens of the vending machine will detect whether there is a user, an d then the voice system will inform the user of the operation steps. The user stands at a specified distance and aligns the recognition display screen through the voice system, and th e system can perform skin type classifica-
tion and acne detection. Finally, the system analyzes the user’s facial status based on the classification and detection results, and provides recommendations for skincare products. At this time, the user can choose whether to buy skincare products. If the user would like to purchase products, the user only needs to click on the screen directly to purchase. This facial skincare product vending machine provides electronic payment and checkout fea-tures. After the checkout, the skincare products will be placed in the pick-up port for the purchaser to pick up. This composite system not only avoids the cost of store rent, but also make it relatively more convenient fo r management and replen ishment. It can also cooperate with major skincare product brands to put on vending machines. Its future de-velopment is worth looking forward to.  Figure 5. Schematic diagram of facial skincare products’ vending machine.
The user interface of skincare products’ recommendation system is shown in Figure 6. The user can determine whether the facial contour is accurately captured according to the screen, then press the recommendation butt on, as shown in Figure 6a, and view the analytical results and recommended results, as shown in Figure 6b.                           ( a) ( b) Figure 6. Skincare products’ recommendation system: ( a) Detection interface; ( b) Result interface. Figure 5. Schematic diagram of facial skincare products’ vending machine.The user interface of skincare products’ recommendation system is shown in Figure 6.The user can determine whether the facial contour is accurately captured according tothe screen, then press the recommendation button, as shown in Figure 6a, and view theanalytical results and recommended results, as shown in Figure 6b.Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 8 of 13   2.2.4. User Interface
2.2.4. User Interface In this work, facial care products were used as the products of the vending machine, as shown in Figure 5. When the user operates the vending machine, the lens of the vending machine will detect whether there is a user, an d then the voice system will inform the user
as shown in Figure 5. When the user operates the vending machine, the lens of the vending machine will detect whether there is a user, an d then the voice system will inform the user of the operation steps. The user stands at a specified distance and aligns the recognition display screen through the voice system, and th e system can perform skin type classifica-tion and acne detection. Finally, the system analyzes the user’s facial status based on the classification and detection results, and provides recommendations for skincare products. At this time, the user can choose whether to buy skincare products. If the user would like to purchase products, the user only needs to click on the screen directly to purchase. This facial skincare product vending machine provides electronic payment and checkout fea-tures. After the checkout, the skincare products will be placed in the pick-up port for the
purchaser to pick up. This composite system not only avoids the cost of store rent, but also make it relatively more convenient fo r management and replen ishment. It can also cooperate with major skincare product brands to put on vending machines. Its future de-velopment is worth looking forward to.  Figure 5. Schematic diagram of facial skincare products’ vending machine. The user interface of skincare products’ recommendation system is shown in Figure 6. The user can determine whether the facial contour is accurately captured according to the screen, then press the recommendation butt on, as shown in Figure 6a, and view the analytical results and recommended results, as shown in Figure 6b.                           ( a) ( b) Figure 6. Skincare products’ recommendation system: ( a) Detection interface; ( b) Result interface. Figure 6. Skincare products’ recommendation system: ( a) Detection interface; ( b) Result interface.
The establishment of a skincare products’ database is an indispensable part of thiswork. The database of this work contains 110 skincare products, including mild-oily, mild-
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 9 of 13neutral, mild-dry, moderate-oily, moderate-neutral, moderate-dry, serious-oily, serious-neutral, and serious-dry of nine types of skincare products. Due to the large number ofitems, only one skincare product is listed, as shown in Table 3.Table 3. List of skin care products.Item Mild Moderate SeriousOilyNRK Rose Astringent PAULA’s CHOICEPAULA’s CHOICESalicylic AcidLotion Pore-Reducing TonerBlemish-prone SkinExtra StrengthNeutralSHISEIDO RevitalSHISEIDOVital-Perfection WhiteRevitalizing EmulsionPAULA’s CHOICESalicylic AcidLotion Ex Blemish-prone SkinDry ORBIS Clear MoisturePAULA’s CHOICECALM Soothing TonerPAULA’s CHOICE 2%BHA Gel Exfoliant2.3. Electronic Payment SystemThe electronic payment system in this work links the ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation systemand the checkout page through the cloud database serialization technology. The relationshipgraph of the electronic payment system is shown in Figure 7.
Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 9 of 13   The establishment of a skincare products’ da tabase is an indispensable part of this work. The database of this work contains 110 skincare products, including mild-oily, mild-neutral, mild-dry, moderate-oily, moderat e-neutral, moderate-dry, serious-oily, se-rious-neutral, and serious-dry of nine types of  skincare products. Due to the large number of items, only one skincare produc t is listed, as shown in Table 3. Table 3. List of skin care products.  Item Mild Moderate Serious Oily NRK Rose Astringent PAULA’s CHOICE PAULA’s CHOICE Salicylic Acid Lotion Pore-Reducing Toner Blemish-prone Skin Extra Strength Neutral SHISEIDO Revital SHISEIDO Vital-Perfec-tion White Revitalizing Emulsion PAULA’s CHOICE Salicylic Acid Lotion Ex Blemish-prone Skin Dry ORBIS Clear Moisture PAULA’s CHOICE CALM Soothing Toner PAULA’s CHOICE 2% BHA Gel Exfoliant 2.3. Electronic Payment System
2.3. Electronic Payment System The electronic payment system in this wo rk links the finger-vein identification sys-tem and the checkout page through the cloud database serialization technology. The rela-tionship graph of the electronic paym ent system is shown in Figure 7.  Figure 7. Relation graph of the el ectronic payment system. 2.3.1. Cloud Database Construction Setting up a cloud database with XAMPP, this database stores the identity data reg-istered by each user, and corresponds to the user ’s first scan of the vein record as a mech-anism to confirm the identity. The database verification method uses encryption and com-parison, and the database also records the purc hase data of users in recent times, provid-ing an analysis of the willingness to purchase various products and the user’s purchasing habits. 2.3.2. Identity Verification and Electronic Payment Mechanism In the part of the identity verification me chanism, the system uses the developed fin-
ger-vein identification system for verification,  compares the user’s identity according to the cloud database, and, after confirming the identity, the skincare product system can be used. It can also be used according to the cloud database, providing recommendations for items that have been purchased. In the part of the electronic payment mechanism, we use cross-border e-commerce payment API to redirect to the payment page, on which con-sumers can finally pay for purchase. This system only needs to perform identity verification through finger-vein identifi-cation, and then consumers can use credit cards to make purchases. It does not require personal mobile devices or chip cards, such as barcodes, near-field communication (NFC), etc.   Figure 7. Relation graph of the electronic payment system.2.3.1. Cloud Database ConstructionSetting up a cloud database with XAMPP , this database stores the identity data regis-
tered by each user, and corresponds to the user’s ﬁrst scan of the vein record as a mechanismto conﬁrm the identity. The database veriﬁcation method uses encryption and comparison,
tered by each user, and corresponds to the user’s ﬁrst scan of the vein record as a mechanismto conﬁrm the identity. The database veriﬁcation method uses encryption and comparison,and the database also records the purchase data of users in recent times, providing ananalysis of the willingness to purchase various products and the user’s purchasing habits.2.3.2. Identity Veriﬁcation and Electronic Payment MechanismIn the part of the identity veriﬁcation mechanism, the system uses the developedﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation system for veriﬁcation, compares the user’s identity accordingto the cloud database, and, after conﬁrming the identity, the skincare product system canbe used. It can also be used according to the cloud database, providing recommendationsfor items that have been purchased. In the part of the electronic payment mechanism,we use cross-border e-commerce payment API to redirect to the payment page, on whichconsumers can ﬁnally pay for purchase.
consumers can ﬁnally pay for purchase.This system only needs to perform identity veriﬁcation through ﬁnger-vein identiﬁ-cation, and then consumers can use credit cards to make purchases. It does not requirepersonal mobile devices or chip cards, such as barcodes, near-ﬁeld communication (NFC),etc.2.3.3. User InterfaceAs shown in Figure 8a,b, the user must ﬁll in the payment method and other informa-tion and complete the operation of photographing ﬁnger-veins. After the ﬁrst registration,if the payment method inquiry is not turned on in future purchases, payment can be madethrough vein authentication without ﬁlling in any information. The payment method canbe changed through the membership system.
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 10 of 13Electronics  2022 , 11, 143 10 of 13   2.3.3. User Interface As shown in Figure 8a,b, the user must fill in the payment method and other infor-mation and complete the operation of photogra phing finger-veins. After the first registra-tion, if the payment method inquiry is not turned on in future purchases, payment can be made through vein authentication without filling in any information. The payment method can be changed through the membership system.   (a) ( b) Figure 8. Finger-vein identification system: ( a) Membership registration interface; ( b) Electronic payment interface. 3. Experimental Results 3.1. Accuracy of Skin Type Classification The accuracy of skin type classification in this work is shown in Table 4 Through cooperation with dermatologists, systematic tests were carried out from the perspective of the medical profession, and the doctors’ pr ofessional advice on various types of skin
was carried out. The skin type classification accuracy rate is the comparison statistics be-tween the results of this work and the results diagnosed by the doctors. In this work, we used 20 people’s skin type data diagnosed by  professional dermatolog ists for training and 15 people’s skin type data for testing. Th ey were all between 18 and 23 years old. Table 4. Accuracy of skin type classification. Method Oily Neutral Dry This work 83% 94% 77% J. Lee et al. [32] 82% 85% 83% 3.2. The Security of Finger- Vein Identification System EER is an important indicator of security. There are two possible errors in the identi-fication system, FRR and FAR. FRR represents the rate at which the system should pass the result but not pass the recognition, while FAR represents the rate at which the system should not pass the result but pass the recognition. The curve formed by FAR and FRR will intersect at a point, which is called EER, which is the point at which the two recogni-
tion error rates are the same. At this point of time, the sum of the two recognition error values is at the minimum value.  When the similarity is set to EER, there will be the most balanced performance; so, in gene ral, the value of EER will be used as an index to identify the performance of the system. The smaller th e value of EER, the better the performance of the identification system. Th is work is optimized by adjusting the parameters of SVM. Table 5 shows the EER comparison of each me thod. Public database FV-USM [34] and the Figure 8. Finger-vein identiﬁcation system: ( a) Membership registration interface; ( b) Electronicpayment interface.3. Experimental Results3.1. Accuracy of Skin Type ClassiﬁcationThe accuracy of skin type classiﬁcation in this work is shown in Table 4 Throughcooperation with dermatologists, systematic tests were carried out from the perspectiveof the medical profession, and the doctors’ professional advice on various types of skin
was carried out. The skin type classiﬁcation accuracy rate is the comparison statisticsbetween the results of this work and the results diagnosed by the doctors. In this work, weused 20 people’s skin type data diagnosed by professional dermatologists for training and15 people’s skin type data for testing. They were all between 18 and 23 years old.Table 4. Accuracy of skin type classiﬁcation.Method Oily Neutral DryThis work 83% 94% 77%J. Lee et al. [32] 82% 85% 83%3.2. The Security of Finger-Vein Identiﬁcation SystemEER is an important indicator of security. There are two possible errors in the identi-ﬁcation system, FRR and FAR. FRR represents the rate at which the system should passthe result but not pass the recognition, while FAR represents the rate at which the systemshould not pass the result but pass the recognition. The curve formed by FAR and FRR willintersect at a point, which is called EER, which is the point at which the two recognition
should not pass the result but pass the recognition. The curve formed by FAR and FRR willintersect at a point, which is called EER, which is the point at which the two recognitionerror rates are the same. At this point of time, the sum of the two recognition error valuesis at the minimum value. When the similarity is set to EER, there will be the most balancedperformance; so, in general, the value of EER will be used as an index to identify theperformance of the system. The smaller the value of EER, the better the performance ofthe identiﬁcation system. This work is optimized by adjusting the parameters of SVM.Table 5 shows the EER comparison of each method. Public database FV-USM [34] and theself-created dataset were used in this work. Table 5 shows that the FV-USM database hadhigh security, and the self-created dataset had the second highest security in this work.
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 11 of 13Table 5. Comparison of EER.MethodEEROur Database FV-USMN. Miura et al. [35] 2.5% 7.2%E-C. Lee et al. [36] 3.13% 10.2%Z. Liu et al. [37] 1.51% 5.2%This work 1.8% 2.8%3.3. The Response Time of Finger-Vein Identiﬁcation SystemTable 6 is a comparison between the response time of this work and that of other meth-ods in identiﬁcation. According to the results of the comparison, in the same developmentenvironment, it can be seen from Table 6 that the response time of this work was reducedby more than 4 times than other methods.Table 6. Comparison of response time.Method Image Extraction Recognition TotalN. Miura et al. [35]320×2406.74 s 1.64 s 8.38 sWang et al. [38] 3.52 s 1.43 s 4.95 sZ. Liu et al. [37] 1.63 s 1.27 s 2.90 sThis work 0.59 s 0.201 s 0.79 s4. ConclusionsThis work proposes the use of CV technology to realize a new business model offacial skincare products. The overall framework is composed of a ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation
system, a skincare products’ recommendation system, and an electronic payment system.The difference between this work and the previous literature is that this work proposes acomposite system architecture, based on the concept of unmanned stores, to design a fastand contactless ﬁnger-vein recognition system. In addition to facial analysis of skin typeclassiﬁcation and acne detection, recommending for skincare products is also provided.The experimental results include accuracy of skin type classiﬁcation, EER comparison ofeach method of ﬁnger-vein identiﬁcation system, and the comparison of response time. TheEER comparison of the FV-USM public database on the vein system is the lowest and theresponse time is the shortest. Additionally, the comparison of the skin type classiﬁcationaccuracy is the highest.Author Contributions: C.-H.H. and C.-F.L. carried out the studies and drafted the manuscript. T.-Y.L.
participated in its design and helped to draft the manuscript. H.-T.C. conducted the experiments andperformed the statistical analysis. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of themanuscript.Funding: This work was partially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan,R.O.C. under Grant No. 109-2221-E-197-029.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Global Acne Market Report for 2016–2026. Available online: https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/global-acne-market-report-for-2016-2026-300576931.html (accessed on 20 October 2021).2. The Power of Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Cosmetics Brands. Available online: https://www.launchmetrics.com/resources/blog/artiﬁcial-intelligence-beauty-industry (accessed on 20 October 2021).
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 12 of 133. Junayed, M.S.; Jeny, A.A.; Atik, S.T.; Neehal, N.; Karim, A.; Azam, S.; Shanmugam, B. AcneNet—A deep CNN based classiﬁcationapproach for acne classes. In Proceedings of the 2019 12th International Conference on Information & Communication Technologyand System (ICTS), Surabaya, Indonesia, 18 July 2019; pp. 203–208.4. Vesal, S.; Ravikumar, N.; Maier, A. SkinNet: A deep learning framework for skin lesion segmentation. In Proceedings of the 2018IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference Proceedings (NSS/MIC), Sydney, NSW, Australia, 10–17November 2018; pp. 1–3.5. Ronneberger, O.; Philipp, F.; Thomas, B. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Proceedings ofthe International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention; Medical Image Computing andComputer-Assisted Intervention-MICCAI, Munich, Germany, 5–9 October 2015; pp. 234–241.
6. Hameed, N.; Shabut, A.M.; Hossain, M.A. Multi-class skin diseases classiﬁcation using deep convolutional neural networkand support vector machine. In Proceedings of the 2018 12th International Conference on Software, Knowledge, InformationManagement & Applications (SKIMA), Phnom Penh, Cambodia, 3–5 December 2018; pp. 1–7.7. Cortes, C.; Vapnik, V . Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 1995 ,20, 273–297. [CrossRef]8. Goyal, M.; Oakley, A.; Bansal, P .; Dancey, D.; Yap, M.H. Skin lesion segmentation in dermoscopic images with ensemble deeplearning methods. IEEE Access. 2020 ,8, 4171–4181. [CrossRef]9. Girshick, R.; Donahue, J.; Darrell, T.; Malik, J. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation. InProceedings of the 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Columbus, OH, USA, 23–28 June 2014;pp. 580–587.
pp. 580–587.10. Adegun, A.A.; Viriri, S. Deep learning-based system for automatic melanoma detection. IEEE Access. 2020 ,8, 7160–7172.[CrossRef]11. Minaee, S.; Abdolrashidi, A.; Su, H.; Bennamoun, M.; Zhang, D. Biometrics recognition using deep learning: A Survey. arXiv2021 , arXiv:1912.00271.12. Hsia, C.-H.; Chiang, J.-S.; Lin, C.-Y. A fast face detection method for illumination variant condition. Scientia Iranica 2015 ,22,2081–2091.13. Hsia, C.-H.; Li, H.-T. Real-time wavelet face detection system with occlusion condition. J. Technol. 2015 ,30, 343–350.14. Prasad, P .S.; Devi, B.S.; Reddy, M.J.; Gunjan, V .K. A survey of ﬁngerprint recognition systems and their applications. InProceedings of the International Conference on Communications and Cyber Physical Engineering, Hyderabad, India, 24–25January 2018; pp. 513–520.15. Guo, J.-M.; Hsia, C.-H.; Liu, Y.-F.; Yu, J.-C.; Chu, M.-H.; Le, T.-N. Contact-free hand geometry-based identiﬁcation system. Exp.
Syst. App. 2012 ,39, 11728–11736. [CrossRef]16. Trokielewicz, M.; Czajka, A.; Maciejewicz, P . Iris recognition after death. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2018 ,14, 1501–1514.[CrossRef]17. Hsia, C.-H. New veriﬁcation strategy for ﬁnger-vein recognition system. IEEE Sens. J. 2017 ,18, 790–797. [CrossRef]18. Gnavi, S.; Penna, B.; Grangetto, M.; Magli, E.; Olmo, G. Wavelet kernels on a DSP: A comparison between lifting and ﬁlter banksfor image coding. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2002 ,2002 , 981–989. [CrossRef]19. Liu, Y.; Guo, J.; Lai, B.; Lee, J. High efﬁcient contrast enhancement using parametric approximation. In Proceedings of the2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013;pp. 2444–2448.20. Wang, K.; Liu, J.; Oluwatoyin, P .P .; Feng, W. Finger vein identiﬁcation based on 2-D Gabor ﬁlter. In Proceedings of the 2010 the
2nd International Conference on Industrial Mechatronics and Automation, Wuhan, China, 30–31 May 2010; pp. 10–13.21. Kocakulak, M.; Acir, N. Enhancement of ﬁnger vein images using Gabor ﬁlter. In Proceedings of the Signal Processing and
21. Kocakulak, M.; Acir, N. Enhancement of ﬁnger vein images using Gabor ﬁlter. In Proceedings of the Signal Processing andCommunications Applications Conference, Izmir, Turkey, 2–5 May 2018; pp. 1–4.22. Hsia, C.-H. Improved ﬁnger-vein pattern method using wavelet-based for real-time personal identiﬁcation system. J. Imaging Sci.Technol. 2018 ,62, 30402-1–30402-8. [CrossRef]23. Hsia, C.-H. A new VLSI architecture for symmetric mask-based discrete wavelet transform. J. Internet Technol. 2014 ,15, 1083–1090.24. Bracewell, R.N.; Bracewell, R.N. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications ; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1986; Volume 31999.25. Daugman, J.G. High conﬁdence visual recognition of persons by a test of statistical independence. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.Intell. 1993 ,15, 1148–1161. [CrossRef]26. Otsu, N. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern. 1979 ,9, 62–66. [CrossRef]
27. Long, J.; Shelhamer, E.; Darrell, T. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEEConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; pp. 3431–3440.28. Zhou, E.; Fan, H.; Cao, Z.; Jiang, Y.; Yin, Q. Extensive facial landmark localization with coarse-to-ﬁne convolutional networkcascade. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2–8December 2013; pp. 386–391.29. Stankovi´ c, R.S.; Falkowski, B.J. The Haar wavelet transform: Its status and achievements. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2003 ,29, 25–44.[CrossRef]30. Hsia, C.-H.; Chiang, J.-S. Real-time moving objects detection and tracking with direct LL-mask band scheme. Int. J. Innov. Comput.Inf. Control. 2012 ,8, 4451–4468.
Electronics 2022 ,11, 143 13 of 1331. Hsia, C.-H.; Guo, J.-M.; Chiang, J.-S. Improved low-complexity algorithm for 2-D integer lifting-based discrete wavelet transformusing symmetric mask-based scheme. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. 2009 ,19, 1201–1208.32. Lee, J.; Chen, Y.; Liu, L.-C.; Huang, C.-H. A facial-skin condition classiﬁcation system in wavelet domain. In Proceedingsof the IECON 2007–33rd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Taipei, Taiwan, 5–8 November 2007;pp. 2419–2422.33. Chen, L.-C.; Zhu, Y.; Papandreou, G.; Schroff, F.; Adam, H. Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semanticimage segmentation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018;pp. 833–851.34. Piciucco, E.; Kuzu, R.S.; Maiorana, E.; Campisi, P . On the cross-ﬁnger similarity of vein patterns. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Image Analysis and Processing, Trento, Italy, 9–13 September 2019; pp. 12–20.35. Miura, N.; Nagasaka, A.; Miyatake, T. Feature extraction of ﬁnger-vein patterns based on repeated line tracking and its applicationto personal identiﬁcation. Mach. Vis. Appl. 2004 ,15, 194–203. [CrossRef]36. Lee, E.C.; Jung, H.; Kim, D. New ﬁnger biometric method using near infrared imaging. Sensors 2011 ,11, 2319–2333. [CrossRef]37. Liu, Z.; Song, S. An embedded real-time ﬁnger-vein recognition system for mobile devices. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 2012 ,58,522–527. [CrossRef]38. Wang, D.; Li, J.; Memik, G. User identiﬁcation based on ﬁnger-vein patterns for consumer electronics devices. IEEE Trans. Consum.Electron. 2010 ,56, 799–804. [CrossRef]
