Review on Strategies andTechnologies for Exosome Isolationand Puri ﬁcationJiaci Chen1†, Peilong Li2†, Taiyi Zhang1, Zhipeng Xu3, Xiaowen Huang1*, Ruiming Wang1*and Lutao Du2*1State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking, Department of Bioengineering, Qilu University ofTechnology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China,2Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Hospital, CheelooCollege of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China,3School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol,United KingdomExosomes, a nano-sized subtype of extracellular vesicles secreted from almost all livingcells, are capable of transferring cell-speci ﬁc constituents of the source cell to the recipientcell. Cumulative evidence has revealed exosomes play an irreplaceable role in prognostic,diagnostic, and even therapeutic aspects. A method that can ef ﬁciently provide intact and
pure exosomes samples is the ﬁrst step to both exosome-based liquid biopsies andtherapeutics. Unfortunately, common exosomal separation techniques suffer fromoperation complexity, time consumption, large sample volumes and low purity, posingsigni ﬁcant challenges for exosomal downstream analysis. Ef ﬁcient, simple, and affordablemethods to isolate exosomes are crucial to carrying out relevant researches. In the lastdecade, emerging technologies, especially micro ﬂuidic chips, have proposed superiorstrategies for exosome isolation and exhibited fascinating performances. While manyexcellent reviews have overviewed various methods, a compressive review includingupdated/improved methods for exosomal isolation is indispensable. Herein, we ﬁrstoverview exosomal properties, biogenesis, contents, and functions. Then, we brie ﬂy
outline the conventional technologies and discuss the challenges of clinical applicationsof these technologies. Finally, we review emerging exosomal isolation strategies and large-scale GMP production of engineered exosomes to open up future perspectives of next-generation Exo-devices for cancer diagnosis and treatment.Keywords: exosomes, micro ﬂuidics, exosome isolation, exosome separation, cancerINTRODUCTIONThe development of medical technologies has reached an unprecedented level in the 21st century.However, early diagnosis and complete recovery of malignant tumors are still facing severechallenges. Cancers have become a dominating health concern around the world. The rapidsurge of cancer morbidity and mortality worldwide has shown more than 19.3 million newcancer cases and an estimated 10.0 million deaths in 2020. With an expected 28.4 million casesin 2040, it is an increase of about 47% from 2020 ( Sung et al., 2021 ). The situation deeply dues to the
concealment of cancer and the limitations of invasive tests (e.g., Tissue biopsy) and imaging tests (e.g., CT,Type-B ultrasonic) ( Nasrollahpour et al., 2021 ). Once cancers are diagnosed by the above methods, theyoften have spread and are in the late stage ( Chambers et al., 2002 ;Nasrollahpour et al., 2021 ). If theEdited by:Holger Becker,Micro ﬂuidic ChipShop GmbH,GermanyReviewed by:Ciprian Iliescu,National Institute for Research andDevelopment in Microtechnologies,RomaniaYoosoo Yang,Korea Institute of Science andTechnology (KIST), South Korea*Correspondence:Xiaowen Huanghuangxiaowen2013@gmail.comRuiming Wangruiming3k@163.comLutao Dulutaodu@sdu.edu.cn†These authors have contributedequally to this work and share ﬁrstauthorshipSpecialty section:This article was submitted toBiosensors and BiomolecularElectronics,a section of the journalFrontiers in Bioengineering andBiotechnologyReceived: 09 November 2021Accepted: 09 December 2021
Accepted: 09 December 2021Published: 05 January 2022Citation:Chen J, Li P, Zhang T, Xu Z, Huang X,Wang R and Du L (2022) Review onStrategies and Technologies forExosome Isolation and Puri ﬁcation.Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9:811971.doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.811971
Wang R and Du L (2022) Review onStrategies and Technologies forExosome Isolation and Puri ﬁcation.Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9:811971.doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.811971Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 1REVIEWpublished: 05 January 2022doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.811971
diagnosis can be made in the early stage, patients have a greatchance of recovery ( Chambers et al., 2002 ;Chen et al., 2020 ). Forthe patients, early diagnosis of cancer not only reduces costs,improves therapeutic effect but is key to reducing mortality ( Qianet al., 2019 ;Whitaker, 2020 ). Accordingly, early cancer detectionplays a signi ﬁcant role and has been a subject of cancer preventionand care.In the few decades, the emerging liquid biopsies have shownpowerful potential as non-invasive diagnostic methods for earlycancer detection. Liquid biopsies are the sampling and analysisfrom various biological ﬂuids of patients to obtain disease-relatedinformation, mainly including circulating tumor cells (CTCs),exosomes, and other vesicles ( Huang et al., 2021 ). Among them,exosomes possess valuable information about physiology andpathology.Exosomes are secreted from almost all cell types andabundantly present in bio ﬂuids ( Raimondo et al., 2011 ). Lipid
bilayer membranes of exosomes enable them to ﬁrmly carry andtransmit important biological signals from their cells of origin,which not only affect the physiological state of the body but alsoare closely related to cell communication ( Raimondo et al., 2011 ),immunoregulation ( Huang et al., 2017 ), angiogenesis ( Zhuanget al., 2012 ), tumorigenesis, and metastasis ( Melo et al., 2015 ;Thind and Wilson, 2016 ;Zheng et al., 2018 ;Correa et al., 2020 ).Thus, exosomes have become promising tools for monitoringcancer occurrence and progression. Despite their potential, ourunderstanding of exosomal functions remains limited. One of themain challenges for research stagnation is the lack of an ef ﬁcientstandardized isolation strategy for speci ﬁc exosome
subpopulations due to their inherent heterogeneity. Inaddition to the need to separate intact and pure exosomes,exosome isolation approaches will further progress towardshigh purity, high throughput, low operation time, andrepeatability(Mathivanan et al., 2010a ;Yang and Robbins,2011 ;An et al., 2019 ).At present, common exosome isolation technologies, such asultraﬁltration, immunoaf ﬁnity, ultracentrifugation ( “goldstandard ”for the isolation of exosomes) are expensiveinstruments, large volumes of sample, possible proteincontamination, complete isolation steps, but they result in lowisolation ef ﬁciency, sample loss, low exosome recovery and purity(LeBleu and Kalluri, 2020 ). Advances in nanotechnologies andmicro ﬂuidics have led to incorporating micro ﬂuidics intoexosome isolation. Integrated and optimized micro ﬂuidic chips
will be expected to be promising tools for future research.Although there have been various reviews summarizing thetopic of exosome isolation and puri ﬁcation, most of themrarely focused on the advantages and drawbacks of eachtechnology in detail. Moreover, reviews including moreupdated and promising methods are crucial to timely learnabout the latest research contents and trends in this ﬁeld.In this review, to better understand the importance andsigniﬁcance of cancer-derived exosomes in early detection andtreatment, we ﬁrst summarized several crucial properties ofexosomes. Then, we introduced the conventional isolationmethods, such as ultracentrifugation, ultra ﬁltration,precipitation. Finally, the current pivotal advances inmicro ﬂuidics and other emerging methods for exosomalpuriﬁcation were presented. To maximize comprehensivenessand visualization, properties of the techniques and strategiescatalogued in the review are summarized and organized into
two tables ( Tables 1 ,2).EXOSOMESExtracellular vesicles are lipid bilayer-closed structures derivedfrom endocytosis and secreted by almost all types of cells,including exosomes (30 –150 nm), microvesicles (150 nm to1μm), and apoptotic bodies (1 –5μm) (Murk et al., 2003 ;Yangand Robbins, 2011). For a long time, these vesicles were thought
1μm), and apoptotic bodies (1 –5μm) (Murk et al., 2003 ;Yangand Robbins, 2011). For a long time, these vesicles were thoughtto be a way to load cellular metabolic waste, which is responsiblefor transporting waste generated by cells ( Johnstone et al., 1987 ).Until 1983, the role of some vesicles with 30 –150 nm had beenpreliminarily identi ﬁed and named exosomes by Pan andJohnstone when they studied the development of reticulocytesin sheep ( Pan and Johnstone, 1983 ;Johnstone et al., 1987).Observed by an electron microscope, the shape of exosomes iscup-shaped or spherical (typically 30 –150 nm in diameter)(Zhang et al., 2019 ). At present, various researches have beenconducted on exosomes and showed exosomes play anirreplaceable role in cancer metastasis and normal physiology(Gurwitz, 2015 ;Zhang et al., 2015 ;Mateescu et al., 2017 ;Zhaoet al., 2018 ). Thus, the ﬁeld of exosomes has been developed
unprecedentedly, and the number of related papers has grownexponentially in the last decade ( Figure 1 ).Exosomal BiogenesisThe term “exosome ”was invented to describe a subtype ofextracellular vesicles secreted through multivesicular bodies(MVBs) in the endosomal pathway ( Raposo and Stoorvogel,2013;Lee et al., 2012 ). Other subtypes contain apoptoticbodies produced by cells in apoptotic conditions, andmicrovesicles (MVs) derived from the outward budding of theplasma membrane as shown in Figure 2(Lin et al., 2020 ).Compared with each other, these three subtypes differ in size,function, biological origin, and other aspects ( Abhange et al.,2021 ). Exosomes can be induced by many factors, such asmicrobial and extracellular stimulation or other stressconditions ( De Toro et al., 2015 ). Exosomal biogenesis beginswith early endosomes ( Figure 2 ;Lin et al., 2020 ). Under theinﬂuence of a certain factor, the cell membrane undergoes
endocytosis to sag inward. The inner membrane formed bythis process is called the early endosome ( Lee et al., 2012 ).The early endosomes will continue to migrate within the cell(from the periphery of the cell to the nucleus) and graduallymature (from the original tube to the sphere) ( Théry et al., 2002 ;Keller et al., 2006 ). When early endosomes mature into lateendosomes, the inner body membrane will further developmultiple depressions, encapsulating parts of the cytoplasm andsome substances (e.g., nucleic acids, proteins from Golgi and cellnucleus), thereby generating intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) ( Kelleret al., 2006 ;Théry, 2011 ;Clark et al., 2015 ;Kalluri and LeBleu,2020 ). Next, MVBs, the late endosomes with ILVs, can fuse withFrontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 2Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
TABLE 1 | Comparison of common exosomes isolation methods and their bene ﬁts/disadvantages.Strategy Principle Bene ﬁts Disadvantages Time Purity Yield ReferencesUltracentrifugation Components withimparity of size anddensity possess varioussediment speedGold standard,suitable for large-volume samples,relatively cheap,matureTime-consuming,cumbersome operation,low yield, may damageexosomes＞4 h Medium (with the co-precipitation andnon-exosomecontaminants)Low Lin et al. (2020)Density gradientcentrifugationComponents withimparity of size anddensity possess varioussediment speedHigh purity, avoidingexosomal damageLabor-intensive,preliminary preparationand cumbersomeoperation＞16 h High Low Kamerkar et al.(2017)Ultra ﬁltration Particles with varioussize and molecularweightEast, without specialequipment andreagentsClogging on ﬁlteringmembrane, loss ofexosomes of smallparticle diameterGenerally ＜4 h High Medium Ding et al.(2021)SEC Particles with various
(2021)SEC Particles with varioussize and molecularweightSimple, economical,maintain thebiological functionand structureSpecial columns andpacking are required,lipoproteincontamination0.3 h for qEV(Izon Science,New Zealand)High High Mohammadiet al. (2021)Immunoaf ﬁnity Based on interactionbetween antibodiesand speci ﬁc membraneproteins of exosomesHigh speci ﬁcity forexosome subtypesisolationExpensive, dependingon speci ﬁcity of theantibody4–20 h High Medium Coumans et al.(2017)PolymerprecipitationThe in ﬂuence ofexosomal the solubilityor dispersibility underthe high hydrophilicpolymersSimple operation,suitable for large-volume samplesPotential contaminants(co-purifying proteinaggregates or residuarypolymers)≈0.3–12 h Low High Coumans et al.(2017)TABLE 2 | Comparison of micro ﬂuidics and other emerging approaches for exosome isolation.Mechanism Principle Sample WorkingvolumeTime SeparationrecoveryReferencesTiO 2-based exosome
recoveryReferencesTiO 2-based exosomeisolation processInteraction between TiO 2particles and thephosphate groups on the surface of exosomallipid membranesHuman serumsamples20 ml ≈5 min 93.4% Gao et al. (2019)Fe3O4@TiO 2-CD63aptamerDouble interaction of CD63 DNA aptamer andTiO 2for exosomesUrine samples ≈100 ml ≈10 min 92.6% Zhang et al. (2021)ExoCAS-2 Based on exosomal negative charges,polycationic polymers can adhere to exosomesPlasma samples 1 ml ≈40 min NA Kim and Shin,(2021)Microvortex chip Nanoprobes can inserted into exosomal lipidbilayer membraneCell culture andhuman serumsamples1m l 1 0h ≈70% Han et al. (2020)Acousto ﬂuidic platform Integration of acoustics and micro ﬂuidics Undiluted humanwhole blood100μL ≈25 min 98.4% Wu et al. (2017)Acousto ﬂuidiccentrifuge systemDouble interaction of droplet spinning andacoustic streamingExosome samples Nanoliters tomicroliters≤1m i n 8 0 –86% Gu et al. (2021)Paper-based anionicITP deviceisotachophoresis Human serum
ITP deviceisotachophoresis Human serumsamples5μl ≤10 min NA Guo et al. (2020)Micro ﬂuidic nanowirearrayFiltration and immunoaf ﬁnity Human breast cells 1 ml ≈20 min ≈70% Suwatthanaraket al. (2021)ExoDFF Based on equilibrium of Dean drag forces andinertial liftWhole blood 5 ml ＜1h ≈15% Tay et al. (2021)Raman assay chip Immunomagnetic Cell culture andserum samples20μl ＜1 h 72.5% Wang et al. (2020)Lipid microarray Membrane fusion and immunoaf ﬁnity Cell culture andserum samples50μl ≈1h N A Liu et al. (2021a)EV-CLUE chip Immunoaf ﬁnity Cell culture andserum samples5–10μl ≈1h ≈78.2% forSKOV3Zhang et al. (2020)Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 3Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
either the lysosome or the cell membrane ( Colombo et al., 2014 ).Scholars reported cholesterol content on MVBs is closely relatedto the regulation of this process ( Möbius et al., 2002 ). If MVBsfuse with lysosomes, they will be degraded entirely ( Théry et al.,2002 ;Colombo et al., 2014 ). Other MVBs fuse with the cellmembrane, where their contents (ILVs) could be released into theextracellular environment. The released vesicles are designated asexosomes ( Hessvik and Llorente, 2018 ). These exosomes caninteract with the extracellular matrix to affect surrounding cellsand transport their contents to target cells through body ﬂuidsFIGURE 1 | The number of exosomal publications. The graph was generated from Web of Science.FIGURE 2 | Biogenesis of exosomes and other vesicles ( Hessvik and Llorente, 2018 )(van der Pol et al., 2012 )(Gurunathan et al., 2019 ).
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 4Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
(blood, urine) ( Bebelman et al., 2018 ;Bebelman et al., 2018 ).ESCRT (endosomal sorting complex required for transport), Alix,and other related proteins or auxiliary factors play anirreplaceable role in the formation of exosomes ( Baietti et al.,2012 ;Colombo et al., 2013 ). In addition, some lipids and proteinsalso regulate the process ( Baietti et al., 2012 ;Pocsfalvi et al., 2016 ).Contents and FunctionsGenerally, the exosomal components are unequal depending ontheir source cell ( Figure 3 ). Until now, studies have shown thatnearly 350,000 proteins, 40,000 nucleic acids, and 600 lipids existin various exosomes (according to http://www.microvesicles.org/).This provides unlimited possibilitie s for practical clinical scenariosof exosomal disease diagnosis and treatment.Proteins are considerable components of exosomes, which comefrom endocytosis, membrane fusion, and cytoplasm of the cell oforigin ( Zaborowski et al., 2015 ). However, this does not mean
exosomal proteins are random. For instance, the proteins arehardly derived from mitochondria , Golgi apparatus, nucleus, andendoplasmic reticulum ( Console et al., 2019 ). Generally speaking,the proteins can be divided into common and speci ﬁcp r o t e i n s .T h ecommon proteins exist in almost all exosomes, such as related tomembrane transport and fusion (Rab, GTPases, ﬂotillin), synthesisof multivesicular bodies (Alix, TSG 101), tetraspanins (CD9, CD63,CD81, CD82), and cytoskeleton proteins (heat shock protein, actin,tubulin) ( Urbanelli et al., 2013 ;Rajagopal and Harikumar, 2018 ;Linet al., 2020 ). Thus, the presence of exosomes can be con ﬁrmed bydetecting their common proteins ( Shao et al., 2018 ). The speci ﬁcproteins derive from their cells of origin. For example, exosomesfrom malignant ascites secreted by ovarian cancer patients containepithelial cell adhesion proteins (CD24 and EpCAM) ( Runz et al.,
2007). Therefore, by detecting speci ﬁc proteins contained in tumor-derived exosomes, we can con ﬁrm the origin of exosomes, diagnoserelated diseases, and evaluate the effect of treatment.Based on the characteristics of the source cell, the exosomallipid composition is diverse and generally containscholesterol, sphingomyelin, phosphatidylserine, ceramideand et al. ( Record et al., 2014 ;Leidal and Debnath, 2020 ).These lipids constitute a stable membrane structure ofexosomes, which not only protect exosome contents fromdegradation but also regulate biogenesis of exosomes(Trajkovic et al., 2008 ;Skotland et al., 2017 ). In addition,asin vivo drug delivery has higher requirements for thestability of the carrier, the stable membrane structure ofexosomes makes people pay more and more attention tothe drug delivery of exosomes ( EL Andaloussi et al., 2013 ;Phinney and Pittenger, 2017 ;Skotland et al., 2017 ). Kamerkaret al. assessed the effects of the exosomal drug carriers
(carrying short interfering RNA speci ﬁct oo n c o g e n i cKRAS) to uppress pancreatic cancer in multiple mousemodels. They showed treatment with exosomal drugcarriers ef ﬁciently suppressed cancer and observablyenhanced overall survival as exosomes can protectthemselves from phagocytosis by monocytes andmacrophages ( Kamerkar et al., 2017 ). In another study,they demonstrated the contribution of the exosomal lipidsin the urine to investigate molecular markers of renal cellcarcinoma patients ( Del Boccio et al., 2012 ). Generally, thefunction of exosomal lipid needs more efforts to be consideredeffective for cancer diagnosis and prognostic potential.Besides lipids and proteins, exosomes also containmultitudinous nucleic acids, which re ﬂect the mutational
status of the source cells. With the advances in next-generation sequencing approaches, these molecules weregradually recognized in exosomes, including almost all RNAsof the cell, ssDNA, and dsDNA ( Valadi et al., 2007 ;Jiang et al.,2017 ). These nucleic acids in exosomes directly participate in
2017 ). These nucleic acids in exosomes directly participate intranscription, translation, modi ﬁcation, and other processes toFIGURE 3 | Schematic of exosomal molecular composition. Exosomes contain various important biomarkers, such as proteins, lipids, and miRNAs.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 5Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
regulate gene expression and function of target cells ( Jiang et al.,2017 ). For example, cells are able to selectively sort miRNAs intoexosomes for gene regulation and intercellular communication bysecreting to distant or nearby targets, revealing the potentialfunctions and mechanisms of exosomal selective sorting inpathogenesis ( Groot and Lee, 2020 ). In other study, Thakurand others ﬁrst demonstrated that the majority of DNA ofcancer-derived exosomes was double-stranded ( Thakur et al.,2014 ). The evidence of nucleic acids further shows exosomesprovide a crucial foundation in tumorigenesis factors andbiomarkers in cancers.COMMON EXOSOMAL SEPARATIONTECHNIQUESAlthough exosomes play an irreplaceable role in early detectionand treatment, they are small in size (30 –150 nm), low in density(1.13 –1.19 g/ml), and mixed with similar components (e.g., cellfragments, proteins) in the body ﬂuids, which pose tremendous
challenges for their separation ( Cui et al., 2018 ;Lin et al., 2020 ). Inaddition, the biological activity of exosomes will be affected bydifferent separation techniques ( Paolini et al., 2016 ). To sum up,standardized separation and quantitative methods are pivotal toFIGURE 4 | Schematic representation of common exosomal separation techniques. (A)Ultracentrifugation, (B)Density gradient centrifugation, (C)Dead-endﬁltration (DEF), (D)Tangential ﬂowﬁltration (TFF), (E)Size-exclusion chromatography, and (F)Immunoaf ﬁnity.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 6Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
the study and clinical application of exosomes. For us,understanding the existing separation technology is thepremise of developing more ef ﬁcient and reasonable exosomesseparation technology.Common separation methods mainly introduceultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography,ultraﬁltration, polymer precipitation, immunoaf ﬁnity(Figure 4 ). The merits and defects of these techniques arecompared in Table 1 .UltracentrifugationUltracentrifugation is the most common technology at present,and about half of researchers use ultracentrifugation to separateexosomes ( Zarovni et al., 2015 ). The principle ofultracentrifugation is based on differences in density and sizebetween exosomes and impurities in the sample. The speci ﬁcsteps are shown in Figure 4A . First of all, the samples werecentrifuged at 300 g, 2000 g, and 10,000 g, respectively. The largercells, cell fragments, and dead cells could be removed ( Théry et al.,
2006 ). In some strategies, ﬁltration can replace these low-speedcentrifugal steps for the large-scale preparation of exosomes(Théry et al., 2001 ;Ji et al., 2008 ). The supernatant was thenultracentrifuged twice at higher speeds ( >100,000 g) to yieldexosomes. It should be noted that ultracentrifugation can onlyconcentrate substances of similar density and size but notdistinguish the exosomes carefully. As the most commonmethod, ultracentrifugation has the advantages of maturetechnology, suitable for separating most samples, and lowoperating expenses. However, the entire separation processtakes much time ( >4 h), and the repeatability is poor/unstable.Secondly, despite several rounds of centrifugation, there are stillmany impurities in the precipitate (co-purifying proteinaggregates, virion, Subcellular organelles), which may affect theresults of subsequent mass spectrometry or protein quantitation(Tauro et al., 2012 ;Jeppesen et al., 2014 ;Zhang et al., 2018 ).
Finally, high-speed centrifugation may cause damage toexosomes and reduce their biological activity ( Jeppesen et al.,2014 ).Density gradient centrifugation is an improved separationtechnology based on ultracentrifugation. The difference fromultracentrifugation is that density gradient centrifugation usestwo or more separation media with different densities, such assucrose and iodixanol ( Tauro et al., 2012 ). The speci ﬁc steps arealso to remove large impurities by low-speed centrifugation, andthen the sample is added to the top of the separation medium forultracentrifugation ( Figure 4B ). The advantage of this method ishigher isolation purity. However, it requires preliminarypreparation, cumbersome operation, and longer centrifugationtime ( >16 h), which limits its clinical application ( Gupta et al.,2018 ;Liu J. et al., 2021 ).Ultra ﬁltrationUltra ﬁltration is a separation method based on molecular size and
is one of the simplest methods for exosome separation. Exosomesare obtained by removing impurities through one or moreﬁltering membranes with different pore sizes or the molecularweight cut off (MWCO). The pollutant larger than MWCO arequantitatively held back by the ﬁltering membrane while othercomponents (exosomes) smaller than the MWCO can passthrough the ﬁltering membrane structure along with thepermeate ( Li et al., 2017 ). Depending on the driving force,ultraﬁltration can be classi ﬁed as electric charge,centrifugation, and pressure.For centrifugation-derive, He et al. established a highlyefﬁcient optimized ultra ﬁltration method. Relying on low-speed centrifugation, 0.22 μmﬁlter and dialysis membranewith MWCO of 10,000 kDa, the device can remove impuritieslarger than 200 μm and the concentrate is reduced to 1/50 incomparison to the original volume ( He et al., 2019 ). Compared to
ultracentrifugation, the method requires only low-speedcentrifugation and is suitable for large samples. However, italso has drawbacks, such as requiring additional commercial
ultracentrifugation, the method requires only low-speedcentrifugation and is suitable for large samples. However, italso has drawbacks, such as requiring additional commercialkits, being time-consuming ( ≈150 min), and not being suitablefor blood.For pressure-derive, it can be divided into dead-end ﬁltration(DEF) and tangential ﬂowﬁltration (TFF) ( Figure 4C,D ). DEFrefers to the ﬁltration form in which the liquid ﬂow direction isthe same as the ﬁltration direction. Due to the rapid accumulationof the ﬁlter cake on the membrane surface, the permeation ratewill continually reduce and eventually plug the ﬁlteringmembrane ( Busatto et al., 2018 ;Musumeci et al., 2018 ).Hence, DEF is best used to handle only small-scale liquids(e.g., syringe ﬁlter). In contrast to DEF, the ﬂow direction isperpendicular to the direction of ﬁltration in TFF. Because of this,the method can effectively avoid the formation of ﬁlter cake on
the membrane surface, improving the utilization rate of themembrane and the stability of the equipment ( Busatto et al.,2018 ). Kim et al. compared ultracentrifugation and TFF-basedisolation ( Kim et al., 2021 ). The results con ﬁrmed that theexosomal yield of the TFF-based isolation method increasedby two orders of magnitude compared with that ofultracentrifugation.For electric charge, Cho et al. developed an electro-migrationmethod for attaining ultracentrifugation-level exosomal isolationfrom biological ﬂuids. This method adopted the principle of TFF-based and electro-migration, used a 30 nm pore diameter ﬁlteringmembrane for excluding impurities (e.g., protein) and preventingpassage of exosomes ( Cho et al., 2016 ). It proved that theexosomal recovery is 14 times higher than ultracentrifugationand the protein removal rate was 83.6% within 30 min. However,the complex structure of the device limits its clinical application.
In conclusion, ultra ﬁltration is one of the simplest methods forexosome separation. Exosomes can be separated from largevolumes of liquid without expensive special equipment andharmful chemical reagents. Nevertheless, the clogging ofexosomes on the surface of the ﬁltering membrane may leadto a low recovery rate ( Xu et al., 2018 ).Size-Exclusion ChromatographySimilar to the principle of ultra ﬁltration, SEC is a technology forseparation based on the difference in molecular size. The speci ﬁcstep is that when the sample is added to the column containingporous beads (e.g., Sephadex, Sepharose, Sephacryl, BioGel P), thelarger particles cannot enter the gel pores, and the elution speed isFrontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 7Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
faster ( Figure 4E )(Yang et al., 2020 ). On the contrary, smallparticles can enter the pores like a labyrinth, and the elution rateis slower to achieve the purpose of separation. Different from thepowerful force of ultracentrifugation, exosome separation can beaccomplished only by gravity or low-speed centrifugation in thismethod, maintaining the biological function of exosomes(Batrakova and Kim, 2015 ). Recently, several types of researchhave indicated that the method combining ultra ﬁltration and SECcan achieve a higher purity of exosomes ( Nordin et al., 2015 ;Zeringer et al., 2015 ;Oeyen et al., 2018 ). Likewise, Guan et al.compared with the traditional ultracentrifugation and SEC ( Guanet al., 2020 ). The separation results showed that more puri ﬁedexosomes were isolated by SEC. For researchers focused on thebiological function of exosomes and biomarkers, the purity ofexosomes is a key indicator. Thus, it is a feasible strategy to
conduct SEC after ultracentrifugation or ultra ﬁltration for them.In a word, SEC is a simple, prolongable, economical method forhanding large-scale samples.Immunoaf ﬁnityImmunoaf ﬁnity is a technique for separating and purifyingbiological particles based on the antigen-antibody speci ﬁcreaction. The membrane of exosomes is rich in proteins andreceptors, including ubiquitous common proteins and speci ﬁcproteins. These ubiquitous proteins (such as tetraspanins,annexins) can bind to the corresponding antibodies tospeciﬁcally isolate exosomes ( Ruivo et al., 2017 ). In addition, itis possible to achieve ef ﬁcient isolation of tumor-derivedexosomes by targeting speci ﬁc proteins contained in exosomes,such as EpCAM and antiA33 ( Mathivanan et al., 2010b ).Generally, antibodies need to be ﬁxed on a certain carrier,such as magnetic particles, chromatography matrices,micro ﬂuidic devices ( Figure 4F )(Zhang et al., 2018 ). At
present, immunomagnetic beads are more common. Theantibody-coated beads can speci ﬁcally bind to thecorresponding exosomes to distinguish them from theunbound impurities through the magnetic. Zarovni and otherscompared three methods for separating exosomes in plasma andcell supernatants (ultracentrifugation, density gradientcentrifugation, and immunomagnetic beads), followed byveriﬁcation with PCR and Elisa ( Zarovni et al., 2015 ). Theresults show that the immunoaf ﬁnity method has moreeffective separation purity and separation advantages.The immunoaf ﬁnity method has strong speci ﬁcity, highisolation purity and can isolate a speci ﬁc subclass of exosomes.However, since suf ﬁcient time is required for antigen-antibodybinding, this method is time-consuming. In addition, there aredisadvantages such as high separation cost and high requirementsfor reagent and storage conditions. This method is not an optimalchoice for researchers who do not need high purity or speci ﬁc
subclasses of exosomes.Polymer PrecipitationThe polymer precipitation method has been often used to isolateviruses or other biological macromolecules in the past ( Zeringeret al., 2015 ). This method has become popular in exosomalisolation in recent years. The reagents used for polymer-basedexosomes isolation mainly include protamine, acetate, proteinorganic solvent precipitation (PROSPR), polyethylene (PEG),among which PEG is the most common. ( Brownlee et al.,2014 ;Deregibus et al., 2016 ;Gallart-Palau et al., 2016 ;Ryuet al., 2020 ). At the function of PEG, exosomal solubility is
reduced to allow exosome precipitation. Then exosomes canbe simply obtained by low-speed centrifugation. This methodis simple to operate without complex devices or time-consumingprocedures, and can handle large sample sizes, and is easy tocombine with existing separation methods. Dash et al. focused onthree exosome isolation methods, including PEG, PROSPR, andultracentrifugation, indicating that the PEG-based approacheshave high stability, well-dispersed, and good quality ( Dash et al.,
2021 ). Conversely, exosomes obtained by this method aresusceptible to contamination with lipoproteins or virusparticles, which may adversely affect subsequent analysis (e.g.,proteomics, mass spectrometry). Recently, numerous researchershave combined this method with other separation methods toovercome the above shortcomings effectively ( Ryu et al., 2020 ).Exosome Separation KitWith exosomes gradually becoming the focus of research, variouscommercial kits have sprung up. At the same time, theapplication of the kit has become more and more extensive.Exosome ’s isolation kit is not a specialized technology, and theprinciples have been described in detail above, such as chemicalprecipitation, immunoaf ﬁnity, size exclusion chromatography,centrifugation. The commercial products are easy to operate, doesnot require special equipment and are suitable for laboratorieswith insuf ﬁcient equipment. At present, the common products
mainly include Total Exosome Isolation kit (Invitrogen,United States) (TEI), Eloquence (System Biosciences,United States) (ExoQ), Exo-spin (Cell guidance systems,United Kingdom) (ExoS), and so on . These kits can isolateexosomes from various biological samples (e.g., serum, plasma,CSF), but the purity, quantity, and size distribution of thecollected exosomes are signi ﬁcantly diverse ( Helwa et al., 2017 ;Martins et al., 2018 ). For researchers concerned, it is crucial tochoose a suitable product according to the purpose of theexperiment. Similarly, the main defect of the kit is expensiveand not suitable for mass sample processing.Realistic Large-Scale ProductionIn numerous pathological, biological and physiologicalresearches, scientists have accomplished considerableachievements regarding the clinical application of exosomesfor carriers of both genes and drugs. Despite many signi ﬁcantprogresses have been made in the separation and puri ﬁcation of
exosomes, it is a main challenge to develop larger-scale batchexosome production. This restricts the boundary of exosome-based biomedical treatment and researches. Hence, areproducible, simple and good manufacturing practice (GMP)-compliant production platform is desired.The procedures for large-scale production of exosomes aregenerally the use of multiple stacked cell culture ﬂasks (e.g., T175or T225), large ﬁxed-bed bioreactors or stirred-tank bioreactors(Colao et al., 2018 ). The process contains complicated qualityFrontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 8Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
control, validation, quanti ﬁcation and characterization.Meanwhile, many issues need to be considered further,including shifting from small-scale laboratory isolation tolarge-scale commercial productions and moving from anexperimental scheme to a commercial product ( Whitford andGuterstam, 2019 ). In general, the key to large-scale production isthe improvement of exosomal recovery rate and purity with highthroughput and minimal cost. Lamparski et al. established areproducible, rapid and credible method for the separationand production of clinical GMP exosomes ( Lamparski et al.,2002 ). The procedure, which involved ultra ﬁltration, dia ﬁltrationand ultracentrifugation into 30% sucrose/deuterium oxide(D2O), achieved rapid isolation within 8 h, consistentlyexosome recovery of ＞30%, high purity and cost-effectiveness.The hollow- ﬁber bioreactor is an ideal method for the large-scale production. Cells are grown inside the ﬁbers of the device,
allowing media and metabolic waste to pass through but blockinglarger secretions as exosomes. Watson et al. demonstrated thehollow- ﬁber system could increase exosome production by 5 –10folds ( Watson et al., 2016 ). In general, the reactor can reducecontaminants and support high-density cell cultures.Finally, further research and clinical application of therapeuticexosomes are inseparable from the large-scale GMP productionof engineered exosomes. Therefore, further development of GMPprotocols, more automated and digital production processes andstrict quality control systems for engineered exosomes large-scaleproduction are essential.EMERGING SEPARATION TECHNIQUEAlthough the above-mentioned traditional separation methodsare the most widely used, there are also many disadvantages, suchas large sample consumption, risk of damage to exosomes, lowpurity, and long time consuming, which are hard to meet thecurrent increasing scienti ﬁc research needs. With the
development in recent years, several new separationtechnologies have been proposed and rapidly developed overthe past decades. Among these new technologies, micro ﬂuidicsoffers an integrated platform and proves fascinating propertiessuch as high purity, high throughput and low sample volumes. Inaddition, scientists have invented some techniques that use theproperties of exosome phospholipid bilayers for separation andenrichment. The pivotal properties of these techniques aresummarized in Table 2 . By presenting and introducing thesemerits and defects of emerging strategies, we expect to proposefuture insights for next-generation device development.Membrane-Based SeparationObviously, Exosomes are biological nanoparticles with lipidbilayer-closed structures ( Brownlee et al., 2014 ). Thus, thesurface of exosomes is rich in negatively chargedphosphatidylserine, which makes a series of novel strategiespossible ( Deregibus et al., 2016 ).
In exosomal systems, amphiphilic phospholipids constitutethe main component of the exosomal lipid bilayer, forming thehydrophilic phosphate head located on the outer surface of themembrane ( Gao et al., 2019 ). By this property, the phosphategroups can speci ﬁcally bind to some metal oxides (e.g., TiO2,ZrO 2). Based on this, Gao et al. performed exosome isolation byhighly af ﬁnitive binding between micron-sized TiO 2particles andphosphate groups on the membrane surface of exosomes(Figure 5A )(Gao et al., 2019 ). By the TiO 2-based isolationstrategy, the method achieved an excellent separationefﬁciency of 93.4% within 5 min. Zhang et al. designed themagnetic TiO2nanoparticles combining CD63 aptamer, whichsuccessfully isolated and captured 92.6% urinary exosomes within10 min ( Zhang et al., 2021 ).Meanwhile, because of the negative charge with the exosomal
lipid bilayer, some positively charged molecules can also be usedto enrich exosomes easily. For instance, exosomes weresuccessfully puri ﬁed from human saliva, serum, and liver stem
lipid bilayer, some positively charged molecules can also be usedto enrich exosomes easily. For instance, exosomes weresuccessfully puri ﬁed from human saliva, serum, and liver stemcells by positively charged protamine ( Deregibus et al., 2016 ).Kim and shin produced an ion-exchange platform (ExoCAS-2)based on magnetic beads coated with a polycationic polymer forisolating exosomes with high purity and ef ﬁcient yield from bloodplasma ( Figure 5B )(Kim and Shin, 2021 ). In brief, Poly-L-lysine(PLL) polymer-functionalized magnetic beads are mixed with theﬁltered plasma and incubated for a period of time. In the process,due to electrostatic reactions, PLL-coated beads with positivecharges can easily combine with negatively charged exosomes. Inthe end, exosome-captured beads could be attracted by a magnet,and then the additional liquid was removed.Additionally, Han et al. reported an innovative micro vortexchip by integrating butter ﬂy wings functionalized with lipid
nanoprobe into micro ﬂuidics for ef ﬁciently isolating exosomesfrom biological ﬂuids ( Figure 5C )(Han et al., 2020 ). In theirstudy, due to the natural three-dimensional microstructure of theunique wings, it can provide a micro vortex when the liquid ﬂowsit, greater surface area and nanoprobe density. Meanwhile, thelipid nanoprobes labeled to the wings can insert into exosomesquickly to capture it. Based on the described properties of themicro ﬂuidic chip, it effectively promoted microscale masstransfer of nanoparticles and thus achieved about 70%separation ef ﬁciency of exosomes.Membrane-based separation methods have shown a powerfulability of isolating greater exosomes. Meanwhile, the methodshardly rely on the surface proteins of exosomes that can avoid lowpurity or yield caused by inherent heterogeneity of exosomes. It isworth noting that the isolated exosomes may contain otherimpurities with membrane because the methods are mainlybased on lipid bilayer-closed structures.
Micro ﬂuidicsMicro ﬂuidics has been deemed a promising method that canintegrate sample processing, analysis, detection, and otherprocesses into a chip, thus realizing miniaturization,integration, high-throughput capacity, and low-timeconsumption ( Jiang et al., 2014 ). At present, on account ofthese advantages, micro ﬂuidic chips are gradually being usedas a powerful tool for conveniently, ef ﬁciently isolating exosomes.Micro ﬂuidics can be combined with common separationtechniques for exosomes separation via exosomal physical andchemical features (e.g., surface antigens, density, size). On theFrontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 9Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
other hand, Micro ﬂuidics devices in combination with externalforces are also emerging as ef ﬁcient platforms (e.g., acoustic ﬁeld,magnetic ﬁeld, or electric ﬁeld). Here, we introduced the differentmicro ﬂuidics-based techniques for exosomes isolation roundly.Physical Property-Based Micro ﬂuidicsThe physical properties of exosomes have been discussed indetail. Current, physical-property-based micro ﬂuidic isolationstrategies have been emerging as powerful methods since themethod can achieve label-free isolation and exosomal uniformity.Physical-property-based micro ﬂuidic devices usually containnanoporous membranes, nano ﬁlters, microvillus, acoustic ﬁeld,and electric ﬁeld to ﬁlter or trap exosomes. Here, based on thepresence of external forces, we divide physical property-basedmicro ﬂuidics into two categories: active and passive isolationmethods.
methods.FIGURE 5 | Schematic representation of Membrane-based exosome isolation techniques. (A)The phosphate groups on the membrane surface of exosomes canspeci ﬁcally bind to metal oxides (TiO 2). Adapted from ( Gao et al., 2019 ), copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B)The positively charged molecules enrichexosomes. Adapted from ( Kim and Shin, 2021 ), copyright 2021 MDPI. (C)The lipid nanoprobes with lipid tail are capable of inserting into the exosomal membranestructure. The wings modi ﬁed with lipid nanoprobes can promote the ef ﬁciency and speed of exosome binding to nanoprobes. Adapted from ( Han et al., 2020 ),copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 10Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
FIGURE 6 | Schematic representation of physical property-based micro ﬂuidic isolation techniques. (A)An acoustic-based separation micro ﬂuidic chip employingacoustic forces and droplet spinning for isolation of exosomes from bio ﬂuids. Adapted from ( Gu et al., 2021 ), copyright 2021 American Association for the Advancementof Science. (B)An electrical-based separation device integrated the focusing power of isotachophoresis and paper-based ﬁltering ability. Adapted from ( Guo et al.,2020 ), copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. (C)A ZnO nanowires array for exosome capture. Adapted from ( Suwatthanarak et al., 2021 ), copyright 2021 Royal Society ofChemistry. (D)Hydrodynamic-based micro ﬂuidic strategy for isolating exosomes from whole blood. Adapted from ( Tay et al., 2021 ), copyright 2021 Royal Society ofChemistry.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 11Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Active Isolation MethodsScholars have integrated micro ﬂuidic systems with variousexternal forces to achieve faster, higher and normativestrategies of exosomal isolation. The active isolation methodsincluded electrical, centrifugal, acoustical forces.In the acoustical ﬁelds, different particle sizes are a pivotal element.The larger particles will be subjected to greater acoustic forces, henceseparating various particles. In the past, acoustic-based methods havebeen successfully implemented cells and single microparticlesseparation ( Ding et al., 2012 ). Recently, Wu and others fabricatedan acoustic-based micro ﬂuidic device consisting of two acousto ﬂuidicmodules for removing larger blood components and separatingexosomes, respectively ( Wu et al., 2017 ). The capture resultsindicated that the separation ef ﬁciency of exosomes was achieved98.4%. Zhao et al. demonstrated a disposable acousto ﬂuidic chip with
unidirectional interdigital transduc ers that can realize versatility andbiocompatibility ( Zhao et al., 2020 ). As another strategy, Gu et al.reported an acousto ﬂuidic technique employing acoustic streamingand droplet spinning that can identify and separate exosomesubpopulations ( Figure 6A )(Gu et al., 2021 ). With regard to thisacousto ﬂuidic centrifuge, particles in a droplet were pushed towardthe center of the droplet under the action of acoustic radiation forcesand streaming generated by high-frequency acoustic waves. Thedevice can achieve high separation ef ﬁciency (80 –86%) andextremely short processing time ( ≤1m i n ) . U n f o r t u n a t e l y , t h estudy needs to be improved the low sample volume per assay andpotential evaporation issue.Electrical-based separation mainly relies on electric ﬁeld intensity,diameters, and electrical properties of the particles ( Cheng et al.,2015). Cho et al. demonstrated an electrical-based isolation system
possessing an electric ﬁeld across the commercial dialysis membrane(30 nm pore size) for isolating exosomes and excluding nano-sizedimpurities ( Cho et al., 2016 ). This study achieved 65% exosomesrecovery by quantifying RNA amount. Meanwhile, the Ayala-Margroup developed the direct current-ins ulator-based dielectrophoreticmicro ﬂuidic chip that can isolate and discriminate exosomesubpopulations ( Ayala-Mar et al., 2019 ). Guo et al. proposed apaper-based isotachophoresis device that was capable of rapidseparation and detection of exos omes derived from cancer cells/tissues ( Figure 6B )(Guo et al., 2020 ). The method integrated thefocusing power of isotachophoresis and paper-based ﬁltering ability.Compared with traditional enhanced Elisa, the detection limit of thedevice is increased by 30-fold. With future improvement onseparation purity and large-scale clinical studies, electrical-basedmethods could be a promising strategy for on-chip rapidseparation and diagnostics.
Centrifugal micro ﬂuidics was achieved to capture andisolate bioparticles in one single platform. Recently, Wooet al. developed a procedure consisting of two ﬁltrationchambers (pore diameter /equals600 and 20 nm, respectively)for automatically enriching and separating exosomes andother vesicles from biological samples ( Woo et al., 2017 ).The centrifugal platform required only low g-force ( ＜500 g)instead of 150,000 g of UC, quickly completed processes ofenrichment ( ＜30 min) and provided a high recovery ( >95%for urinary EVs). In addition to the outstanding capability,simple operation and relatively low cost made the device apromising strategy for both clinical research and the laboratory.Overall, the active isolation methods can realize continuous-ﬂow, biocompatible and label-free exosome separation toresearch the role of exosomes for cancer diagnostics.Passive Isolation Methods
Passive Isolation MethodsResearchers have also incorporated strategies based oncomplicated channel structures or hydrodynamiccharacteristics into micro ﬂuidic devices. Passive isolation
Passive Isolation MethodsResearchers have also incorporated strategies based oncomplicated channel structures or hydrodynamiccharacteristics into micro ﬂuidic devices. Passive isolationmethods generally included nanoporousmembranes, nano ﬁlters, nanopillar arrays, and hydrodynamiccharacteristics.For example, Suwatthanarak et al. developed the ZnO nanowirearray modi ﬁed exosome-targeting peptides for ef ﬁcient exosomesenrichment from cultured medium of human breast cancer cells(Figure 6C )(Suwatthanarak et al., 2021 ). Meanwhile, the capturedexosomes by the ZnO nanowire array were capable of releasing undera neutral salt condition that could protect the collected exosomes andnot affect their downstream applications. The peptide-nanowireplatform reached the exosome recovery of 70% approximately
from 1 ml suspension of exosomes in 20 min collecting time. Inthe future, clinical samples or cancer-derived exosomes spiked inserum should be used to further con ﬁrm the performance of thisdevice.Pillar-based micro ﬂuidics (Deterministic Lateral Displacement,DLD) consists of one or more arrays of optimal pitch, gap, anddiameter of pillars for various particles isolation ( Lin et al., 2020 ). Theprinciple of the method is that particles larger than the criticaldiameter are capable of migrating at a certain angle de ﬁned bythe pillar spacing and array gradient ( Iliescu et al., 2019 ). For instance,Wunsch and groups ﬁrst produced nanoscale DLD arrays consistingof consistent gap sizes ranging from 25 to 235 nm ( Wunsch et al.,2016). The method demonstrated the nanoparticles with diameters
from 20 to 110 nm could successfully isolate from biological sampleswith sharp resolution, presenting hopeful potentials as chip-basedliquid biopsies in monitoring early cancer screening and diagnostics.Hydrodynamic-based micro ﬂuidic strategies (e.g., viscoelasticﬂow or inertial ﬂow) have also indicated that this principle caneffectively separate various particles from complicated bio ﬂuids.Compared to other methods, hydrodynamic-based micro ﬂuidicdevices can be implemented without complicated channelstructures or additional external force ﬁelds. This can simplifythe fabrication process and operation dif ﬁculty of micro ﬂuidicdevices. To illustrate, Tay and others have developed a novelinertial-based micro ﬂuidic device for directly separatingexosomes and microvesicles from whole blood with 15%(±3.8%) separation ef ﬁciency within an hour ( Figure 6D )(Tayet al., 2021 ). Although the separation ef ﬁciency is limited, the
method does not require functionalization with antibodies orexternal force ﬁeld and performs directly separation of wholeblood, hence providing a low device cost, portable, and promisingstrategy.In summary, due to taking advantage o f label-free, portability, andreproducibility, various passive is olation methods will spring up likefountains.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 12Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Immunoaf ﬁnity-Based Micro ﬂuidicsThe immunoaf ﬁnity-based micro ﬂuidic devices depend on theantigen-antibody reaction for isolating speci ﬁc exosomes. Hence,the critical element for ef ﬁciently isolating exosomes is theselection of suitable antibodies, promoting microscale masstransfer, increasing particles-surface collisions (or increasingcontact surface area) ( Zhang et al., 2019 ;Li et al., 2020 ). Inmost cases, immunoaf ﬁnity capture can be achieved bystationary antibody-coated mediums and mobile antibody-coated mediums.FIGURE 7 | Scheme of immunoaf ﬁnity-based micro ﬂuidics for exosome isolation and enrichment. (A)Micro ﬂuidic Raman chip for exosome isolation and detection.Adapted from ( Wang et al., 2020 ), copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B)Scheme of lipid membranes microarrays functionalized with antibodies. Adapted from
(Liu H. Y. et al., 2021 ), copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (C)3D nanopatterned EV-CLUE chip were manufactured by colloidal inkjet printing. Adapted from(Zhang et al., 2020 ), copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 13Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Mobile-Coated MediumsMobile coated mediums refer to magnetic beads or othermagnetic nanomaterials here. These antibody-coatednanoparticles inherently provide a larger surface area andﬂexibility in handing which enhance the capture and releaseefﬁciency of exosomes from micro ﬂuidics to perform betterdownstream analysis. For instance, Liu et al. modi ﬁed thesurface of nanoparticles consisting of silica shell and Fe 304core with two conjugated antibodies (anti-CD63 and anti-myosin light chain) to capture CD63-expressing exosomes andtarget injured cardiomyocytes, respectively ( Liu et al., 2020 ).Sancho-Albero et al. developed magnetic beads micro ﬂuidicplatform functionalized with anti-CD9 antibodies capable ofisolating magnetic bead-captured exosomes from whole bloodby NdFeB permanent magnets ( Sancho-Albero et al., 2020 ).However, one apparent defect of the platform was unable torealize the integration of isolation, puri ﬁcation and detection onto
the same chip, which increased additional operations and theprobability of sample contamination. Recently, Wang et al.reported an integrated micro ﬂuidic Raman biochip capable ofisolating and detecting serum exosomes on the same chip whereanti-CD63 conjugated magnetic beads and EpCAM-functionalized Raman beads were utilized to distinguishbetween healthy patients and prostate cancer patients withinan hour ( Figure 7A )(Wang et al., 2020 ). In the approach,anti-CD63 antibody-labeled magnetic beads were ﬁrst used toisolate CD63-expressing exosome through mixing regionconsisting of a staggered triangular micropillar array, followedby magnetically ﬁxing on detection chamber and detecting thesecaptured exosomes by Raman beads functionalized with anti-EpCAM antibody. Finally, further SERS analyses were introducedto detect clinical serum samples. The device could entirely handleand detect 20 μl clinical samples in <1h at an isolation ef ﬁciency
of 72.5%. However, the absence of more clinical sample data inthe research could serve as starting points of future development.In brief, mobile antibody-coated methods have the advantagesof high speci ﬁcity, throughput, and capture ef ﬁciency. However,for large volumes of samples, the method is not optimal and has ahigh experimental cost.Stationary-Coated MediumsStationary-coated mediums mainly rely on interactions betweenexosomes and antibodies/aptamers immobilized on the surface ofmicrochannels for af ﬁnity capture. It was recently reported thatthe limitations of mass transfer and hydrodynamic resistancebecause of the greatly low diffusion of bioparticles inmicrochannels restrict exosomes to contact with antibodies/aptamers modi ﬁed on the channels, which extremely reducesbinding ef ﬁciency ( Zhang et al., 2019 ;Li et al., 2020 ). Thus,effective promotion of mass transfer of bioparticles, increase ofsurface area and probe density are essential.
Kang et al. developed a device of joint isolation and release ofdesired exosomes providing exosomal recovery yield of above76% ( Kang Y.-T. et al., 2020 ). Again, Kang and the groupproposed a dual-utilization chip functionalized with anti-MCAM and anti-MCSP antibodies for simultaneously isolatingcancer-exosomes and circulating tumor cells in a single platform(Kang Y. T. et al., 2020 ). It is worth noting that the method ﬁrstintegrated isolation of cancer-exosomes and circulating tumorcells from single samples in a single microarray. The ability ofdual isolation and molecular detection will allow for furtheridentify and enhance cancer detection and clinical applicationsin the future.Liu et al. established supported lipid membranes microarraysfunctionalized with antibodies for recognizing and capturingcancer-speci ﬁc exosomes ( Figure 7B )(Liu H. Y. et al., 2021 ).In this research, the lipid microarray was ﬁrst structured using
functionalized with antibodies for recognizing and capturingcancer-speci ﬁc exosomes ( Figure 7B )(Liu H. Y. et al., 2021 ).In this research, the lipid microarray was ﬁrst structured usinglipid dip-pen nanolithography, followed by incubating and self-assembling onto the lipid microarrays by using Biotin-PE,streptavidin, and speci ﬁc biotinylated antibodies in aprearranged sequence. Finally, the experiment results showthat the platform can detect and capture cancer-associatedexosomes from unpuri ﬁed or puri ﬁed 30 –50μl samplesvolumes within 2 hours. While several clinical tests onpancreatic cancer were accomplished to identify diagnosticpotential of CD63 and EpCAM, the ability can be furtherimproved due to few clinical samples.To further improve the capture ef ﬁciency, various
micromixing approaches have been proposed to enhancemicroscale mass transfer to increase exosomes-antibodiescollisions (e.g., herringbone mixers). For instance, employingengineered colloidal self-assembly (CSA), Zhang et al.developed a micro ﬂuidic platform (Nano-HB) consisting ofself-assembled three-dimensional herringbone nanopatternsfunctionalized with speci ﬁc antibodies ( Zhang et al., 2019 ).The platform promoted the ef ﬁciency of exosome binding toantibodies and reduced near-surface hydrodynamic resistance.Thus, low levels of tumor-associated exosomes in plasma can bedetected at concentrations as low as ten exosomes μL−1. Themethod provided an advantageous platform for detectingdiagnostic markers of non-invasive screening with highsensitivity and speci ﬁcity. However, the CSA-base strategydepends on supererogatory surface pretreatment and complexproduction process that may limit large-scale clinical studies. To
address these issues, Zhang and the group reported again EV-CLUE chips (three-dimensional nanopatterned microchips) thatwere manufactured by high-resolution colloidal inkjet printingmethod ( Figure 7C )(Zhang et al., 2020 ). Based on the printingmethod, the microchip consisted of continuous 3D sinusoidalpatterns functionalized with speci ﬁc antibodies that can increasesurface area, enhance microscale mass transfer and allow thedrainage of the boundary ﬂuid. Compared to the previous Nano-HB, the EV-CLUE chip could achieve on the unmodi ﬁed glasssurface, enhancing the repeatability and facilitating the successratio of largescale fabrication. Finally, the results showed that theEV-CLUE chip possessed 78.2 ±2.6% ef ﬁciency for SKOV3.While the demonstrated principle and capture ef ﬁciency of EV-CLUE chips resembled previously mentioned Nano-HBplatform, the chip is capable of more ef ﬁcient detection forisolated exosomes and more ﬂexible ﬂuid control due to the
use of pneumatic pumps. The device provided a bene ﬁcial liquidbiopsy platform to further cancer diagnosis and treatment.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 14Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
CONCLUSIONDue to their clinical potential and unique biological functions,exosome researches and applications have brought substantivebreakthroughs in drug delivery, non-invasive disease diagnosis,treatment and other ﬁe l d s .I nt h el a s tf e wd e c a d e s ,am a j o rl i m i tfactor in clinical applications, the drawbacks of common exosomalisolation methods, has inspired efforts for developing emergingseparation platforms. At ﬁrst, researchers drew inspirations fromindividual or combinations of various conventional schemes thatpreviously were used to separate other larger particles (e.g., CTCs)from bio- ﬂuids. Up to now, incorporating emerging technologies(e.g., micro ﬂuidics, electrical, centrifugal, acoustical forces) intoexosome isolation technologies has widely developed and becomemore consummate than before. Micro ﬂuidic devices for exosomeisolation and puri ﬁcation will be expected to be promising tools for
early detection and biomedical applications. Despite the greatprogress made, it is clear that current separation methods are notperfect. In addition to achieving high-purity exosome isolation, moreintegrated, high-throughput, hig h-recovery-rate devices will break apromising avenue for exosome-based diagnostics and biomedicalapplications in the years ahead.In this article, we summarized the merits and shortcoming ofthe latest advances for exosomal isolation and puri ﬁcation,including common and emerging strategies. Additionally, thebiogenesis, contents of exosomes and their central functions astumorigenesis factors and biomarkers in cancers were discussedin detail. We also reviewed the current challenges and futuredirections in the ﬁeld. The aforementioned challenges, whenaddressed, exosomes will provide a powerful platform forcancer detection and treatment.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSXH contributed to the conception and design of the study. XH
and JC designed and wrote the whole manuscript sections. JC andTZ designed all Figures of the manuscript. All authorscontributed to manuscript revision, read, and approved theﬁnal version of manuscript.FUNDINGThis research was funded by Shandong Provincial Key Researchand Development Project (2020CXGC011304); National NaturalScience Foundation of China (Grant No. 32001020); ShandongProvincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2020QB131); QiluUniversity of Technology Foundation/Shandong Academy ofSciences Foundation (202004); National Natural ScienceFoundation of China (Grant No. 82130067).REFERENCESAbhange, K., Makler, A., Wen, Y., Ramnauth, N., Mao, W., Asghar, W., et al.(2021). Small Extracellular Vesicles in Cancer. Bioact. Mater. 6, 3705 –3743.doi:10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.03.015An, Y., Jin, T., Zhu, Y., Zhang, F., and He, P. (2019). An UltrasensitiveElectrochemical Aptasensor for the Determination of Tumor Exosomes
Based on Click Chemistry. Biosens. Bioelectron. 142, 111503. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2019.111503Ayala-Mar, S., Perez-Gonzalez, V. H., Mata-Gómez, M. A., Gallo-Villanueva, R. C.,and González-Valdez, J. (2019). Electrokinetically Driven Exosome Separationand Concentration Using Dielectrophoretic-Enhanced PDMS-BasedMicro ﬂuidics. Anal. Chem. 91, 14975 –14982. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03448Baietti, M. F., Zhang, Z., Mortier, E., Melchior, A., Degeest, G., Geeraerts, A., et al.(2012). Syndecan-syntenin-ALIX Regulates the Biogenesis of Exosomes. Nat.Cel. Biol. 14, 677 –685. doi:10.1038/ncb2502Batrakova, E. V., and Kim, M. S. (2015). Using Exosomes, Naturally-EquippedNanocarriers, for Drug Delivery. J. Control. Release 219, 396 –405. doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.07.030Bebelman, M. P., Smit, M. J., Pegtel, D. M., and Baglio, S. R. (2018). Biogenesis andFunction of Extracellular Vesicles in Cancer. Pharmacol. Ther. 188, 1 –11.doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.02.013
doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.02.013Brownlee, Z., Lynn, K. D., Thorpe, P. E., and Schroit, A. J. (2014). A Novel "Salting-Out" Procedure for the Isolation of Tumor-Derived Exosomes. J. Immunol.
doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.02.013Brownlee, Z., Lynn, K. D., Thorpe, P. E., and Schroit, A. J. (2014). A Novel "Salting-Out" Procedure for the Isolation of Tumor-Derived Exosomes. J. Immunol.Methods 407, 120 –126. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2014.04.003Busatto, S., Vilanilam, G., Ticer, T., Lin, W.-L., Dickson, D., Shapiro, S., et al.(2018). Tangential Flow Filtration for Highly Ef ﬁcient Concentration ofExtracellular Vesicles from Large Volumes of Fluid. Cells 7, 273.doi:10.3390/cells7120273Chambers, A. F., Groom, A. C., and MacDonald, I. C. (2002). Dissemination andGrowth of Cancer Cells in Metastatic Sites. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 563 –572.doi:10.1038/nrc865Chen, X., Gole, J., Gore, A., He, Q., Lu, M., Min, J., et al. (2020). Non-invasive EarlyDetection of Cancer Four Years before Conventional Diagnosis Using a BloodTest. Nat. Commun. 11, 3475. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17316-zCheng, I.-F., Huang, W.-L., Chen, T.-Y., Liu, C.-W., Lin, Y.-D., and Su, W.-C.
(2015). Antibody-free Isolation of Rare Cancer Cells from Blood Based on 3DLateral Dielectrophoresis. Lab. Chip 15, 2950 –2959. doi:10.1039/C5LC00120JCho, S., Jo, W., Heo, Y., Kang, J. Y., Kwak, R., and Park, J. (2016). Isolation ofExtracellular Vesicle from Blood Plasma Using Electrophoretic Migrationthrough Porous Membrane. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 233, 289 –297.doi:10.1016/j.snb.2016.04.091Clark, D. J., Fondrie, W. E., Liao, Z., Hanson, P. I., Fulton, A., Mao, L., et al. (2015).Redeﬁning the Breast Cancer Exosome Proteome by Tandem Mass TagQuantitative Proteomics and Multivariate Cluster Analysis. Anal. Chem. 87,10462 –10469. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02586Colao, I. L., Corteling, R., Bracewell, D., and Wall, I. (2018). ManufacturingExosomes: a Promising Therapeutic Platform. Trends Mol. Med. 24,242 –256. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2018.01.006Colombo, M., Moita, C., van Niel, G., Kowal, J., Vigneron, J., Benaroch, P., et al.
(2013). Analysis of ESCRT Functions in Exosome Biogenesis, Composition andSecretion Highlights the Heterogeneity of Extracellular Vesicles. J. Cel Sci. 126,5553 –5565. doi:10.1242/jcs.128868Colombo, M., Raposo, G., and Théry, C. (2014). Biogenesis, Secretion, andIntercellular Interactions of Exosomes and Other Extracellular Vesicles.Annu. Rev. Cel Dev. Biol. 30, 255 –289. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-101512-122326Console, L., Scalise, M., and Indiveri, C. (2019). Exosomes in In ﬂammation andRole as Biomarkers. Clin. Chim. Acta 488, 165 –171. doi:10.1016/j.cca.2018.11.009Correa, R., Caballero, Z., De León, L. F., and Spadafora, C. (2020). ExtracellularVesicles Could Carry an Evolutionary Footprint in InterkingdomCommunication. Front. Cel. Infect. Microbiol. 10, 76. doi:10.3389/fcimb.2020.00076Coumans, F. A. W., Brisson, A. R., Buzas, E. I., Dignat-George, F., Drees, E. E. E.,El-Andaloussi, S., et al. (2017). Methodological Guidelines to Study
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 15Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Extracellular Vesicles. Circ. Res. 120, 1632 –1648. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.309417Cui, S., Cheng, Z., Qin, W., and Jiang, L. (2018). Exosomes as a Liquid Biopsy forLung Cancer. Lung Cancer 116, 46 –54. doi:10.1016/j.lungcan.2017.12.012Dash, M., Palaniyandi, K., Ramalingam, S., Sahabudeen, S., and Raja, N. S. (2021).Exosomes Isolated from Two Different Cell Lines Using Three DifferentIsolation Techniques Show Variation in Physical and MolecularCharacteristics. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (Bba) - Biomembr. 1863, 183490.doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2020.183490De Toro, J., Herschlik, L., Waldner, C., and Mongini, C. (2015). Emerging Roles ofExosomes in normal and Pathological Conditions: New Insights for Diagnosisand Therapeutic Applications. Front. Immunol. 6, 203. doi:10.3389/ﬁmmu.2015.00203Del Boccio, P., Raimondo, F., Pieragostino, D., Morosi, L., Cozzi, G., Sacchetta, P.,
et al. (2012). A Hyphenated microLC-Q-TOF-MS Platform for ExosomalLipidomics Investigations: Application to RCC Urinary Exosomes.Electrophoresis 33, 689 –696. doi:10.1002/elps.201100375Deregibus, M. C., Figliolini, F., D ’antico, S., Manzini, P. M., Pasquino, C., De Lena,M., et al. (2016). Charge-based Precipitation of Extracellular Vesicles. Int.J. Mol. Med. 38, 1359 –1366. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2016.2759Ding, X., Lin, S.-C. S., Kiraly, B., Yue, H., Li, S., Chiang, I.-K., et al. (2012). On-chipManipulation of Single Microparticles, Cells, and Organisms Using SurfaceAcoustic Waves. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 11105 –11109. doi:10.1073/pnas.1209288109Ding, L., Yang, X., Gao, Z., Effah, C. Y., Zhang, X., Wu, Y., et al. (2021). A HolisticReview of the State-of-the-Art Micro ﬂuidics for Exosome Separation: AnOverview of the Current Status, Existing Obstacles, and Future Outlook.Small 17, 2007174. doi:10.1002/smll.202007174
El Andaloussi, S., Mäger, I., Breake ﬁeld, X. O., and Wood, M. J. A. (2013).Extracellular Vesicles: Biology and Emerging Therapeutic Opportunities.Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 12, 347 –357. doi:10.1038/nrd3978Gallart-Palau, X., Serra, A., and Sze, S. K. (2016). Enrichment of ExtracellularVesicles from Tissues of the central Nervous System by PROSPR. Mol.Neurodegener. 11, 41. doi:10.1186/s13024-016-0108-1Gao, F., Jiao, F., Xia, C., Zhao, Y., Ying, W., Xie, Y., et al. (2019). A Novel Strategyfor Facile Serum Exosome Isolation Based on Speci ﬁc Interactions betweenPhospholipid Bilayers and TiO2. Chem. Sci. 10, 1579 –1588. doi:10.1039/c8sc04197kGroot, M., and Lee, H. (2020). Sorting Mechanisms for MicroRNAs intoExtracellular Vesicles and Their Associated Diseases. Cells 9, 1044.doi:10.3390/cells9041044Gu, Y., Chen, C., Mao, Z., Bachman, H., Becker, R., Rufo, J., et al. (2021).Acousto ﬂuidic Centrifuge for Nanoparticle Enrichment and Separation. Sci.
Adv. 7, eabc0467. doi:10.1126/sciadv.abc0467Guan, S., Yu, H., Yan, G., Gao, M., Sun, W., and Zhang, X. (2020). Characterizationof Urinary Exosomes Puri ﬁed with Size Exclusion Chromatography andUltracentrifugation. J. Proteome Res. 19, 2217 –2225. doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00693Guo, S., Xu, J., Estell, A. P., Ivory, C. F., Du, D., Lin, Y., et al. (2020). Paper-basedITP Technology: An Application to Speci ﬁc Cancer-Derived ExosomeDetection and Analysis.Biosens. Bioelectron. 164, 112292. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2020.112292Gupta, S., Rawat, S., Arora, V., Kottarath, S. K., Dinda, A. K., Vaishnav, P. K., et al.(2018). An Improvised One-step Sucrose Cushion Ultracentrifugation Methodfor Exosome Isolation from Culture Supernatants of Mesenchymal Stem Cells.Stem Cel Res. Ther. 9, 180. doi:10.1186/s13287-018-0923-0Gurunathan, S., Kang, M.-H., Jeyaraj, M., Qasim, M., and Kim, J.-H. (2019).
Review of the Isolation, Characterization, Biological Function, and MultifariousTherapeutic Approaches of Exosomes. Cells 8, 307. doi:10.3390/cells8040307Gurwitz, D. (2015). Exosomal MicroRNAs in Tissue Crosstalk. Drug Dev. Res. 76,259 –262. doi:10.1002/ddr.21264
Gurwitz, D. (2015). Exosomal MicroRNAs in Tissue Crosstalk. Drug Dev. Res. 76,259 –262. doi:10.1002/ddr.21264Han, S., Xu, Y., Sun, J., Liu, Y., Zhao, Y., Tao, W., et al. (2020). Isolation andAnalysis of Extracellular Vesicles in a Morpho Butter ﬂy wing-integratedMicrovortex Biochip. Biosens. Bioelectron. 154, 112073. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2020.112073He, L., Zhu, D., Wang, J., and Wu, X. (2019). A Highly Ef ﬁcient Method forIsolating Urinary Exosomes. Int. J. Mol. Med. 43, 83 –90. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2018.3944Helwa, I., Cai, J., Drewry, M. D., Zimmerman, A., Dinkins, M. B., Khaled, M. L.,et al. (2017). A Comparative Study of Serum Exosome Isolation UsingDifferential Ultracentrifugation and Three Commercial Reagents. PLoS One12, e0170628. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170628Hessvik, N. P., and Llorente, A. (2018). Current Knowledge on Exosome Biogenesisand Release. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 75, 193 –208. doi:10.1007/s00018-017-2595-9
Huang, F., Wan, J., Hao, S., Deng, X., Chen, L., and Ma, L. (2017). TGF- β1-silencedLeukemia Cell-Derived Exosomes Target Dendritic Cells to Induce PotentAnti-leukemic Immunity in a Mouse Model. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 66,1321 –1331. doi:10.1007/s00262-017-2028-5Huang, L., Rong, Y., Tang, X., Yi, K., Wu, J., and Wang, F. (2021). Circular RNAsAre Promising Biomarkers in Liquid Biopsy for the Diagnosis of Non-small CellLung Cancer. Front. Mol. Biosci. 8, 625722. doi:10.3389/fmolb.2021.625722Iliescu, F., Vrta čnik, D., Neuzil, P., and Iliescu, C. (2019). Micro ﬂuidic Technologyfor Clinical Applications of Exosomes. Micromachines 10, 392. doi:10.3390/mi10060392Jeppesen, D. K., Hvam, M. L., Primdahl-Bengtson, B., Boysen, A. T., Whitehead, B.,Dyrskjøt, L., et al. (2014). Comparative Analysis of Discrete Exosome FractionsObtained by Differential Centrifugation. J. Extracell. Vesicles 3, 25011.doi:10.3402/jev.v3.25011
doi:10.3402/jev.v3.25011J i ,H . ,E r f a n i ,N . ,T a u r o ,B .J . ,K a p p ,E .A . ,Z h u ,H .J . ,M o r i t z ,R .L . ,e ta l .(2008). Difference Gel Electrophoresis Analysis of Ras-transformedFibroblast Cell-derived Exosomes. Electrophoresis 29, 2660 –2671.doi:10.1002/elps.200800015Jiang, X., Jing, W., Zheng, L., Liu, S., Wu, W., and Sui, G. (2014). A Continuous-Flow High-Throughput Micro ﬂuidic Device for Airborne Bacteria PCRDetection. Lab. Chip 14, 671 –676. doi:10.1039/c3lc50977jJiang, L., Vader, P., and Schiffelers, R. M. (2017). Extracellular Vesicles for NucleicAcid Delivery: Progress and Prospects for Safe RNA-Based Gene Therapy. GeneTher. 24, 157 –166. doi:10.1038/gt.2017.8Johnstone, R. M., Adam, M., Hammond, J. R., Orr, L., and Turbide, C. (1987).Vesicle Formation during Reticulocyte Maturation. Association of PlasmaMembrane Activities with Released Vesicles (Exosomes). J. Biol. Chem. 262,9412 –9420. doi:10.1016/S0021-9258(18)48095-7
9412 –9420. doi:10.1016/S0021-9258(18)48095-7K a l l u r i ,R . ,a n dL e B l e u ,V .S .( 2 0 2 0 ) .T h e Biology , Function , and BiomedicalApplications of Exosomes. Science 367, eaau6977. doi:10.1126/science.aau6977Kamerkar, S., Lebleu, V. S., Sugimoto, H., Yang, S., Ruivo, C. F., Melo, S. A., et al.(2017). Exosomes Facilitate Therapeutic Targeting of Oncogenic KRAS inPancreatic Cancer. Nature 546, 498 –503. doi:10.1038/nature22341Kang, Y.-T., Hadlock, T., Jolly, S., and Nagrath, S. (2020a). Extracellular Vesicles onDemand (EVOD) Chip for Screening and Quanti ﬁcation of Cancer-AssociatedExtracellular Vesicles. Biosens. Bioelectron. 168, 112535. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2020.112535Kang, Y. T., Hadlock, T., Lo, T. W., Purcell, E., Mutukuri, A., Fouladdel, S., et al.(2020b). Dual-Isolation and Pro ﬁling of Circulating Tumor Cells and CancerExosomes from Blood Samples with Melanoma Using Immunoaf ﬁnity-Based
Micro ﬂuidic Interfaces. Adv. Sci. 7, 2001581. doi:10.1002/advs.202001581Keller, S., Sanderson, M. P., Stoeck, A., and Altevogt, P. (2006). Exosomes: FromBiogenesis and Secretion to Biological Function. Immunol. Lett. 107, 102 –108.doi:10.1016/j.imlet.2006.09.005
Keller, S., Sanderson, M. P., Stoeck, A., and Altevogt, P. (2006). Exosomes: FromBiogenesis and Secretion to Biological Function. Immunol. Lett. 107, 102 –108.doi:10.1016/j.imlet.2006.09.005Kim, H., and Shin, S. (2021). Exocas-2: Rapid and Pure Isolation of Exosomes byAnionic Exchange Using Magnetic Beads. Biomedicines 9, 28. doi:10.3390/biomedicines9010028Kim, J. Y., Rhim, W.-K., Yoo, Y.-I., Kim, D.-S., Ko, K.-W., Heo, Y., et al. (2021).Deﬁned MSC Exosome with High Yield and Purity to Improve RegenerativeActivity. J. Tissue Eng. 12, 204173142110086 –15. doi:10.1177/20417314211008626Lamparski, H. G., Metha-Damani, A., Yao, J.-Y., Patel, S., Hsu, D.-H., Ruegg, C.,et al. (2002). Production and Characterization of Clinical Grade ExosomesDerived from Dendritic Cells. J. Immunol. Methods 270, 211 –226. doi:10.1016/S0022-1759(02)00330-7LeBleu, V. S., and Kalluri, R. (2020). Exosomes as a Multicomponent BiomarkerPlatform in Cancer. Trends Cancer 6, 767 –774. doi:10.1016/
j.trecan.2020.03.007Lee, Y., El Andaloussi, S., and Wood, M. J. A. (2012). Exosomes and Microvesicles:Extracellular Vesicles for Genetic Information Transfer and Gene Therapy.Hum. Mol. Genet. 21, R125 –R134. doi:10.1093/hmg/dds317Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 16Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Leidal, A. M., and Debnath, J. (2020). Unraveling the Mechanisms that SpecifyMolecules for Secretion in Extracellular Vesicles. Methods 177, 15 –26.doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.01.008Li, P., Kaslan, M., Lee, S. H., Yao, J., and Gao, Z. (2017). Progress in ExosomeIsolation Techniques. Theranostics 7, 789 –804. doi:10.7150/thno.18133Li, G., Tang, W., and Yang, F. (2020). Cancer Liquid Biopsy Using IntegratedMicro ﬂuidic Exosome Analysis Platforms. Biotechnol. J. 15, 1900225.doi:10.1002/biot.201900225Lin, S., Yu, Z., Chen, D., Wang, Z., Miao, J., Li, Q., et al. (2020). Progress inMicro ﬂuidics-Based Exosome Separation and Detection Technologies forDiagnostic Applications. Small 16, 1903916. doi:10.1002/smll.201903916Liu, S., Chen, X., Bao, L., Liu, T., Yuan, P., Yang, X., et al. (2020). Treatment ofInfarcted Heart Tissue via the Capture and Local Delivery of CirculatingExosomes through Antibody-Conjugated Magnetic Nanoparticles. Nat.
Biomed. Eng. 4, 1063 –1075. doi:10.1038/s41551-020-00637-1Liu, H. Y., Kumar, R., Zhong, C., Gorji, S., Paniushkina, L., Masood, R., et al.(2021a). Rapid Capture of Cancer Extracellular Vesicles by Lipid PatchMicroarrays. Adv. Mater. 33, 2008493. doi:10.1002/adma.202008493Liu, J., Chen, Y., Pei, F., Zeng, C., Yao, Y., Liao, W., et al. (2021b). ExtracellularVesicles in Liquid Biopsies: Potential for Disease Diagnosis. Biomed. Res. Int.2021, 1 –17. doi:10.1155/2021/6611244Soares Martins, T., Catita, J., Martins Rosa, I., A. B. da Cruz e Silva, O., andHenriques, A. G. (2018). Exosome Isolation from Distinct Bio ﬂuids UsingPrecipitation and Column-Based Approaches. PLoS One 13, e0198820.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0198820Mateescu, B., Kowal, E. J. K., van Balkom, B. W. M., Bartel, S., Bhattacharyya, S. N.,Buzás, E. I., et al. (2017). Obstacles and Opportunities in the FunctionalAnalysis of Extracellular Vesicle RNA - an ISEV Position Paper. J. Extracell.
Vesicles 6, 1286095. doi:10.1080/20013078.2017.1286095Mathivanan, S., Ji, H., and Simpson, R. J. (2010a). Exosomes: ExtracellularOrganelles Important in Intercellular Communication. J. Proteomics 73,1907 –1920. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2010.06.006Mathivanan, S., Lim, J. W. E., Tauro, B. J., Ji, H., Moritz, R. L., and Simpson, R. J.(2010b). Proteomics Analysis of A33 Immunoaf ﬁnity-Puri ﬁed ExosomesReleased from the Human Colon Tumor Cell Line LIM1215 Reveals aTissue-speci ﬁc Protein Signature. Mol. Cel. Proteomics 9, 197 –208.doi:10.1074/mcp.M900152-MCP200Melo, S. A., Luecke, L. B., Kahlert, C., Fernandez, A. F., Gammon, S. T., Kaye, J.,et al. (2015). Glypican-1 Identi ﬁes Cancer Exosomes and Detects EarlyPancreatic Cancer. Nature 523, 177 –182. doi:10.1038/nature14581Möbius, W., Ohno-Iwashita, Y., Donselaar, E. G. v., Oorschot, V. M. J., Shimada,
Y., Fujimoto, T., et al. (2002). Immunoelectron Microscopic Localization ofCholesterol Using Biotinylated and Non-cytolytic Perfringolysin O.J. Histochem. Cytochem. 50, 43 –55. doi:10.1177/002215540205000105Mohammadi, M., Zargartalebi, H., Salahandish, R., Aburashed, R., Wey Yong, K.,and Sanati-Nezhad, A. (2021). Emerging Technologies and CommercialProducts in Exosome-Based Cancer Diagnosis and Prognosis. Biosens.Bioelectron. 183, 113176. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2021.113176Murk, J. L. A. N., Humbel, B. M., Ziese, U., Grif ﬁth, J. M., Posthuma, G., Slot, J. W.,et al. (2003). Endosomal Compartmentalization in Three Dimensions:Implications for Membrane Fusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100, 13332 –13337.doi:10.1073/pnas.2232379100Musumeci, T., Leonardi, A., Bonaccorso, A., Pignatello, R., and Puglisi, G. (2018).Tangential Flow Filtration Technique: An Overview on NanomedicineApplications. Pnt6, 48 –60. doi:10.2174/2211738506666180306160921
Nasrollahpour, H., Isildak, I., Rashidi, M.-R., Hashemi, E. A. ,N a s e r i ,A . ,a n dK h a l i l z a d e h ,B. (2021). Ultrasensitive Bioassaying of HE R-2 Protein for Diagn osis of Breast Cancer
Nasrollahpour, H., Isildak, I., Rashidi, M.-R., Hashemi, E. A. ,N a s e r i ,A . ,a n dK h a l i l z a d e h ,B. (2021). Ultrasensitive Bioassaying of HE R-2 Protein for Diagn osis of Breast CancerUsing Reduced Graphene Oxide/chitos an as Nanobiocompatible Platform. CancerNano 12, 10. doi:10.1186/s12645-021-00082-yNordin, J. Z., Lee, Y., Vader, P., Mäger, I., Johansson, H. J., Heusermann, W., et al.(2015). Ultra ﬁltration with Size-Exclusion Liquid Chromatography for HighYield Isolation of Extracellular Vesicles Preserving Intact Biophysical andFunctional Properties. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnol., Biol. Med. 11, 879 –883.doi:10.1016/j.nano.2015.01.003Oeyen, E., Van Mol, K., Baggerman, G., Willems, H., Boonen, K., Rolfo, C., et al.(2018). Ultra ﬁltration and Size Exclusion Chromatography Combined withAsymmetrical-Flow Field-Flow Fractionation for the Isolation andCharacterisation of Extracellular Vesicles from Urine. J. Extracell. Vesicles 7,
1490143. doi:10.1080/20013078.2018.1490143Pan, B.-T., and Johnstone, R. M. (1983). Fate of the Transferrin Receptor duringMaturation of Sheep Reticulocytes In Vitro : Selective Externalization of theReceptor. Cell33, 967 –978. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(83)90040-5Paolini, L., Zendrini, A., Noto, G. D., Busatto, S., Lottini, E., Radeghieri, A., et al.(2016). Residual Matrix from Different Separation Techniques ImpactsExosome Biological Activity. Sci. Rep. 6, 23550. doi:10.1038/srep23550Phinney, D. G., and Pittenger, M. F. (2017). Concise Review: MSC-DerivedExosomes for Cell-Free Therapy. Stem Cel. 35, 851 –858. doi:10.1002/stem.2575Pocsfalvi, G., Stanly, C., Vilasi, A., Fiume, I., Capasso, G., Turiák, L., et al. (2016).Mass Spectrometry of Extracellular Vesicles. Mass. Spec. Rev. 35, 3 –21.doi:10.1002/mas.21457Qian, L., Li, Q., Baryeh, K., Qiu, W., Li, K., Zhang, J., et al. (2019). Biosensors forEarly Diagnosis of Pancreatic Cancer: a Review. Translational Res. 213, 67 –89.
doi:10.1016/j.trsl.2019.08.002Raimondo, F., Morosi, L., Chinello, C., Magni, F., and Pitto, M. (2011). Advances inMembranous Vesicle and Exosome Proteomics Improving BiologicalUnderstanding and Biomarker Discovery. Proteomics 11, 709 –720.doi:10.1002/pmic.201000422Rajagopal, C., and Harikumar, K. B. (2018). The Origin and Functions of Exosomesin Cancer. Front. Oncol. 8, 66. doi:10.3389/fonc.2018.00066Raposo, G., and Stoorvogel, W. (2013). Extracellular Vesicles: Exosomes,Microvesicles, and Friends. J. Cel Biol. 200, 373 –383. doi:10.1083/jcb.201211138Record, M., Carayon, K., Poirot, M., and Silvente-Poirot, S. (2014). Exosomes asNew Vesicular Lipid Transporters Involved in Cell-Cell Communication andVarious Pathophysiologies. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (Bba) - Mol. Cel Biol. Lipids1841, 108 –120. doi:10.1016/j.bbalip.2013.10.004Ruivo, C. F., Adem, B., Silva, M., and Melo, S. A. (2017). The Biology of CancerExosomes: Insights and New Perspectives.Cancer Res. 77, 6480 –6488.
Cancer Res. 77, 6480 –6488.doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-0994Runz, S., Keller, S., Rupp, C., Stoeck, A., Issa, Y., Koensgen, D., et al. (2007).Malignant Ascites-Derived Exosomes of Ovarian Carcinoma Patients ContainCD24 and EpCAM. Gynecol. Oncol. 107, 563 –571. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2007.08.064Ryu, K. J., Lee, J. Y., Park, C., Cho, D., and Kim, S. J. (2020). Isolation of SmallExtracellular Vesicles from Human Serum Using a Combination ofUltracentrifugation with Polymer-Based Precipitation. Ann. Lab. Med. 40,253 –258. doi:10.3343/alm.2020.40.3.27710.3343/alm.2020.40.3.253Sancho-Albero, M., Sebastián, V., Sesé, J., Pazo-Cid, R., Mendoza, G., Arruebo, M.,et al. (2020). Isolation of Exosomes from Whole Blood by a New Micro ﬂuidicDevice: Proof of Concept Application in the Diagnosis and Monitoring ofPancreatic Cancer. J. Nanobiotechnol. 18, 150. doi:10.1186/s12951-020-00701-7Shao, H., Im, H., Castro, C. M., Breake ﬁeld, X., Weissleder, R., and Lee, H. (2018).
New Technologies for Analysis of Extracellular Vesicles. Chem. Rev. 118,
Shao, H., Im, H., Castro, C. M., Breake ﬁeld, X., Weissleder, R., and Lee, H. (2018).New Technologies for Analysis of Extracellular Vesicles. Chem. Rev. 118,1917 –1950. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00534Skotland, T., Sandvig, K., and Llorente, A. (2017). Lipids in Exosomes: CurrentKnowledge and the Way Forward. Prog. Lipid Res. 66, 30 –41. doi:10.1016/j.plipres.2017.03.001Sung, H., Ferlay, J., Siegel, R. L., Laversanne, M., Soerjomataram, I., Jemal, A., et al.(2021). Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence andMortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA A. Cancer J. Clin. 71,209 –249. doi:10.3322/caac.21660Suwatthanarak, T., Thiodorus, I. A., Tanaka, M., Shimada, T., Takeshita, D., Yasui,T., et al. (2021). Micro ﬂuidic-based Capture and Release of Cancer-DerivedExosomes via Peptide-Nanowire Hybrid Interface. Lab. Chip 21, 597 –607.doi:10.1039/d0lc00899kTauro, B. J., Greening, D. W., Mathias, R. A., Ji, H., Mathivanan, S., Scott, A. M.,
et al. (2012). Comparison of Ultracentrifugation, Density Gradient Separation,and Immunoaf ﬁnity Capture Methods for Isolating Human colon Cancer CellLine LIM1863-Derived Exosomes. Methods 56, 293 –304. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.01.002Tay, H. M., Leong, S. Y., Xu, X., Kong, F., Upadya, M., Dalan, R., et al. (2021).Direct Isolation of Circulating Extracellular Vesicles from Blood for VascularRisk Pro ﬁling in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Lab. Chip 21, 2511 –2523.doi:10.1039/d1lc00333jFrontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 17Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
Thakur, B. K., Zhang, H., Becker, A., Matei, I., Huang, Y., Costa-Silva, B., et al.(2014). Double-stranded DNA in Exosomes: A Novel Biomarker in CancerDetection. Cel. Res. 24, 766 –769. doi:10.1038/cr.2014.44Théry, C., Boussac, M., Véron, P., Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P., Raposo, G., Garin, J.,et al. (2001). Proteomic Analysis of Dendritic Cell-Derived Exosomes: ASecreted Subcellular Compartment Distinct from Apoptotic Vesicles.J. Immunol. 166, 7309 –7318. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.166.12.7309Théry, C., Zitvogel, L., and Amigorena, S. (2002). Exosomes: Composition,Biogenesis and Function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2, 569 –579. doi:10.1038/nri855Théry, C., Amigorena, S., Raposo, G., and Clayton, A. (2006). Isolation andCharacterization of Exosomes from Cell Culture Supernatants andBiological Fluids. Curr. Protoc. Cel Biol. 30, 3.22.1 –3.22.29. doi:10.1002/0471143030.cb0322s30Théry, C. (2011). Exosomes: Secreted Vesicles and Intercellular Communications.
F1000 Biol. Rep. 3, 15. doi:10.3410/B3-15Thind, A., and Wilson, C. (2016). Exosomal miRNAs as Cancer Biomarkers andTherapeutic Targets. J. Extracell. Vesicles 5, 31292. doi:10.3402/jev.v5.31292Trajkovic, K., Hsu, C., Chiantia, S., Rajendran, L., Wenzel, D., Wieland, F., et al.(2008). Ceramide Triggers Budding of Exosome Vesicles into MultivesicularEndosomes. Science 319, 1244 –1247. doi:10.1126/science.1153124Urbanelli, L., Magini, A., Buratta, S., Brozzi, A., Sagini, K., Polchi, A., et al. (2013).Signaling Pathways in Exosomes Biogenesis, Secretion and Fate. Genes 4,152 –170. doi:10.3390/genes4020152Valadi, H., Ekström, K., Bossios, A., Sjöstrand, M., Lee, J. J., and Lötvall, J. O.(2007). Exosome-mediated Transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs Is a NovelMechanism of Genetic Exchange between Cells. Nat. Cel Biol. 9, 654 –659.doi:10.1038/ncb1596van der Pol, E., Böing, A. N., Harrison, P., Sturk, A., and Nieuwland, R. (2012).
Classi ﬁcation, Functions, and Clinical Relevance of Extracellular Vesicles.Pharmacol. Rev. 64, 676 –705. doi:10.1124/pr.112.005983Wang, Y., Li, Q., Shi, H., Tang, K., Qiao, L., Yu, G., et al. (2020). Micro ﬂuidicRaman Biochip Detection of Exosomes: A Promising Tool for Prostate CancerDiagnosis. Lab. Chip 20, 4632 –4637. doi:10.1039/d0lc00677gWatson, D. C., Bayik, D., Srivatsan, A., Bergamaschi, C., Valentin, A., Niu, G., et al.(2016). Ef ﬁcient Production and Enhanced Tumor Delivery of EngineeredExtracellular Vesicles. Biomaterials 105, 195 –205. doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.07.003Whitaker, K. (2020). Earlier Diagnosis: the Importance of Cancer Symptoms.Lancet Oncol. 21, 6 –8. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30658-8Whitford, W., and Guterstam, P. (2019). Exosome Manufacturing Status. FutureMed. Chem. 11, 1225 –1236. doi:10.4155/fmc-2018-0417Woo, H.-K., Sunkara, V., Park, J., Kim, T.-H., Han, J.-R., Kim, C.-J., et al. (2017).
Exodisc for Rapid, Size-Selective, and Ef ﬁcient Isolation and Analysis ofNanoscale Extracellular Vesicles from Biological Samples. ACS Nano 11,1360 –1370. doi:10.1021/acsnano.6b06131Wu, M., Ouyang, Y., Wang, Z., Zhang, R., Huang, P.-H., Chen, C., et al. (2017).Isolation of Exosomes from Whole Blood by Integrating Acoustics andMicro ﬂuidics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 10584 –10589. doi:10.1073/pnas.1709210114Wunsch, B. H., Smith, J. T., Gifford, S. M., Wang, C., Brink, M., Bruce, R. L., et al.(2016). Nanoscale Lateral Displacement Arrays for the Separation of Exosomesand Colloids Down to 20 Nm. Nat. Nanotech 11, 936 –940. doi:10.1038/nnano.2016.134Xu, W.-C., Qian, G., Liu, A.-Q., Li, Y.-Q., and Zou, H.-Q. (2018). UrinaryExtracellular Vesicle. Chin. Med. J. (Engl). 131, 1357 –1364. doi:10.4103/0366-6999.232801Yang, C., and Robbins, P. D. (2011). The Roles of Tumor-Derived Exosomes inCancer Pathogenesis. Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2011, 1 –11. doi:10.1155/2011/842849
842849Yang, D., Zhang, W., Zhang, H., Zhang, F., Chen, L., Ma, L., et al. (2020). Progress,
Cancer Pathogenesis. Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2011, 1 –11. doi:10.1155/2011/842849Yang, D., Zhang, W., Zhang, H., Zhang, F., Chen, L., Ma, L., et al. (2020). Progress,Opportunity, and Perspective on Exosome Isolation - Efforts for Ef ﬁcientExosome-Based Theranostics. Theranostics 10, 3684 –3707. doi:10.7150/thno.41580Zaborowski, M. P., Balaj, L., Breake ﬁeld, X. O., and Lai, C. P. (2015). ExtracellularVesicles: Composition, Biological Relevance, and Methods of Study. Bioscience65, 783 –797. doi:10.1093/biosci/biv084Zarovni, N., Corrado, A., Guazzi, P., Zocco, D., Lari, E., Radano, G., et al. (2015).Integrated Isolation and Quantitative Analysis of Exosome Shuttled Proteinsand Nucleic Acids Using Immunocapture Approaches. Methods 87, 46 –58.doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.05.028Zeringer, E., Barta, T., Li, M., and Vlassov, A. V. (2015). Strategies for Isolation ofExosomes. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2015, pdb.top074476 –323. doi:10.1101/pdb.top074476
pdb.top074476Zhang, J., Li, S., Li, L., Li, M., Guo, C., Yao, J., et al. (2015). Exosome and ExosomalmicroRNA: Traf ﬁcking, Sorting, and Function. Genomics, ProteomicsBioinformatics 13, 17 –24. doi:10.1016/j.gpb.2015.02.001Zhang, M., Jin, K., Gao, L., Zhang, Z., Li, F., Zhou, F., et al. (2018). Methods andTechnologies for Exosome Isolation and Characterization. Small Methods 2,1800021. doi:10.1002/smtd.201800021Z h a n g ,P . ,Z h o u ,X . ,H e ,M . ,S h a n g ,Y . ,T e t l o w ,A .L . ,G o d w i n ,A .K . ,e ta l .( 2 0 1 9 ) .Ultrasensitive Detection of Circulating Exosomes with a 3D-NanopatternedMicro ﬂuidic Chip. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 438 –451. doi:10.1038/s41551-019-0356-9Zhang, P., Wu, X., Gardashova, G., Yang, Y., Zhang, Y., Xu, L., et al. (2020).Molecular and Functional Extracellular Vesicle Analysis Using NanopatternedMicrochips Monitors Tumor Progression and Metastasis. Sci. Transl. Med. 12,eaaz2878. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz2878
eaaz2878. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz2878Zhang, N., Sun, N., and Deng, C. (2021). Rapid Isolation and Proteome Analysis ofUrinary Exosome Based on Double Interactions of Fe3O4@TiO2-DNAAptamer. Talanta 221, 121571. doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2020.121571Zhao, Y., Weber, S. R., Lease, J., Russo, M., Siedlecki, C. A., Xu, L.-C., et al. (2018).Liquid Biopsy of Vitreous Reveals an Abundant Vesicle Population Consistentwith the Size and Morphology of Exosomes. Trans. Vis. Sci. Tech. 7, 6.doi:10.1167/tvst.7.3.6Zhao, S., Wu, M., Yang, S., Wu, Y., Gu, Y., Chen, C., et al. (2020). A DisposableAcousto ﬂuidic Chip for Nano/microparticle Separation Using UnidirectionalAcoustic Transducers. Lab. Chip 20, 1298 –1308. doi:10.1039/D0LC00106FZheng, P., Luo, Q., Wang, W., Li, J., Wang, T., Wang, P., et al. (2018). Tumor-associated macrophages-derived exosomes promote the migration of gastriccancer cells by transfer of functional Apolipoprotein e. Cell Death Dis 9, 434.
doi:10.1038/s41419-018-0465-5Zhuang, G., Wu, X., Jiang, Z., Kasman, I., Yao, J., Guan, Y., et al. (2012). Tumour-secreted miR-9 Promotes Endothelial Cell Migration and Angiogenesis byActivating the JAK-STAT Pathway. EMBO J. 31, 3513 –3523. doi:10.1038/emboj.2012.183Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in theabsence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as apotential con ﬂict of interest.Publisher ’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authorsand do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁliated organizations, or those ofthe publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated inthis article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed orendorsed by the publisher.Copyright © 2022 Chen, Li, Zhang, Xu, Huang, Wang and Du. This is an open-
Copyright © 2022 Chen, Li, Zhang, Xu, Huang, Wang and Du. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons AttributionLicense (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that theoriginal publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academicpractice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not complywith these terms.Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 9 | Article 811971 18Chen et al. Progress in Exosome Isolation Techniques
