International Journal of  Molecular SciencesReviewFernblock ( Polypodium leucotomos Extract):Molecular Mechanisms and Pleiotropic Effects inLight-Related Skin Conditions, Photoaging and SkinCancers, a ReviewConcepcion Parrado1, Marta Mascaraque2, Yolanda Gilaberte3, Angeles Juarranz2and Salvador Gonzalez4,5,*1Pathology Department, School of Medicine, Universidad de Málaga, Malaga 29071, Spain; cparrado@uma.es2Biology Department, Sciences School, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain;marta.mascaraque@estudiante.uam.es (M.M.); angeles.juarranz@uam.es (A.J.)3Dermatology Service, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca 22004, Spain; ygilaberte@salud.aragon.es4Dermatology Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA5Medicine Department, Alcalá University, Madrid 28805, Spain*Correspondence: gonzals6@mskcc.org; Tel.: +1-212-610-0185; Fax: +1-212-308-0530Academic Editors: Antonio Segura-Carretero and Ana Maria Gómez Caravaca
Received: 7 May 2016; Accepted: 20 June 2016; Published: 29 June 2016Abstract: Healthier life styles include increased outdoors time practicing sports and walking. Thismeans increased exposure to the sun, leading to higher risk of sunburn, photoaging and skin cancer.In addition to topical barrier products, oral supplementations of various botanicals endowed withantioxidant activity are emerging as novel method of photoprotection. Polypodium leucotomos extract(PL, commercial name Fernblock®, IFC Group, Spain) is a powerful antioxidant due to its highcontent of phenolic compounds. PL is administered orally, with proven safety, and it can also be usedtopically. Its mechanisms include inhibition of the generation and release of reactive oxygen species(ROS) by ultraviolet (UV) light. It also prevents UV- and ROS-induced DNA damage with inhibitionof AP1 and NF- κB and protection of natural antioxidant enzyme systems. At the cellular level, PL
decreases cellular apoptosis and necrosis mediated UV and inhibits abnormal extracellular matrixremodeling. PL reduces inﬂammation, prevents immunosuppression, activates tumor suppressor p53and inhibits UV-induced cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) enzyme expression. In agreement with increasedp53 activity, PL decreased UV radiation-induced cell proliferation. PL also prevents common deletionsmitochondrial DNA damage induced by UVA, and MMP-1 expression induced Visible Light andInfrared Radiation. These cellular and molecular effects are reﬂected in inhibitions of carcinogenesisand photoaging.Keywords: Polypodium leucotomos extract; photoprotection; antioxidant; photoaging; oral; DNA;immunosuppression; photocarcinogenesis; ultraviolet (UV) radiation; visible light (VIS) radiation;infrared (IR)1. IntroductionSkin cancer accounts for at least 40% of all human malignancies. Solar radiation is a potent
environmental human carcinogen, and its properties as a cancer-inducing agent are summarized inthe13th Report on Carcinogens on 2 October 2014, of the National Institute of Environmental HealthSciences [1].Ultraviolet (UV) radiation (UVR) is a major causal agent in most skin cancers [ 2]. Broad-spectrumUVR causes skin cancer by inducing DNA damage, increasing oxidative stress, suppressing theInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026; doi:10.3390/ijms17071026 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 2 of 21immune system response and promoting tumor growth through, among other mechanisms, mutationof the p53 tumor-suppressor gene [ 3,4]. UVR causes mutations in human cells and the type of lesiondepends on the speciﬁc wavelength of UVR and whether cells can repair the lesion without error [1].The use of botanical supplements equipped with signiﬁcant antioxidant activity has generatedgreat interest to decrease the risk of disease of the skin induced by UV radiation [ 5]. Polyphenolshave been considered as a group natural bioactive products with potential health beneﬁts. [ 6]. Plantextracts, herbs and spices containing these compounds have been administered for different diseasesfor thousands of years [ 7,8]. Today, plant polyphenols are being increasingly acknowledged by thescientiﬁc community for their added value as health boosters [ 7,8]. Currently, studies using plant
polyphenols have proliferated, including 226 clinical trials that have been approved by the NationalInstitutes of Health (NIH). At the moment of writing this paper, 35 open studies aimed at addressingthe beneﬁcial effects of polyphenols in health and diseases are recruiting participants.In this context, Polypodium leucotomos (PL, commercial name Fernblock®, IFC Group, Spain)contains several hydrophilic extracts in its aerial part and these extracts exhibit powerfulphotoprotective properties after its administration, either topically or orally. Polypodium leucotomos(PL) is rich in phenolic compounds. PL contains among other cinnamic, ferulic and chlorogenicacids, all of them polyphenols with known antioxidant properties [ 9,10].In vitro and in vivo studieshave demonstrated that PL exerts its photoprotective by several mechanisms including inhibitionof the generation and release of reactive oxygen species (ROS). It also prevents damage to the DNA,
lipid peroxidation, activation of pro-inﬂammatory factors and induction of nitric oxide. It inhibitsUV-mediated loss of cell-extracellular matrix adhesion, actin disarray and also prevents keratinocyteapoptosis [ 11]. In this review, we describe the composition of the extract and its antioxidant beneﬁcialproperties. To substantiate the molecular basis of the impact of oral PL for the prevention of the adversecutaneous effects of UVR, we will summarize the state of the art of the molecular mechanisms andtargets of PL involved in photodamage and skin cancer prevention. Brieﬂy, these include: (i) signalingpathways that induce or regulate ROS generation and/or effects; (ii) pathways of DNA damage andDNA repair; (iii) role of ROS in inﬂammation; (iv) immune evasion of due to oxidative stress; (v)UV-induced tumor progression; (vi) interaction with UVR extracellular matrix (ECM) damage; and(vii) PL use in other non skin malignancies.
(vii) PL use in other non skin malignancies.2. Solar Radiation and Deleterious Cutaneous EffectsThe electromagnetic radiation emitted by the sun comprises ultraviolet radiation (UVR; 200–400nm), visible light (VIS; 400–780 nm), and infrared (IR; 780 nm–1 mm). The International Commissionof L’Eclairage (CIE) [ 12] classiﬁes UV radiation into three types: UVA (315–400 nm), UVB (280–315 nm)and UVC (100–280 nm). UVC is completely ﬁltered in the upper layers of the atmosphere. Althoughif a very limited exposure to UVA and UVB photons is necessary [ 13], excessive sun exposure isharmful to the skin and can be a cause of skin disease. Skin cancer induced by UV radiation takesmany years to develop [ 4]. UV radiation produces photoaging and photocarcinogenesis through thegeneration of ROS, DNA damage, immunosuppression, inﬂammation and abnormal remodeling ofECM/angiogenesis [4].Photoprotection is a practical approach to prevent skin cancers. In recent years, natural agents
endowed with antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-carcinogenic and immunomodulatory propertieshave garnered considerable interest due to their ability to prevent UV radiation-induced skin
endowed with antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-carcinogenic and immunomodulatory propertieshave garnered considerable interest due to their ability to prevent UV radiation-induced skindamage [ 14]. In the literature, UVR has been described as the main cause of the development ofseveral skin pathologies. Intriguingly, great numbers of studies have also demonstrated radical speciesproduction after exposure to VIS and IR radiation [ 15]. The VIS part of the spectrum has not been asthoroughly investigated as the UV radiation subset [ 16,17]. VIS induces transient [ 18] as well as longlasting pigmentation in humans [ 19]. However, limited information is available regarding the sideeffect of VIS. Recently, several research studies showed that VIS induces signiﬁcant ROS productionthereby contributing premature skin photoaging [15–17,20].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 3 of 21IR radiation has both beneﬁcial and negative effects on the skin [ 21], thus IR has found applicationsin the treatment of skin pathologies [ 21]; however, cutaneous exposure to IR radiation may affect theskin promoting ROS generation, interfering with mitochondrial functions and by generation of heatand mobilizing heat sensors at the skin surface [15,20,22].2.1. Ultraviolet Radiation (UVR) and Photoinduced-Skin Cancer Aging2.1.1. Photooxidative Stress: Generation of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)The main effects of UV radiation are DNA damage, immunosuppression and inﬂammation [23].UVR induces the formation of ROS in the skin [ 23]. Oxidative stress is the principal cause ofpremature aging (“photoaging”). Oxidative stress is involved in several diseases, including cancer.At a cellular level, ROS generated in response to UV-R irradiation can activate cell surface receptors
that activated mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) [ 24,25]. The activator protein (AP-1) and thenuclear factor (NF)- κB are involved in the processes of cell proliferation, cell death, and cell survival.In addition, NF- κB is a key regulator of inﬂammation, oncogenesis, and apoptosis [26].The inﬂammatory effect of UVR is due to induction of the oxidized membrane lipids to producearachidonic acid released that is converted by cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX) into prostaglandins(PG), amplifying the recruitment of inﬂammatory cells to the area [ 27]. UVR activates AP-1, whichcontributes to photocarcinogenesis and the damage on ECM. AP-1 interferes with synthesis collagens Iand III blocking the effect of transforming growth factor- β(TGF- β). TGF- βenhances collagen genetranscription. In addition, activation of AP-1 by UV irradiation causes overexpression of matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs) in human skin and extracellular matrix degradation. NF- κB regulation
can also be modiﬁed by the activation of AP-1 [28].2.1.2. DNA PhotodamageUV radiation, mostly UVB, alters DNA by stimulation of the formation of speciﬁc DNAphotoproducts, e.g., thymine-thymine dimers and pyrimidine-pyrimidine dimers. In addition, UVRdamages telomeres, due to their elevated TT and G bases proportion. Thymine-thymine dimers areextremely important, mainly when they altered the tumor suppressor gene p53. In this regard, p53mutations make cells resistant to apoptosis, with cells entering mitosis without having undergoneDNA repair [ 29]. UV-B radiation also damages DNA through ROS. These may promote the generationof 8-hydroxy-21-deoxyguanosine (8-OH-dG), a marker of DNA oxidative damage [ 30]. ROS damagegenomic DNA, giving rise to mutations in critical genes that may lead to cancer development [29].Finally, UV effect on mitochondria induces mtDNA “common deletion”, increasing ROS and adecreased cellular ability to generate energy [31].2.1.3. Photoinﬂammation
2.1.3. PhotoinﬂammationAcute and chronic exposure to UVR causes skin cancer through oxidation and inﬂammatoryreactions. Acute UVR in the skin leads to erythema, edema, and inﬂammation [ 32]. Edema isdue to excess leakage from hyperpermeable blood vessels by leukocyte inﬁltration, resulting ininﬂammation. In addition, transcription factors that control the inﬂammatory response such asNF-κB play critical roles in the pathogenesis of UVB-induced inﬂammation and carcinogenesis [ 33].UV-induced ROS up-regulate the expression of the cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme (COX-2) [ 34]. COX-2and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production contribute to the earliest stages of inﬂammation. In addition,other pro-inﬂammatory cytokines actively contribute to inﬂammation, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) andtumor necrosis factor- α(TNF- α) [35]. Other pro-inﬂammatory mechanisms of UV radiation includeROS-induced peroxidation, which damages cellular membranes and induces activation of different
isoforms of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). UV-induction of iNOS seems to mediate VEGF-inducedangiogenesis and hyperpermeability [36].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 4 of 212.1.4. PhotoimmunosuppressionUV radiation induces immunosuppression, anergy and immunological tolerance. This is mediatedby a marked decrease of the numbers of epidermal Langerhans cells (eLC), which leads to T helper1 lymphocyte (Th1) clonal anergy [ 37]. The essential mechanism implicated in this process is theisomerization of the urocanic acid [3-(1 H-imidazol-4-yl)-2-propenoic acid; UCA]. The isomerization oftrans -UCA to the cis-isomer converts UV radiation into a biologically active identiﬁable signal thatactivates immune suppression [38].In addition to alterations in antigen presentation and processing, the immunosuppressive effectsof UV radiation are mediated by immunomodulatory molecules. These include both pro-inﬂammatoryand anti-inﬂammatory molecules, such as prostaglandin PGE2, TNF- αand IL-10 [39].2.2. Solar Non-Ultraviolet (UV) (Visible and Infrared) Radiation and Photoaging
UVA and UVB radiation have been the main focus of research on photoaging, but recent studiesindicate a possible role for IR and VIS radiation in the pathogenesis of photoaging [16].2.2.1. Infrared (IR) RadiationThe photon energy of IR is much lower than that of UV . The largest part of solar IR radiationis IR A (IRA). IRA deeply penetrates into human skin but IR B (IRB) and IR C (IRC) only affectthe upper layers of the skin [ 40,41]. Near-infrared (NIR) radiation (IRA: 760–1440 nm and IRB:1440–3000 nm) and high doses of IRA radiation can produce deleterious effects in the human skin,but low doses of NIR radiation are indicated for the management of different cutaneous processes.In human skin, doses therapeutically acceptable lie in the range between 1 and 10 J/cm2. In thisregard, low doses of NIR radiation has been used in the treatment of several diseases as superﬁcialwounds healing, rheumatoid arthritis and Achilles tendinitis. Dermal ﬁbroblasts are the main cell
responsible for the beneﬁcial action of IR radiation [ 21]. The molecular basis of the therapeutics effectsincludes: activation of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase; change the redox state of mitochondriacell membrane and activation the formation of NF- κB; increase expression of TGF- β1 and extracellularmatrix proteins mediated by NF- κB; stimulation of reparative processes by extracellular matrix proteinsand stimulation of ﬁbroblast activity mediated by TGF- β1 activation [21].IR radiation, however, can also have deleterious effects on the skin. A possible role for IR radiationin the pathogenesis of photoaging was proposed as early as 1982 by Kligman et al. [ 42]. More recentstudies indicate that IR irradiation generates free radicals in human skin [ 43–45]. It is also known thatIR radiation depletes the levels of beta-carotene and lycopene in human skin that only can be explainedby the action of free radicals. Concerning the molecular mechanisms IRA-induced photoaging,
mitochondrial ROS generation was shown to be the initiating event [ 46] followed by increased MMP-1via activation of the MAPK, speciﬁcally extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-JUN N-terminalkinase (JNK), and p38 kinase [ 42]. It was also shown that IRA leads to an overexpression of MMP-1without an increase in expression tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) [ 47], and increasedalso MMP-9 [ 48]. Finally, IRA seems to be conﬁned to the dermal compartment and decreases thesynthesis of the collagen itself. IR, as described before, induces similar effects to UV , but the essentialmechanisms implicated in their actions are substantially different.Besides the effect on metalloproteases, IRA produces other cellular responses, e.g., angiogenesisand increased the number of mast cells, both events associated with skin aging [ 49,50]. However, IRAdecreases the cell turnover of keratinocytes and Langerhans cell density, inﬂuencing wound repair
and altering the levels of transforming growth factor beta (TGB- β) [51].
decreases the cell turnover of keratinocytes and Langerhans cell density, inﬂuencing wound repairand altering the levels of transforming growth factor beta (TGB- β) [51].2.2.2. Visible Light (VIS) RadiationUntil recently, VIS (400–700 nm) has been regarded to have no signiﬁcant cutaneous photobiologiceffects. This was not entirely true, as an early study from Pathak et al. [ 18]. Pathak in 1962, reported
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 5 of 21that exposure to VIS results in immediate pigment-darkening (IPD) [ 18]. In 1984, Kollias and Baqer [ 19]performed an in vivo study to observe the pigmentary induced by VIS and NIR light. They reportedthat the pigmentation may occur without a signiﬁcant UV component. This led to the hypothesis thatVIS could contribute to photoaging and pigmentary conditions. This has been proven formally inrecent years [16,20].VIS contributes to ROS production in the skin [ 17]. Exposure of human skin to increased doses ofVIS, from 40 to 180 J ¨cm´2, resulted increase in ROS production in a dose-dependent manner, similarto UV [ 20]. VIS produces DNA damage indirectly through the generation of ROS. It has been veriﬁed inmelanoma cells and ﬁbroblasts that there was no correlation between cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers(CPD) production and micronucleus formation induced by VIS [52].
The effect of VIS in the ECM is similar to that of UVR, IR plus VIS increased MMP-1 and MMP-9expression and decrease type I procollagen levels in human skin in vivo , and recruited macrophagesto the irradiated site [53]. Along with ROS generation by VIS, it has recently been proven that visibleblue-violet light induces free radicals in human skin in vivo . Using a radiation source of blue-violetlight, the concentration of skin carotenoids was measured noninvasively using resonance Ramanspectroscopy over a period of 24 h after irradiation. Irradiation of human skin with blue-violet lightinduces signiﬁcant dose-dependent degradation of carotenoids. This degradation of carotenoidsreﬂects how blue-violet light generated free radicals and ROS in skin. In all individuals tested, theconcentration of skin carotenoids declined in a similar manner as that caused by the infrared orultraviolet radiation, leading to the conclusion that also the blue-violet light at high doses could
cause damage equivalent to UV and IR radiation on human skin [54]. Regarding pigment darkening,the early studies described above have been conﬁrmed late. In fact, recent studies reported that theimmediate pigment darkening (IPD) induced by VIS is not signiﬁcantly different from that producedby UV fraction suggesting that both UV and VIS interact with the same precursor [ 55]. Also in relationto UV radiation, both UVA and VIS can induce pigmentation in skin types IV–VI but the pigmentationinduced by VIS was darker and more sustained [ 56]. These ﬁndings have potential implications andclinical relevance because the possible role of VIS in the pathogenesis of photo-induced pigmentarydisorders, such as melasma or post inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation [16].Finally, although sunscreens protect against UV photons efﬁciently, they are not as efﬁcientstopping VIS and IR photons. Thus, the levels of skin ROS may overcome the natural antioxidant
reservoir in the skin and cause skin damage [ 14,20]. This line of reasoning underlies therapies aimedat increasing the antioxidant threshold of the skin, as they seem to effectively increase its bufferingability against ROS induced by solar radiation [51].3.Polypodium leucotomos (Fernblock®) as Photoprotective AgentsPolypodium leucotomos (PL) (synonyms Phlebodium aureum ) is a fern of the Polypodiaceae family,genus Phlebodium , native to Central and South America. It has been traditionally used for treating skindiseases (e.g., psoriasis and atopic dermatitis) in the original areas [57].The interest in the mechanism of action and overall properties of PL has spiked in recentyears, mainly focusing on its antioxidant properties [ 58–62]. PL displays anti-inﬂammatory andimmunoregulatory effects and also suppresses tumor growth [ 57]. It also accelerates the removal ofUV-induced photoproducts, which contributes to its photoprotective effects [63–68].
Fernblock®is controlled aqueous extract of the leaves of PL that has been developed to take
UV-induced photoproducts, which contributes to its photoprotective effects [63–68].Fernblock®is controlled aqueous extract of the leaves of PL that has been developed to takeadvantage to take advantage of the photoprotective properties of ferns by providing a consistentphenolic content.PL has been marketed in Europe since 2000, both in topical and oral formats and, presently, PL iscommercialized in more than 26 countries, including the United States. In the United States, PL hasbeen available as a dietary supplement since 2006 [ 69]. Studies on the pharmacology of Fernblock®and their biological disposition have demonstrated that its toxicity is negligible even at high doses [ 70].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 6 of 21The photoprotective dose in healthy humans is 7.5 mg/kg [ 67,68]. PL, used topically, inhibitederythema at 0.1% (weight/volume) [ 71]. Its mechanisms of action and effects on successful clinicaloutcomes, and continued interest in the use of natural products such as polyphenols, have placed PLas an emerging trend as photoprotector and antioxidant [57,60].3.1. CompositionThe chemical composition of PL has identiﬁed the following compounds: p-coumaric, chlorogenic,caffeic, ferulic and vanillic acids. Phenolic compounds are secondary metabolites ubiquitously presentin plants. In the human diet, polyphenols are the most abundant antioxidants [ 72,73] and they arepresent in beverages and foods of botanic origin. Moreover, they have many beneﬁcial effects onhuman health. Phenolic compounds in the diet have beneﬁcial effects in mammalian cells, including
antioxidant activity, modulation of gene expression and inhibition of tumorigenesis in differentmodels [73].High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) revealed that PL contains several phenoliccompounds that were separated according to their retention time. The most abundant were phenolicacids (cinannamic acid), speciﬁcally 3-methoxy-4-hydroxycinnamic acids (ferulic), 4-hydroxycinnamicacid (p-coumaric), 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid (caffeic), 3-methoxy-4-hydroxybenzoic acid (vanillic),3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid (caffeic), and 3-caffeoilquinic acid (chlorogenic) [ 9]. To study whetherthese could be responsible for the beneﬁcial effects of the extract, their absorption rate was studiedin vitro . Their absorption of the phenolic compounds was studied using Caco-2 cells in order toresemble the intestinal barrier. Their antioxidative capacity was evaluated by the luminol/H 2O2assay.Finally, their metabolism was assessed using cultured primary rat hepatocytes. The most powerful
antioxidants were ferulic and caffeic acids. The PL components increased the antioxidant capacity in aconcentration-dependent manner. For all tested substances, the apparent permeability was similar tohuman post-oral administration absorption of 70%–100%. Coumaric, vanillic acids and ferulic acidswere metabolized by CYP450-dependent mono-oxygenases. They were partially conjugated to sulfateand glucuronic acid [10].3.2. Cellular and Molecular Evidence of the Photoprotective Properties of Fernblock®PL extract constitutes the basis of Fernblock®. Oral intake of PL protects against the effect ofUV-induced oxidative stress. Early studies described the anti-tumoral effect of PL extracts and othersfrom similar ferns [ 74]. These results were conﬁrmed in a hairless albino mouse model, in whichtopically applied PL inhibited skin tumor formation after UVB irradiation [ 75]. The anti-tumoral
properties of PL likely reside in its protective effect against UV induced DNA damage [ 65,68]. Inaddition, PL blocked the effect of UV radiation on the expression of COX-2, which is an inducibleenzyme responsible for prostaglandin synthesis that is also involved in carcinogenesis. Finally, PLinduced activation of the tumor suppressor p53 and inhibits epidermal proliferation, decreasingthe number of cyclin D1 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) positive cells induced byUVR [64,76].Regarding the anti-inﬂammatory properties, in skin irradiated with UVB and UVA radiation,PL successfully blocked the inﬂammatory response elicited by of UV radiation [ 65,71]. PL decreasedphototoxicity during Psoralens + UVA (PUVA) therapy [ 67,77]. Moreover, oral PL inhibitedPUVA-induced inﬁltration of neutrophils, mast cells and formation sunburn cells, and inhibitedthe observed decrease of epidermal Langerhans cells (eLC) associated with these treatments. The
beneﬁcial effect of PL is probably due to decreased DNA damage and apoptosis, and correlates wellwith the reduction of skin photodamage [61].
beneﬁcial effect of PL is probably due to decreased DNA damage and apoptosis, and correlates wellwith the reduction of skin photodamage [61].In addition to its antioxidant activity, PL bears promise in the treatment and prevention ofphotoaging, due to its proven effects on extracellular matrix remodeling. PL inhibits severalmatrix MMPs, by inducing TIMP , elastin, TGF- β, and different types of collagen [ 78], thuspromoting regeneration.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 7 of 21At a cellular level, PL prevents membrane damage and lipid peroxidation induced by UV . PL alsoblocks UV-mediated disarray of the actin cytoskeleton with the loss of cell–cell adhesion and cell–ECMadhesion [ 79]. Finally, PL inhibits keratinocyte and ﬁbroblast cell death induced by UV radiation [ 66].In summary, oral supplementation of the natural antioxidant PL extract affords the followingphotoprotective effects: (a) decreased pro-inﬂammatory mechanisms of UV radiation includeROS-induced peroxidation; (b) decreased of UV-induced oxidative DNA damage; (c) increased inthe expression of active p53; (d) inhibition of UV-induced COX-2 enzyme levels; (e) reduction ofUV-induced nuclear transcription factors AP-1 and NF- κB; and (f) increase the levels of TIMP . All ofthese effects are related to the prevention of photoaging and photocarcinogenesis (Figure 1).Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 , 17, 1026 7 of 20
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 , 17, 1026 7 of 20  In summary, oral supplementation of the natura l antioxidant PL extract affords the following photoprotective effects: (a) decreased pro-infla mmatory mechanisms of UV radiation include  ROS-induced peroxidation; (b) decreased of UV-induced oxidative DNA damage; (c) increased in the expression of active p53; (d) inhibition of UV-induced COX-2 enzyme levels; (e) reduction of  UV-induced nuclear transcri ption factors AP-1 and NF- κB; and (f) increase the levels of TIMP. All of these effects are related to the prevention of photoaging and photocarcinogenesis (Figure 1).  Figure 1.  Polypodium leucotomos  (PL) extract’s anti-UV effects: ( A) decreases pro-inflammatory mechanisms of UV radiation include ROS-induced lipid peroxidation; ( B) decreases UV-induced DNA damage; ( C) increases the expression of active p53; ( D) inhibits UV-induc ed Cox-2 enzyme
levels; ( E) reduces UV-induced nuclear tran scription factors AP-1 and NF- κB; (F) reduces MMPs production; ( G) decreases inflammation and vasodilation; and ( H) inhibits skin immunodepression. Black arrows indicate increased/decreased effects du e to UVR. ROS, reactive oxygen species; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; UV, ultraviolet; ECM, extr acellular matrix; CPD, cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; MAPK, mito gen-activated protein ki nases; AP-1, activator protein-1; NF- κB, nuclear factor kappa beta; TGF- β, transforming growth factor- β.; COX, cyclooxygenase enzymes; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; TNF- α, tumor necrosis factor- α; iNOS, isoforms of nitric oxide synthase; RANK, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand. 3.3. Fernblock in Photodamage and DNA Repair and Cellular Homeostasis When administered orally, PL inhibits UV -mediated DNA damage and mutagenesis.
It prevented the UV-induced accu mulation of CPD [65,68,76]. This may be due to an improved function of the DNA repair systems, due to PL  capacity to decreased oxidative damage [66]. In humans and in a xeroderma pigmentosum rode nt model (XPC), PL inhibits the UV-mediated formation of thymine dimers [65,68]. XPC rodent model exhibit aggravates inflammatory response to UV irradiation and a reduction in their DNA repair capability. As a result, they have more risk to develop skin cancer. PL also reduced systemic oxidative damage, as shown by the reduction of 8-OH-dG-positive cells. Orally supplementation with PL reduces the level of basal oxidative stress (quantified as a Figure 1. Polypodium leucotomos (PL) extract’s anti-UV effects: ( A) decreases pro-inﬂammatorymechanisms of UV radiation include ROS-induced lipid peroxidation; ( B) decreases UV-inducedDNA damage; ( C) increases the expression of active p53; ( D) inhibits UV-induced Cox-2 enzyme
levels; ( E) reduces UV-induced nuclear transcription factors AP-1 and NF- κB; (F) reduces MMPsproduction; ( G) decreases inﬂammation and vasodilation; and ( H) inhibits skin immunodepression.
levels; ( E) reduces UV-induced nuclear transcription factors AP-1 and NF- κB; (F) reduces MMPsproduction; ( G) decreases inﬂammation and vasodilation; and ( H) inhibits skin immunodepression.Black arrows indicate increased/decreased effects due to UVR. ROS, reactive oxygen species; mtDNA,mitochondrial DNA; UV , ultraviolet; ECM, extracellular matrix; CPD, cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers;MMP , matrix metalloproteinase; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinases; AP-1, activator protein-1;NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa beta; TGF- β, transforming growth factor- β.; COX, cyclooxygenaseenzymes; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; TNF- α, tumor necrosis factor- α; iNOS, isoforms of nitric oxidesynthase; RANK, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclearfactor kappa-B ligand.3.3. Fernblock in Photodamage and DNA Repair and Cellular HomeostasisWhen administered orally, PL inhibits UV-mediated DNA damage and mutagenesis. It prevented
the UV-induced accumulation of CPD [ 65,68,76]. This may be due to an improved function of the DNArepair systems, due to PL capacity to decreased oxidative damage [66].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 8 of 21In humans and in a xeroderma pigmentosum rodent model (XPC), PL inhibits the UV-mediatedformation of thymine dimers [ 65,68]. XPC rodent model exhibit aggravates inﬂammatory responseto UV irradiation and a reduction in their DNA repair capability. As a result, they have more risk todevelop skin cancer.PL also reduced systemic oxidative damage, as shown by the reduction of 8-OH-dG-positive cells.Orally supplementation with PL reduces the level of basal oxidative stress (quantiﬁed as a number of8-OH-dG-positive cells), advancing that PL reduces constitutive oxidative DNA damage. 8-OH-dGis an important marker of early DNA damage and is mutagenic, favoring GC ÑTA mutations. Inaddition, PL decreased the levels of 8-OH-dG even before UV irradiation, suggesting that PL reducesconstitutive oxidative DNA damage [65].Finally, another clinical study has revealed that oral PL decreases UVA-dependent mitochondrial
DNA damage by decreased common deletions (CD), which are mitochondrial markers of chronic UVAirradiation in ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes [31] (Table 1).Table 1. Solar (ultraviolet (UV), infrared (IR), and visible light (VIS)) protection effects ofPolypodium leucotomos (PL) and molecular target.UV EffectsTissue/Cellular/Molecular TargetPL Counteracts UV-Effects ReferencesDNA damageInhibit of DNA mutations [65,68]Inhibit accumulation of CPD [65,68,76]Inhibit of 8-hydroxy-21-deoxyguanosine [65]Inhibit of mtDNA mutations [31]InﬂammationInhibit of TNF- α, iNOS, NF- κB, AP-1, COX-2 [35,57,65]Decrease mast cell, neutrophils, and macrophageinﬁltration[59,61,62]Inhibit of PUVA induced vasodilation [71]ImmunosuppressionInhibit of UVR-mediated Langerhans cell depletion [67,68,77]Protect DCs from UV-induced apoptosis [66–68]Induce DCs production of anti-inﬂammatory cytokines(IL-12)[80]Reduce of glutathione oxidation in blood and epidermis [66]
Interfere the cis-UCA isomerization [81]Photo CarcinogenesisReduce the number of mice showing skin tumors at 8weeks after the cessation of chronic UVB exposure[75]Increase the number of p53(+) cells [63,65,82]Increase TIMP [65]Inhibit of angiogenesis [77]Inhibit of epidermal cell proliferation [68,76]Enhance the antioxidant plasma capacity [71,82]UV–ECM damageInhibit MMP-1 (also in melanoma cells) [78,83]Increase TIMP (also in melanoma cells) [78]Increase the synthesis of types I, III, and V collagen [78]IR–VIS EffectsTissue/Cellular/Molecular TargetPL Counteracts IR–VIS Effects [84]UV–ECM damage Inhibit MMP-1 [84]mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; ECM, extracellular matrix; CPD, cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers; TNF- α, tumornecrosis factor- α; iNOS, isoforms of nitric oxide synthase; NF- κB, nuclear factor kappa beta; AP-1, activatorprotein-1; COX-2, cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme; PUVA, Psoralens + UVA; DC, dendritic cells; UVR, ultraviolet
Radiation; UCA, urocanic acid; MMP-1, matrix metalloproteinase-1; TIMP , tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase.3.4. Fernblock Effects on InﬂammationEvidence of the role of PL in preventing UV-mediated inﬂammation stems from experiments thatrevealed that oral PL prevented erythema in UV-treated human skin [ 68,71,77] and also in PUVA-based
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 9 of 21therapy [ 67], which is often used in the treatment of vitiligo, psoriasis, and other inﬂammatory skindiseases [ 85,86]. The molecular basis of its anti-inﬂammatory properties could be due to its ability tosuppress the expression of the following factors: (i) pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as TNF- αandinducible NOS (iNOS) [ 35]; (ii) redox-sensitive transcriptional factors AP-1 and NF- κB [35,57,87]; and(iii) COX-2 and PGE2 [65].Solar-simulated radiation (SSR) experiments in vitro showed that PL blocks the triggering ofactivation of activator protein 1 (AP-1) and NF- κB induced by UV radiation [ 35]. SSR-inducedactivation of AP1 and NF- κB in HaCaT cells, which was partially inhibited by PL treatment to the cells.This is a speciﬁc effect of PL that cannot be completely explained by to its antioxidant properties, astreatment of the cells with a bona ﬁde antioxidant (AA) did not prevent the activation of AP-1 and
NF-κB induced by solar-simulated radiation (SSR) [ 35]. However, some of the genes responsive to AP-1are oxidative sources, including COX-2. UV-irradiated skin and tumors skin induced by UV radiationoverexpress the inducible isoform COX-2, and COX-2 inhibition reduces photocarcinogenesis.Importantly, PL inhibits expression of COX-2 induced by the UV-radiation [ 65]. COX-2in vivo induces the synthesis of PGE2, which is a potent inducer of vasodilation. Inhibition ofCOX by PL decreased the presence of mast cells and leukocyte extravasation in the irradiatedarea [ 65,67,68]. PL also inhibits apoptosis and cell death [ 35,63]in vivo and in vitro thereby preventingapoptosis/necrosis-triggered inﬂammation.The photoprotective effect of PL in SSR experiments with HaCaT cells supports theanti-inﬂammatory PL effects by counteracting SSR-dependent induction of TNF- αexpression andproduction of nitric oxide (NO). PL decreases iNOS up-regulation induced by UV light [ 35]. This
correlates well with inhibition of pro-inﬂammatory, UV-induced AP1 and NF- κB (Table 1).A recent study addressed the effect of PL supplementation in the inﬂammatory reaction of theskin and tanning following a single exposure to solar-simulated radiation (SSR). A daily oral supply ofPL reduced the inﬂammatory reaction induced by a single exposure to SSR with a signiﬁcant increaseerythematosus threshold. Conversely, it had no effect on the pigmentary reaction. Evaluation ofchanges in pigmentation in vivo should also be noted, because antioxidants reduce the phototoxicdamage and subsequent elimination of keratinocytes of the upper epidermal layers, leading to longerretention of these cells and their skin melanosomes [88].In conclusion, oral PL supplementation reduces the phototoxic erythematous reaction and ifsuper-erythemogenic dose is delivered, it enhances skin recovery. All these activities likely play an
important role in the acute and chronic harmful effects of sun exposure (Table 1).3.5. Fernblock and ImmunosuppressionSkin immune suppression is caused by the uncontrolled overexposure to UVR. Preventivemeasures, including photoprotection, are helpful. PL has shown immunomodulatory properties [89].PL is as an oral antioxidant and photoimmunoprotective agent by several mechanisms: (a) interferingwith cis-UCA isomerization [ 81]; (b) inhibiting of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as TNF- α[35];(c) anti-apoptotic effects on dendritic cells (DCs) and eLC; and [ 67,68]; (d) inhibiting glutathioneoxidation [66,77,80].Elimination of eLC after UV radiation is induced by direct cell apoptosis, inﬂammatoryphenomena, the aberrant morphology of eLC, and inhibition of adhesion molecules that are necessaryfor DCs migration from the epidermis to the deep skin layers. Efﬁciently, PL in vivo prevents eLCdepletion produced by UV irradiation as well as the appearance of abnormal DCs [66–68].
Similar results were obtained irradiating blood dendritic cells using a solar simulator. UV
depletion produced by UV irradiation as well as the appearance of abnormal DCs [66–68].Similar results were obtained irradiating blood dendritic cells using a solar simulator. UVradiation-induced a reduced expression of molecules activating for antigen capture. On the otherhand, solar-simulated radiation produces overexpression of TNF- αand IL-10 by DCs, but noIL-12. Pretreatment with PL partially in vivo blocked secretion of these cytokines by UVR andconsistently revealed higher numbers of LCs in PL-treated, the irradiated group [ 60]. Multiplemolecular mechanisms underlie enhanced DCs survival, including in vitro inhibition of trans -UCA
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 10 of 21isomerization [ 81] and blockade in vitro of iNOS expression induced by UV radiation [ 30], whichgenerates altered nitrogen oxide metabolites that cause immunosuppression by eliminating skinDCs and enhancement of endogenous systemic antioxidant systems that lead to decreased oxidizedintermediates, e.g., oxidized glutathione [66] (Table 1).3.6. Fernblock, an Anti-UV-Induced Tumor Progression AgentSeveral research works have reported the anti-tumor effects of different fern extracts, includingPL [57,87]. In this regard, in the hairless albino mouse model, PL, topically applied, blocked skin tumorformation and photoaging resulting from exposure to UVB radiation, even after discontinuation ofthe treatment for eight weeks [ 75]. In addition to blocking ROS generation efﬁciently, PL has shownanti-mutagenic properties and also cell protection ability from immortalized mutations preventing
carcinogenesis [ 65]. Furthermore, PL induced activation of p53 [ 59,65]. In agreement with increased p53activity, PL also decreased UV radiation-induced cell proliferation [ 68]. In agreement with inhibitionof epidermal proliferation, PL decreases the number of cyclin D1 and PCNA positive epidermal cellsinduced by UVR [ 76]. As outlined above, PL inhibits the overexpression of COX-2 induced by UVradiation [65,76], which is also involved in carcinogenesis.PL enhanced both p53 expression and activation in irradiated XPC (Xpc(+/´)) mice [ 65]. Activationof p53 has been shown to decrease the expression of COX-2, thereby reducing the inﬂammatoryresponse [ 65]. Levels of phospho-p53 Serine 15, presumably an active form of p53, were increasedin the skin of PL-treated mice, which inversely correlated with decreased COX-2 levels, suggestingthat orally administered PL reduces UV-induced COX-2 levels in mouse skin through, at least in part,
by activating tumor suppressor protein p53. Previous in vivo studies reported that PL increased p53in UV-irradiated hairless mice with a signiﬁcant enhancement of the antioxidant plasma capacity.Importantly, the antioxidant activity of PL was not lost during digestion but reached the bloodstream(increased oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC), in plasma). Furthermore, the observed increasein superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GP), and glutathione S-transferase (GST)activities cannot be explained as a function of increased expression as erythrocytes are anucleated [ 82].Instead, it was postulated that PL may produce an allosteric activation of these enzymes. In the case ofSOD, their activity decreased in both irradiated animals and vehicle-treated, and PL prevented suchdecrease of activity, but PL did not increase their expression, suggesting an activating modulatory effect.
A recent study on the mouse model reported the capacity of an orally administered PL extractto delay tumorigenesis induced by chronic exposure to UVR. PL also diminished the number ofskin tumors in the surrounding non tumoral skin of animal. This effect correlated with signiﬁcantchanges in several oxidative stress markers in blood and skin, without changes in the expression ofspeciﬁc antioxidant enzymes. The observed photoprotective effect of PL can be due to its anti-oxidantproperties and its capacity to produce allosteric changes in some enzyme systems [63].Finally, PL complemented the effect of ascorbate and limited melanoma cell growth and theextracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling through, among other effects, by increasing the expression ofTIMP-1 [ 65]. Oral administration of PL could offer signiﬁcant photoprotective effects essential to thetreatment and prevention of UV-induced skin cancer (Table 1).
3.7. Fernblock and Extracellular Remodeling: Collagen, Elastin, and Matrix Metalloproteinases NetworkThe remodeling of the ECM in cancer or skin aging is due to reduced biosynthesis of ECM and/or
3.7. Fernblock and Extracellular Remodeling: Collagen, Elastin, and Matrix Metalloproteinases NetworkThe remodeling of the ECM in cancer or skin aging is due to reduced biosynthesis of ECM and/orincreased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [ 90], inhibition of collagen synthesis, orinhibition of TIMP . TGF- βis a primary regulator of ECM [ 91]. Aging skin displays lower levels ofTGF- β, or reductions of its mediator, whereas TGF- βlevels are enhanced in cancer. UV radiationreduces the microﬁbrillar network in the dermis and in the epidermal-dermal layer and contributes tothe appearance of aberrant elastic ﬁbers.PL counteracts these alterations via its photoprotective, antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatoryproperties. PL exhibits a strong anti-aging effect. Additional anti-aging effects of PL include inhibition
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 11 of 21in vitro of the expression of MMP and increased expression of an endogenous metalloprotease inhibitor,TIMP . Inhibition of MMP-1 expression by PL in keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts has been reported [ 83].In ﬁbroblasts, PL inhibited the expression of MMP-2 and simultaneously stimulated TIMPs (TIMP-1and TIMP-2). In vitro , in melanoma cells, PL preferentially inhibited MMP-1 in an AP-1-dependentmanner, which is consistent with reduced degradation of interstitial collagen, and stimulated TIMP-2,implicated in the inhibition of basement membrane remodeling [78].Regarding a direct effect on the ECM, PL stimulated deposition of types I and V collagenin UV-irradiated ﬁbroblasts and types I, III, and V collagen in non-irradiated ﬁbroblasts [ 78]. Itsstimulatory effect on types I and V collagen was observed in both UVA- or UVB-irradiated ﬁbroblasts,though UVB radiation decreased the level of stimulation of types I and V expression, and UVA
radiation signiﬁcantly counteracted the stimulation of collagen type I (COLI α1) promoter activity byPL. Conversely, UV radiation decreases the PL induction of type III collagen. These data imply that PLpromotes the synthesis of types I and V collagen in UV radiation-exposed skin and the assembly ofﬁbrillar collagens in the sun-protected skin. PL also modulates the expression of cytokines that controlECM remodeling and the biology of the cells implicated in this process. Speciﬁcally, PL promotesexpression of TGF- βin non-irradiated or UV-irradiated ﬁbroblasts but inhibits TGF- βin melanomacells, which may be responsible for the observed inhibition of MMP-1 expression induced by in thesecells. This effect may be responsible for the observed inhibition of angiogenesis in vivo [78]. In thisregard, the effect of PL was largely similar to that of ascorbic acid.Stimulation of collagen expression was associated with the increase of TGF- β, whereas UVB
radiation-mediated inhibition of collagen synthesis correlated with decreased expression of TGF- β.However, UV radiation did not decrease PL stimulation of TGF- βexpression, which suggests that UVand PL regulate TGF- βexpression by separate, yet related, pathways [78].In summary, PL protects the ECM through two types of actions: one depends on its effect onECM proteolytic enzymes and the overexpression of TIMPs, and the second one is related to theexpression/assembly of structural collagens (types I, III, and V), and TGF- βin ﬁbroblasts. Theanti-cancer effect of PL encompasses the inhibition of MMPs and stimulation of TIMPs, and decreaseTGF- βin melanoma cells (Table 1).3.8. Fernblock and VIS and IR RadiationThe most recent attempt to palliate the above-mentioned deleterious effects of IR and VIS radiationwas performed with Fernblock. The González group has shown its clinical efﬁcacy in preventtheharmful effects of infrared-visible IR–VIS radiations [84] (Figure 2).
PL extract protects skin cells in vitro against IR–VIS radiations due to its antioxidant propertiesand to its ability to induce the repair of DNA damage. A prospective clinical trial has been performed,in which a gluteal biopsy from volunteers was performed before and after irradiating with IR–VIS(600 and 200 J/cm2, respectively). A mixture including Fernblock (960 mg/day) was administered for21 days, and a new irradiation and biopsy were performed. Histological and molecular studies wereperformed to determine the levels of MMP1 before and after irradiation with and without treatment.MMP1 was increased after irradiation with VIS-IR with respect to baseline in 71% of the patients,while this increase signiﬁcantly dropped (51.7%) in subjects treated with the oral photoprotector.Immunohistochemistry experiments revealed that irradiation did not signiﬁcantly affect the structureof the epidermis [84] (Table 1).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 12 of 21Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 , 17, 1026 11 of 20  Conversely, UV radiation decreases the PL inductio n of type III collagen. These data imply that PL  promotes the synthesis of types I and V collagen in  UV radiation-exposed skin and the assembly of fibrillar collagens in the sun-protected skin. PL  also modulates the expression of cytokines that control ECM remodeling and the biology of the cells implicated in this process. Specifically, PL promotes expression of TGF- β in non-irradiated or UV-irradiated fibroblasts but inhibits TGF- β in melanoma cells, which may be responsible for the observed inhibition of MMP-1 expression induced by in these cells. This effect may be responsible for the observed inhibition of angiogenesis in vivo [78]. In this regard, the effect of PL  was largely similar to that of ascorbic acid. Stimulation of collagen expression was associated with the increase of TGF- β, whereas UVB
radiation-mediated inhibition of collagen synthe sis correlated with decreased expression of TGF- β. However, UV radiation did not decrease PL  stimulation of TGF- β expression, which suggests that UV and PL regulate TGF- β expression by separate, yet related, pathways [78]. In summary, PL protects the ECM through two type s of actions: one depends on its effect on ECM proteolytic enzymes and the overexpression of  TIMPs, and the second one is related to the expression/assembly of structural coll agens (types I, III, and V), and TGF- β in fibroblasts. The  anti-cancer effect of PL encompasses the inhibition of  MMPs and stimulation of TIMPs, and decrease TGF-β in melanoma cells (Table 1). 3.8. Fernblock Derivative and VIS and IR Radiation The most recent attempt to palliate the abov e-mentioned deleterious effects of IR and VIS radiation was performed with Fernblock. The González group has shown its clinical efficacy in
preventthe harmful effects of infrared-visible IR–VIS radiations [84] (Figure 2).  Figure 2.  Tested anti IR–VIS effects of Polypodium leucotomos  (PL) extract: ( A) ultraviolet radiation (UV), visible light (VIS ), and infrared radiation (IR) de pth penetration in the skin; and ( B) main PL effects reflect its capacity to decrease MMP-1 upregulation induced by cutaneous exposure to  IR–VIS. Black arrows indicate increa sed/decreased effects due to IR–VIS. Figure 2. Tested anti IR–VIS effects of Polypodium leucotomos (PL) extract: ( A) ultraviolet radiation (UV),visible light (VIS), and infrared radiation (IR) depth penetration in the skin; and ( B) main PL effectsreﬂect its capacity to decrease MMP-1 upregulation induced by cutaneous exposure to IR–VIS. Blackarrows indicate increased/decreased effects due to IR–VIS.4. Potential Use of Fernblok in the Treatment in Other Skin Pathology4.1. Melanoma High-Risk Patients
4.1. Melanoma High-Risk PatientsMelanoma (MM) is a devastating disease, with high rate of metastasis. The constant increase intheir incidence and chemotherapy resistance of MM has stressed the importance of its prevention. It isbecoming increasingly clear that solar UV radiation is a major risk factor in the etiology of MM (andphotoprotection is the only primary preventive method against its development).Approximately 10% of MM occurs in a familiar context. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A(CDKN2A ) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 ( CDK4 ) have been identiﬁed as MM susceptibility genes. Ithas been shown that 25% to 50% of familial MM kindred are affected by the mutation of CDKN2A [64].Beyond genes known to be involved in a high degree of susceptibility to cutaneous MM, othergenes have been proposed to confer moderate risk. Thus, variants in Melanocortin 1 receptor ( MC1R )gene codiﬁed the synthesis of a red/yellow pheomelanin and induce oxidative cell damage [64].
A recent in vivo study has addressed the possible role of oral PL extract to increasephotoprotection in patients with high risk of MM. First, that study described that PL improved systemic
A recent in vivo study has addressed the possible role of oral PL extract to increasephotoprotection in patients with high risk of MM. First, that study described that PL improved systemicphotoprotection by decreasing UV-induced erythema and increasing the minimal erythematous dose(UV-MED) in patients with patients with familial MM and sporadic MM, and dysplastic nevussyndrome. Although not signiﬁcant, PL had a stronger effect on the MED in patients with familial MMthan in sporadic MM. The study could also prove that patients with familial MM, and those exhibitingpolymorphisms in MC1R and/or a mutated CDKN2A displayed the biggest difference in response totreatment with PL. According to this study, patients with lower basal MED (higher UVR sensibility)would beneﬁt the most from oral PL treatment. The results are very promising, suggesting the need to
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 13 of 21perform new studies with long-term administration of PL in patients having a high risk of developingMM, and with long-term follow-up [64] (Table 2).Table 2. Application of Polypodium leucotomos (PL) in the treatment of skin pathology.Pathology Potential Clinical Use of PL ReferencesMelanomaPL extract improves systemic photoprotection inpatients at risk of MM[64]The strongest effect of PL in patients with familialMM, those exhibiting a mutated CDKN2A and/orpolymorphisms in MC1R[64]Idiopathic PhotodermatosisPL signiﬁcant reduces skin reactions andsubjective symptoms.[92–94]Actinic KeratosisPL improves PDT clearance and decreases AKrecurrence rate at 6 months[95]Pigmentary DisordersVitiligo [96–99]Addition of PL to the treatment with NB-UVBshows an increased repigmentation mainly in thehead and neck areaMelasma [100]PL had decreased Mean Melasma Area andSeverity Index. Photographic assessment and
Severity Index. Photographic assessment andpatient self-assessments revealed mild and markedimprovement by PLAgingPL decreased the proposed skin agingoxidative damageSee Table 1MM, melanoma; PDT, photodynamic therapy; AK, actinic keratosis; NB-UVB, narrow-band UVB.4.2. Idiopathic PhotodermatosisThese lesions include clinical conditions that emerge after cutaneous exposure to sunlight. Someexamples include solar urticaria, polymorphic light eruption (PMLE), actinic prurigo and chronicactinic dermatitis [ 92,93]. A recent study has addressed the PL potential to counteract the appearanceof PMLE [ 93]. After two weeks of PL intake, it was observed a signiﬁcant reduction in positivephotoprovocation results and as well as a signiﬁcant delay in PMLE lesions formation. Despite thesmall number of patients and taking into account that this was an open study, its results suggested useof PL extract in the prevention of PMLE in severely affected patients.
Other studies including patients affected with PMLE have reported the beneﬁcial effects of PL.In those studies, patients exposed themselves to sunlight were treated with PL orally (480 mg/day).The response of the skin to sunlight exposure was compared to that occurring previously withoutPL. These studies displayed a relevant and signiﬁcant reduction of skin reaction and improvement ofsubjective symptoms [94,95] (Table 2).4.3. Actinic KeratosisActinic keratosis (AKs) is a common premalignant skin condition. Different of treatments areavailable, but photodynamic therapy (PDT) is one of the treatment most effectives for AKs. PDT couldinduce DNA-mutagenesis/immunosuppression, bearing to AKs therapeutic failure/recurrences. PLreduces immunosuppression induced by UV and mutagenesis. Patients who had at least two AKs onthe scalp were subjected to two PDT sessions, one-week apart. The ﬁrst group started oral treatment
with PL one week after the last session of PDT. Both treatment modalities reduced the number ofAKs. However, oral supplementation of PL added to PDT treatment increased clearance rate when
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 14 of 21compared to PDT alone and decreased recurrence rate of AKs within six months, supporting that oralPL may be used as a supplementary agent in the treatment of ﬁeld cancerization [95].4.4. Pigmentary Disorders4.4.1. VitiligoUVB phototherapy, narrow band (311–312 nm), is one of the most efﬁcient treatment optionsfor vitiligo vulgaris. The treatment promotes melanocyte reservoirs to counteract depigmentation.A double-blind, placebo-controlled study in patients with vitiligo showed that the use of PL andnarrow-band UVB (NB-UVB) increases repigmentation of the affected head and neck area affected [ 96].The observed effect might be attributable to the immunomodulatory and antioxidant properties of PLthat would counter the possible autoimmune and/or oxidative origin of the disease.Together with PL beneﬁcial effect on PUVA-therapy [ 97], these studies suggest that PL may be
general use in phototherapy protocols [ 98]. The addition of oral PL to NB-UVB for the treatment ofvitiligo vulgaris shows a tendency toward increasing the amount of pigment in the neck and headareas that nearly reaches statistical signiﬁcance. The repigmentation was more pronounced in patientswith light skin types. In a second study, patients with generalized vitiligo were randomized to receivea therapy with both NB-UVB and PL (twice-weekly NB-UVB and oral PL 480 mg daily) for up tosix months or NB-UVB phototherapy alone. The combination of PL and NB-UVB improved there-pigmentation by 40% compared to 22% percent for NB-UVB alone. All patients treated with PL andNB-UVB showed signiﬁcantly higher re-pigmentation [99] (Table 2).4.4.2. MelasmaMelasma, a common skin condition in adults, is an acquired hypermelanosis on sun-exposedareas of the skin. Several methods of treatment are available to patients with melasma; however,
developing novel targeted therapies could help to understand the pathogenesis and improve the skincondition, which has important social and psychological ramiﬁcations [101,102].A recent study has shown the efﬁcacy of PL for treating melasma. Female patients with melasmawere randomized to be treated for 12 weeks with oral PL or placebo twice daily [ 98]. Each patientapplied sun protection factor (SPF) 45 sunscreen daily. The group of patients treated with PL had asigniﬁcantly decreased in mean Melasma Area and Severity Index at 12 weeks of treatment with PL,whereas the placebo group did not [100] (Table 2).4.5. Premature AgingSkin aging is a time dependent event that results in changes in the appearance and the molecularcomposition of human skin. “Aging” should be seen as a combination of two biological processes:intrinsic or natural aging and the changes produced by the interaction of the skin with external
environment or extrinsic aging. Extrinsic aging is mostly synonymous with photoaging becauseUV-radiation induces damage in exposed skin [ 103]. Human skin contains many antioxidantsubstances (redox-active) and enzymes that continually dampen the oxidative effect of the environment.If these substances are not present or malfunction, oxidation can have deleterious effects, includingdarkening, skin damage, and aging.ROS affect nuclear DNA and also produce “common” medina deletion. As is well-known, theseROS-induced DNA alterations cause the generation 8-OH-dG. This mutation accumulates duringaging [ 104]. UV irradiation leads to the formation of CPD. The capacity in repairing CPD clearlydecreases with age [ 105]. This decrease in DNA damage repair capacity likely underlies the higherprevalence of skin cancer in older individuals. In addition, ROS are important factors in carcinogenesisand high levels of 8-OH-dG are found many types of cancers.
In aged skins, the alterations in the enzyme activities are not well characterized. However,disruption of Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPx4), an enzyme implicated in antioxidative defense,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 15 of 21displayed aging skin phenotypes, with an increase of lipid peroxidation, and with higher levelsof the COX-2 [103].In the context of aging, the disruption of the balance of the extracellular matrix plays an importantrole. The levels of skin collagen I, III and VII decrease in aging, which is exacerbated by the activationof MMPs. During the aging process, MMPs are upregulated but TIMP , are downregulated, withaccelerated turnover ECM [ 106]. UV-irradiation increases the expression of ROS and activation ofMAP-kinase, NF- κB and AP-1. Both AP-1 and NF- κB are important for the balance of proliferationand apoptosis, heavily involucrated in carcinogenesis in aged human skin. In addition to aging,UV-irradiation causes mutations in p53, which can lead to skin cancers [ 103]. In summary, PL protectsagainst skin photoaging and oxidative damage due to the known molecular interaction with the
intrinsic and extrinsic aging related factors (See Table 1).5. Fernblock: A Road to (Present and Future) Prevention of UV-, VIS-, and IR-MediatedSkin DamageFernblock exhibits a wide array of beneﬁcial effects revealing no signiﬁcant toxicity or allergenicity.Its dual route of administration supports its preventive activity against skin photodamage, not onlywhen given prior to sunlight exposure but also during exposure (Table 1, Figures 1 and 2). It may alsocontribute to the cutaneous wound-healing process that is required post exposure with potential as ananti-aging and anti-cancer tool. Most of its beneﬁcial effects are mediated by its antioxidant properties,both when administered topically and systemically. Recently, the positive effect of reducing IR–VISdamage has also been proposed. New evidence links PL to tumor development delay in mice, eitherby repairing the damaged DNA or by increasing apoptosis. Additional investigation will be addressed
to evaluate its effects in other parameters related to photoaging and photocarcinogenesis.Acknowledgments: This work has been partially supported by a grant from the Carlos III Health Institute,Ministry of Science and Innovation, Spain (PS09/01099). The authors want to dedicate this review article to thememory of Eduardo Reyes, a very special scientist, in recognition to his remarkable contribution in the ﬁeld.Author Contributions: All the authors have contributed equally to the work reported.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.Abbreviations8-OH-dG 8-Hydroxy-21-deoxyguanosineAP-1 Activator protein 1COLI α1 Collagen type ICD Common deletionCOX-2 Cyclooxygenase-2CPDs Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimersDC Dendritic cellseLC Epidermal Langerhans cellsGP Glutathione peroxidaseGPx4 Glutathione peroxidase 4GST Glutathione S-transferaseHPLC High-performance liquid chromatographyNB-UVB Narrow-band UVBNF-κB Nuclear factor kappa beta
NF-κB Nuclear factor kappa betaPL Polypodium leucotomosPMLE Polymorphic light eruptionPUVA Psoralens + UVAROS Reactive oxygen speciesSOD Superoxide dismutaseSSR Solar simulated radiationTGF- β Transforming growth factor betaTh1 T helper 1 lymphocyteTIMP Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinaseTNF- α Tumor necrosis factor-alphaUCA Urocanic acid
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 16 of 21References1. NTP (National ToxiScology Program). Report on Carcinogens, Thirteenth Edition ; Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service: Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 2 October 2014. Available online:http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/roc13/ (accessed on 24 March 2016).2. De Vries, E.; Arnold, M.; Altsitsiadis, E.; Trakatelli, M.; Hinrichs, B.; Stockﬂeth, E.; Coebergh, J. Potentialimpact of interventions resulting in reduced exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation (UVA and UVB) onskin cancer incidence in four European countries, 2010–2050. Br. J. Dermatol. 2012 ,167, 53–62. [CrossRef][PubMed]3. Rundhaug, J.E.; Pavone, A.; Kim, E.; Fischer, S.M. The effect of cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression on skincarcinogenesis is context dependent. Mol. Carcinog. 2007 ,46, 981–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]4. Nishigori, C. Cellular aspects of photocarcinogenesis. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2006 ,5, 208–214. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]5. Działo, M.; Mierziak, J.; Korzun, U.; Preisner, M.; Szopa, J.; Kulma, A. The Potential of Plant Phenolics inPrevention and Therapy of Skin Disorders. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Del Rio, D.; Rodriguez-Mateos, A.; Spencer, J.P .; Tognolini, M.; Borges, G.; Crozier, A. Dietary (poly)phenolicsin human health: Structures, bioavailability, and evidence of protective effects against chronic diseases.Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2013 ,18, 1818–1892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]7. Wachtel-Galor, S.; Benzie, I.F.F. An introduction to its history, usage, regulation, current trends, and researchneeds. In Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects , 2nd ed.; Benzie, I.F.F., Wachtel-Galor, S., Eds.;CRC Press/Taylor & Francis: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011; pp. 1–10.8. Paur, I.; Carlsen, M.H.; Halvorsen, B.L.; Blomhoff, R. Antioxidants in herbs and spices roles in oxidative
stress and redox signaling. In Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects , 2nd ed.; Benzie, I.F.F.,Wachtel-Galor, S., Eds.; CRC Press/Taylor & Francis: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011; pp. 11–36.9. García, F.; Pivel, J.P .; Guerrero, A.; Brieva, A.; Martínez-Alcazar, M.P .; Caamano-Somoza, M.; González, S.Phenolic components and antioxidant activity of Fernblock, an aqueous extract of the aerial parts of the fernPolypodium leucotomos .Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol. 2006 ,28, 157–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]10. Gombau, L.; Garcia, F.; Lahoz, A.; Fabre, M.; Roda-Navarro, P .; Majano, P .; Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; Pivel, J.P .;Castell, J.V .; Gómez-Lechon, M.J.; et al. Polypodium leucotomos extract, Antioxidant activity and disposition.Toxicol. in Vitro 2006 ,20, 464–471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]11. Jansen, R.; Wang, S.Q.; Burnett, M.; Osterwalder, U.; Lim, H.W. Photoprotection: Part I. Photoprotection
by naturally occurring, physical, and systemic agents. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2013 ,69, 1–12. [CrossRef][PubMed]12. CIE. ILV: International Lighting Vocabulary; Standard CIE S 017/E:2011. Available online: http://cie.co.at/index.php?i_ca_id=827 (accessed on 24 March 2016).13. Holick, M.F. Sunlight, UV-radiation, vitamin D and skin cancer: How much sunlight do we need? Adv. Exp.Med. Biol. 2008 ,624, 1–15. [PubMed]14. Seifried, H.E.; Anderson, D.E.; Fisher, E.I.; Milner, J.A. A review of the interaction among dietary antioxidantsand reactive oxygen species. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2007 ,18, 567–579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Lohan, S.B.; Müller, R.; Albrecht, S.; Mink, K.; Tscherch, K.; Ismaeel, F.; Lademann, J.; Rohn, S.; Meinke, M.C.Free radicals induced by sunlight in different spectral regions— In vivo vs. ex vivo study. Exp. Dermatol.2016 ,25, 380–385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2016 ,25, 380–385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Sklar, L.R.; Almutawa, F.; Lim, H.W.; Hamzavi, I. Effects of ultraviolet radiation, visible light, and infraredradiation on erythema and pigmentation, a review. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2013 ,12, 54–64. [CrossRef][PubMed]
radiation on erythema and pigmentation, a review. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2013 ,12, 54–64. [CrossRef][PubMed]17. Mahmoud, B.H.; Hexsel, C.L.; Hamzavi, I.H.; Lim, H.W. Effects of Visible Light on the Skin. Photochem.Photobiol. 2008 ,84, 450–462. [CrossRef] [PubMed]18. Pathak, M.A.; Riley, F.C.; Fitzpatrick, T.B. Melanogenesis in human skin following exposure to long-waveultraviolet and visible light. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1962 ,39, 435–443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Kollias, N.; Baqer, A. An experimental study of the changes in pigmentation in human skin in vivo withvisible and near infrared light. Photochem. Photobiol. 1984 ,39, 651–659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 17 of 2120. Liebel, F.; Kaur, S.; Ruvolo, E.; Kollias, N.; Southall, M.D. Irradiation of Skin with Visible Light InducesReactive Oxygen Species and Matrix-Degrading Enzymes. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2012 ,132, 1901–1907.[CrossRef] [PubMed]21. Akhalaya, M.Y.; Maksimova, G.V .; Rubina, A.B.; Lademannb, J.; Darvinb, M.E. Molecular action mechanismsof solar infrared radiation and heat on human skin. Ageing Res. Rev. 2014 ,16, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Schroeder, P .; Pohl, C.; Calles, C.; Marks, C.; Wild, S.; Krutmann, J. Cellular response to infrared radiationinvolves retrograde mitochondrial signaling. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2007 ,43, 128–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Bickers, D.R.; Athar, M. Oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of skin disease. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2006 ,126,2565–2575. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Xu, Y.; Shao, Y.; Voorhees, J.J.; Fisher, G.J. Oxidative inhibition of receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase
κby ultraviolet irradiation activates epidermal growth factor receptor in human keratinocytes. J. Biol. Chem.2006 ,281, 27389–27397. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Hildesheim, J.; Fornace, A.J., Jr. The dark side of light, the damaging effects of UV rays and the protectiveefforts of MAP kinase signaling in the epidermis. DNA Repair 2004 ,3, 567–580. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Muthusamy, V .; Piva, T.J. The UV response of the skin, a review of the MAPK, NF κB and TNF αsignaltransduction pathways. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2010 ,302, 5–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Yaar, M.; Gilchrest, B.A. Photoageing, mechanism, prevention and therapy. Br. J. Dermatol. 2007 ,157, 874–887.[CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Cooper, S.J.; Bowden, G.T. Ultraviolet B regulation of transcription factor families: Roles of nuclearfactor-kappa B (NF- κB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) in UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis. Curr. CancerDrug Targets 2007 ,7, 325–334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Tornaletti, S.; Pfeifer, G.P . Slow repair of pyrimidine dimers at p53 mutation hotspots in skin cancer. Science1994 ,263, 1436–1438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]30. Cheng, K.C.; Cahill, D.S.; Kasai, H.; Nishimura, S.; Loeb, L.A. 8-Hydroxyguanine, an abundant form ofoxidative DNA damage, causes G-T and A-C substitutions. J. Biol. Chem. 1992 ,267, 166–172. [PubMed]31. Villa, A.; Viera, M.H.; Amini, S.; Huo, R.; Pérez, O.; Ruiz, P .; Amador, A.; Elgart, G.; Berman, B. Decrease ofultraviolet A light-induced “common deletion” in healthy volunteers after oral Polypodium leucotomos extractsupplement in a randomized clinical trial. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2010 ,62, 511–513. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Balupillai, A.; Prasad, R.N.; Ramasamy, K.; Muthusamy, G.; Shanmugham, M.; Govindasamy, K.;Gunaseelan, S. Caffeic Acid Inhibits UVB-induced Inﬂammation and Photocarcinogenesis through Activation
of Peroxisome Proliferator-activated Receptor- γin Mouse Skin. Photochem. Photobiol. 2015 ,91, 1458–1468.[CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Adhami, V .M.; Afaq, F.; Ahmad, N. Suppression of ultraviolet B exposure-mediated activation of NF- κB innormal human keratinocytes by resveratrol. Neoplasia 2003 ,5, 74–82. [CrossRef]34. Prescott, S.M.; Fitzpatrick, F.A. Cyclooxygenase-2 and carcinogenesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2000 ,1470 ,69–78. [CrossRef]35. Janczyk, A.; Garcia-Lopez, M.A.; Fernández-Penas, P .; Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; Benedicto, I.; Lopez-Cabrera, M.;González, S. A Polypodium leucotomos extract inhibits solar-simulated radiation-induced TNF- αand iNOSexpression, transcriptional activation and apoptosis. Exp. Dermatol. 2007 ,16, 823–829. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Lu, W.; Wu, S. Mechanism for dynamic regulation of iNOS expression after UVB-irradiation. Mol. Carcinog.2013 ,52, 627–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2013 ,52, 627–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Simon, J.C.; Edelbaum, D.; Bergstresser, P .R.; Cruz, P .D., Jr. Distorted antigen-presenting function ofLangerhans cells induced by tumor necrosis factor αvia a mechanism that appears different from that
Langerhans cells induced by tumor necrosis factor αvia a mechanism that appears different from thatinduced by ultraviolet B radiation. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 1991 ,8, 90–94.38. Prater, M.R.; Blaylock, B.L.; Holladay, S.D. Molecular mechanisms of cis-urocanic acid andpermethrin-induced alterations in cutaneous immunity. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 2003 ,19, 287–294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]39. Mittelbrunn, M.; Tejedor, R.; de la Fuente, H.; García-López, M.A.; Ursa, A.; Peñas, P .F.; García-Díez, A.;Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; Pivel, J.P .; González, S.; et al. Solar-simulated ultraviolet radiation induces abnormalmaturation and defective chemotaxis of dendritic cells. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2005 ,125, 334–342. [PubMed]40. Schroeder, P .; Calles, C.; Krutmann, J. Prevention of infrared-A radiation mediated detrimental effects inhuman skin. Skin Ther. Lett. 2009 ,14, 4–5.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 18 of 2141. Kochevar, I.E.; Taylor, C.R.; Krutmann, J. Fundamentals of cutaneous photobiology and photoimmunology.InFitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine , 8th ed.; Wolff, K., Goldsmith, L.A., Katz, S., Paller, G.A.,Leffell, D.J., Eds.; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 2012; Volume 1, pp. 1031–1047.42. Kligman, LH. Intensiﬁcation of ultraviolet-induced dermal damage by infrared radiation. Arch. Dermatol.Res. 1982 ,272, 229–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Darvin, M.E.; Haag, S.; Meinke, M.; Zastrow, L.; Sterry, W.; Lademann, J. Radical production by infrared Airradiation in human tissue. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2010 ,23, 40–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Jung, T.; Höhn, A.; Piazena, H.; Grune, T. Effects of water-ﬁltered infrared A irradiation on human ﬁbroblasts.Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010 ,48, 153–160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Zastrow, L.; Groth, N.; Klein, F.; Kockott, D.; Lademann, J.; Renneberg, R.; Ferrero, L. The missing
link—Light-induced (280–1600 nm) free radical formation in human skin. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2009 ,22,31–44. [PubMed]46. Krutmann, J.; Schroeder, P . Role of mitochondria in photoaging of human skin, the defective power- housemodel. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2009 ,14, 44–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]47. Schieke, S.; Stege, H.; Kürten, V .; Grether-Beck, S.; Sies, H.; Krutmann, J. Infrared-A radiation-induced matrixmetalloproteinase 1 expression is mediated through extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation inhuman dermal ﬁbroblasts. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2002 ,119, 1323–1329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Shin, M.H.; Moon, Y.J.; Seo, J.E.; Lee, Y.; Kim, K.H.; Chung, J.H. Reactive oxygen species produced by NADPHoxidase, xanthine oxidase, and mitochondrial electron transport system mediate heat shock-induced MMP-1and MMP-9 expression. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2008 ,44, 635–645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Krutmann, J.; Morita, A.; Chung, J.H. Sun exposure, what molecular photodermatology tells us about itsgood and bad sides. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2012 ,132, 976–998. [CrossRef] [PubMed]50. Kim, M.S.; Kim, Y.K.; Cho, K.H.; Chung, J.H. Regulation of type I procollagen and MMP-1 expression aftersingle or repeated exposure to infrared radiation in human skin. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2006 ,127, 875–882.[CrossRef] [PubMed]51. Schroeder, P .; Lademann, J.; Darvin, M.E.; Stege, H.; Marks, C.; Bruhnke, S.; Krutmann, J. Infraredradiation-induced matrix metalloproteinase in human skin, implications for protection. J. Investig. Dermatol.2008 ,128, 2491–2497. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Hoffmann-Dorr, S.; Greinert, R.; Volkmer, B.; Epe, B. Visible light (>395 nm) causes micronuclei formationin mammalian cells without generation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Mutat. Res. 2005 ,572, 142–149.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Cho, S.; Lee, M.J.; Kim, M.S.; Lee, S.; Kim, Y.K.; Lee, D.H.; Kang, S.; Cho, W.G.; Park, H.J.; Oh, K.W.; et al.Infrared plus visible light and heat from natural sunlight participate in the expression of MMPs and typeI procollagen as well as inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cell in human skin in vivo .J. Dermatol. Sci. 2008 ,50,123–133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Vandersee, S.; Beyer, M.; Lademann, J.; Darvin, M.E. Blue-violet light irradiation dose dependently decreasescarotenoids in human skin, which indicates the generation of free radicals. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2015 ,579675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Ramasubramaniam, R.; Roy, A.; Sharma, B.; Nagalakshmi, S. Are there mechanistic differences betweenultraviolet and visible radiation induced skin pigmentation? Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2011 ,10, 1887–1893.[CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Mahmoud, B.H.; Ruvolo, E.; Hexsel, C.L.; Liu, Y.; Owen, M.R.; Kollias, N.; Lim, H.W.; Hamzavi, I.H. Impact
of long-wavelength UVA and visible light on melanocompetent skin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2010 ,130,2092–2097. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
of long-wavelength UVA and visible light on melanocompetent skin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2010 ,130,2092–2097. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. González, S.; Gilaberte, Y.; Philips, N.; Juarranz, A. Fernblock, a nutriceutical with photoprotective propertiesand potential preventive agent for skin photoaging and photoinduced skin cancers. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2011 ,12,8466–8475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]58. De la Fuente, H.; Tejedor, R.; García-López, M.A.; Mittelbrunn, M.; Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; Sánchez-Madrid, F.;García-Díez, A.; Pivel, J.P .; Peñas, P .F.; González, S. Polypodium leucotomos induces protection of UV-inducedapoptosis in human skin cells. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2005 ,124, A121.59. Bhatia, N. Polypodium leucotomos , a potential new photoprotective agent. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 2015 ,16,73–79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 19 of 2160. El-Haj, N.; Goldstein, N. Sun protection in a pill, the photoprotective properties of Polypodium leucotomosextract. Int. J. Dermatol. 2015 ,54, 362–366. [CrossRef] [PubMed]61. Murbach, T.S.; Béres, E.; Vértesi, A.; Glávits, R.; Hirka, G.; Endres, J.R.; Clewell, A.E.; Szakonyiné, I.P . Acomprehensive toxicological safety assessment of an aqueous extract of Polypodium leucotomos (Fernblock®).Food Chem. Toxicol. 2015 ,86, 328–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]62. González, S.; Gilaberte, Y.; Philips, N. Mechanistic insights in the use of a Polypodium leucotomos extract as anoral and topical photoprotective agent. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2010 ,9, 559–563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Rodríguez-Yanes, E.; Cuevas, J.; González, S.; Mallol, J. Oral administration of Polypodium leucotomos delaysskin tumor development and increases epidermal p53 expression and the anti-oxidant status of UV-irradiated
hairless mice. Exp. Dermatol. 2014 ,23, 526–528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Aguilera, P .; Carrera, C.; Puig-Butille, J.A.; Badenas, C.; Lecha, M.; González, S.; Malvehy, J.; Puig, S. Beneﬁtsof oral Polypodium leucotomos extract in MM high-risk patients. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2013 ,27,1095–1100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Zattra, E.; Coleman, C.; Arad, S.; Helms, E.; Levine, D.; Bord, E.; Guillaume, A.; El-Hajahmad, M.;Zwart, E.; van Steeg, H.; et al. Polypodium leucotomos extract decreases UV-induced Cox-2 expression andinﬂammation, enhances DNA repair, and decreases mutagenesis in hairless mice. Am. J. Pathol. 2009 ,175,1952–1961.66. Mulero, M.; Rodríguez-Yanes, E.; Nogues, M.R.; Giralt, M.; Romeu, M.; González, S.; Mallol, J. Polypodiumleucotomos extract inhibits glutathione oxidation and prevents Langerhans cell depletion induced byUVB/UVA radiation in a hairless rat model. Exp. Dermatol. 2008 ,17, 653–658. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Middelkamp-Hup, M.A.; Pathak, M.A.; Parrado, C.; Garcia-Caballero, T.; Rius-Díaz, F.; Fitzpatrick, T.B.;González, S. Orally administered Polypodium leucotomos extract decreases psoralen-UVA inducedphototoxicity, pigmentation, and damage of human skin. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2004 ,50, 41–49. [CrossRef]68. Middelkamp-Hup, M.A.; Pathak, M.A.; Parrado, C.; Goukassian, D.; Rius-Díaz, F.; Mihm, M.C.;Fitzpatrick, T.B.; González, S. Oral Polypodium leucotomos extract decreases ultraviolet-induced damageof human skin. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2004 ,51, 910–918. [CrossRef] [PubMed]69. Choudhry, S.Z.; Bhatia, N.; Ceilley, R.; Hougeir, F.; Lieberman, R.; Hamzavi, I.; Lim, H.W. Role of oralPolypodium leucotomos extract in dermatologic diseases, a review of the literature. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2014 ,13,148–153. [PubMed]70. Nestor, M.S.; Berman, B.; Swenson, N. Safety and Efﬁcacy of Oral Polypodium leucotomos Extract in Healthy
Adult Subjects. J. Clin. Aesthet. Dermatol. 2015 ,8, 19–23. [PubMed]71. González, S.; Pathak, M.A. Inhibition of ultraviolet-induced formation of reactive oxygen species, lipidperoxidation, erythema and skin photosensitization by Polypodium leucotomos .Photodermatol. Photoimmunol.Photomed. 1996 ,12, 45–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]72. Fantini, M.; Benvenuto, M.; Masuelli, L.; Frajese, G.V .; Tresoldi, I.; Modesti, A.; Bei, R. In vitro and in vivoAntitumoral Effects of Combinations of Polyphenols, or Polyphenols and Anticancer Drugs, Perspectives onCancer Treatment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015 ,16, 9236–9282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]73. Williamson, G.; Carughi, A. Polyphenol content and health beneﬁts of raisins. Nutr. Res. 2010 ,30, 511–519.[CrossRef] [PubMed]74. Creasey, W.A. Antitumoral activity of the fern Cibotium schiedei .Nature 1969 ,222, 1281–1282. [CrossRef][PubMed]75. Alcaraz, M.V .; Pathak, M.A.; Rius, F.; Kollias, N.; González, S. An extract of Polypodium leucotomos appears to
minimize certain photoaging changes in a hairless albino mouse animal model. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol.Photomed. 1999 ,15, 120–126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
minimize certain photoaging changes in a hairless albino mouse animal model. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol.Photomed. 1999 ,15, 120–126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Kholi, I.; Grifﬁth, J.L.; Isedeh, P .; Silpa-Archa, N.; Al-Jamal, M.; Lim, H.W.; Hamzavi, I.H. The Effect of OralPolypodium leucotomos Extract (PLE) on Ultraviolet-induced Changes in the Skin. In Proceedings of the 34thFall Clinical Dermatology Conference, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 1–4 October 2015.77. González, S.; Pathak, M.A.; Cuevas, J.; Villarubia, V .G.; Fitzpatrick, T.B. Topical or oral administration withan extract of Polypodium leucotomos prevents acute sunburn and psolaren-induced phototoxic reactions aswell as depletion of Langerhans cells in human skin. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 1997 ,13, 50–60.[CrossRef] [PubMed]78. Philips, N.; Conte, J.; Chen, Y.J.; Natrajan, P .; Taw, M.; Keller, T.; Givant, J.; Tuason, M.; Dulaj, L.;
Leonardi, D.; et al. Beneﬁcial regulation of matrixmetalloproteinases and their inhibitors, ﬁbrillar collagens
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 20 of 21and transforming growth factor- βbyPolypodium leucotomos , directly or in dermal ﬁbroblasts, ultravioletradiated ﬁbroblasts, and melanoma cells. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2009 ,301, 487–495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; Domínguez-Jiménez, C.; Tejedor, R.; Brieva, A.; Pivel, J.P . Photoprotective properties ofa hydrophilic extract of the fern Polypodium leucotomos on human skin cells. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 2003 ,70,31–37. [CrossRef]80. González, S.; Alcaraz, M.V .; Cuevas, J.; Pérez, M.; Jaen, P .; Alvarez-Mon, M.; Villarrubia, V .G. An extract ofthe fern Polypodium leucotomos (Difur) modulates Th1/Th2 cytokines balance in vitro and appears to exhibitanti-angiogenic activities in vivo , pathogenic relationships and therapeutic implications. Anticancer Res.2000 ,20, 1567–1575. [PubMed]81. Capote, R.; Alonso-Lebrero, J.L.; García, F.; Brieva, A.; Pivel, J.P .; González, S. Polypodium leucotomos extract
inhibits transurocanic acid photoisomerization and photodecomposition. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 2006 ,82,173–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Rodríguez-Yanes, E.; Juarranz, A.; Cuevas, J.; Gonzalez, S.; Mallol, J. Polypodium leucotomos decreasesUV-induced epidermal cell proliferation and enhances p53 expression and plasma antioxidant capacity inhairless mice. Exp. Dermatol. 2012 ,21, 638–640. [CrossRef] [PubMed]83. Philips, N.; Smith, J.; Keller, T.; González, S. Predominant effects of Polypodium leucotomos on membraneintegrity, lipid peroxidation, and expression of elastin and matrixmetalloproteinase-1 in ultraviolet radiationexposed ﬁbroblasts, and keratinocytes. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2003 ,32, 1–9. [CrossRef]84. Truchuelo, M.T.; Jiménez, N.; Mascaraque, M.; Lucena, S.; Días, I.J.; Juarranz, A.; González, S. Pilot study toassess the effects of a new oral photoprotector against infrared-visible radiations. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2016 ,136, S106.
136, S106.85. Mohammad, A. Vitiligo repigmentation with Anapsos ( Polypodium leucotomos ).Int. J. Dermatol. 1989 ,28, 479.[PubMed]86. Padilla, H.C.; Lainez, H.; Pacheco, J.A. A new agent (hydrophilic fraction of Polypodium leucotomos ) formanagement of psoriasis. Int. J. Dermatol. 1974 ,13, 276–282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]87. Bosch, R.; Philips, N.; Suárez-Pérez, J.A.; Juarranz, A.; Devmurari, A.; Chalensouk-Khaosaat, J.; González, S.Mechanisms of Photoaging and Cutaneous Photocarcinogenesis, and Photoprotective Strategies withPhytochemicals. Antioxidants 2015 ,4, 248–268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]88. Calzavara-Pinton, P .G.; Rossi, M.T.; Zanca, A.; Arisi, M.; González, S.; Venturini, M. Oral Polypodiumleucomotos increases the anti-inﬂammatory and melanogenic responses of the skin to different modalities ofsun exposures: A pilot study. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 2016 ,32, 22–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. De la Fuente, H.; Lamana, A.; Mittelbrunn, M.; Pérez-Gala, S.; González, S.; García-Diez, A.; Vega, M.;Sánchez-Madrid, F. Identiﬁcation of genes responsive to solar simulated UV radiation in humanmonocyte-derived dendritic cells. PLoS ONE 2009 ,4, e6735. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Gupta, A.; Kaur, C.D.; Jangdey, M.; Saraf, S. Matrix metalloproteinase enzymes and their naturally derivedinhibitors, novel targets in photocarcinoma therapy. Ageing Res. Rev. 2014 ,13, 65–74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Wilkins-Port, C.E.; Higgins, P .J. Regulation of extracellular matrix remodeling following transforming growthfactor- β1/epidermal growth factor-stimulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human premalignantkeratinocytes. Cells Tissues Organs 2007 ,185, 116–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]92. Tanew, A.; Radakovic, S.; González, S.; Venturini, M.; Calzavara-Pinton, P . Oral administration of ahydrophilic extract of Polypodium leucotomos for the prevention of polymorphic light eruption. J. Am.
Acad. Dermatol. 2012 ,66, 58–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
hydrophilic extract of Polypodium leucotomos for the prevention of polymorphic light eruption. J. Am.Acad. Dermatol. 2012 ,66, 58–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]93. Caccialanza, M.; Recalcati, S.; Piccinno, R. Oral Polypodium leucotomos extract photoprotective activity in 57patients with idiopathic photodermatoses. G. Ital. Dermatol. Venereol. 2011 ,146, 85–87. [PubMed]94. Caccialanza, M.; Percivalle, S.; Piccinno, R.; Brambilla, R. Photoprotective activity of oral Polypodiumleucotomos extract in 25 patients with idiopathic photodermatoses. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed.2007 ,23, 46–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]95. Auriemma, M.; Di Nicola, M.; González, S.; Piaserico, S.; Capo, A.; Amerio, P . Polypodium leucotomossupplementation in the treatment of scalp actinic keratosis, could it improve the efﬁcacy of photodynamictherapy? Dermatol. Surg. 2015 ,41, 898–902. [CrossRef] [PubMed]96. Middelkamp-Hup, M.A.; Bos, J.D.; Rius-Diaz, F.; González, S.; Westerhof, W. Treatment of vitiligo
vulgaris with narrow-band UVB and oral Polypodium leucotomos extract: A randomized double blindplacebo-controlled study. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2007 ,21, 942–950. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1026 21 of 2197. Reyes, E.; Jaen, P .; de las Heras, E.; Carrion, F.; Alvarez-Mon, M.; de Eusebio, E.; Cuevas, J.; González, S.;Villarrubia, V .G. Systemic immunomodulatory effects of Polypodium leucotomos as an adjuvant to PUVAtherapy in generalized vitiligo: A pilot study. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2006 ,41, 213–216. [CrossRef] [PubMed]98. Nestor, M.; Bucay, V .; Callender, V .; Cohen, J.L.; Sadick, N.; Waldorf, H. Polypodium leucotomos as an AdjunctTreatment of Pigmentary Disorders. J. Clin. Aesthet. Dermatol. 2014 ,7, 13–17. [PubMed]99. Paciﬁco, A.; Vidoli, P .; Leone, G.; Iacovelli, P . Combined treatment of narrowband ultraviolet B light (NBUVB)phototherapy and oral Polypodium leucotomos extract versus NB UVB phototherapy alone in the treatment ofpatients with vitiligo. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2009 ,60(Suppl. S1), AB154.100. Martin, L.K.; Caperton, C.; Woolery-Lloyd, H. A randomized double-blind placebo controlled study
evaluating the effectiveness and tolerability of oral Polypodium leucotomos in patients with melasma.J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2012 ,66(Suppl. S1), AB21.101. Sheth, V .M.; Pandya, A.G. Melasma, a comprehensive update, part I. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2011 ,65, 689–697.[CrossRef] [PubMed]102. Sheth, V .M.; Pandya, A.G. Melasma, a comprehensive update, part II. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2011 ,65,699–714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]103. Rinnerthaler, M.; Bischof, J.; Streubel, M.K.; Trost, A.; Richter, K. Oxidative Stress in Aging Human Skin.Biomolecules 2015 ,5, 545–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]104. Nie, B.; Gan, W.; Shi, F.; Hu, G.X.; Chen, L.G.; Hayakawa, H.; Sekiguchi, M.; Cai, J.P . Age-dependentaccumulation of 8-oxoguanine in the DNA and RNA in various rat tissues. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2013 ,2013 , 433–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Sauvaigo, S.; Caillat, S.; Odin, F.; Nkengne, A.; Bertin, C.; Oddos, T. Effect of aging on DNA excision/synthesis
repair capacities of human skin ﬁbroblasts. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2010 ,130, 1739–1741. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Kohl, E.; Steinbauer, J.; Landthaler, M.; Szeimies, R.M. Skin ageing. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. 2011 ,25, 873–884.[CrossRef] [PubMed]©2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
