Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2012 , 13, 142-172; doi:10.3390/ijms13010142   International Journal of Molecular Sciences  ISSN 1422-0067 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms Review Protein Kinases and Transcription Factors Activation in Response to UV-Radiation of Skin: Implications  for Carcinogenesis César López-Camarillo 1,*, Elena Aréchaga Ocampo 2, Mavil López Casamichana 1,  Carlos Pérez-Plasencia 3,4, Elizbeth Álvarez-Sánchez 1 and Laurence A. Marchat 5 1 Genomics Sciences Program, Oncogenomics a nd Cancer Proteomics Laboratory, University Autonomous of Mexico City, Av. San Lorenzo 290, 03100, Mexico; E-Mails: mavil.lopez@uacm.edu.mx (M.L.-C. ); maria.alvarez@uacm.edu.mx (E.Á.-S.) 2 Carcinogenesis Laboratory, Nati onal Institute of Cancerol ogy, Av. Saint Fernando 22, 14080, México; E-Mail: ear echagao@incan.edu.mx  3 Massive Sequencing Unit, National Institute  of Cancerology, Av. Saint Fernando 22, 14080, México; E-Mail: carlos.pplas@campus.iztacala.unam.mx
4 Genomics Laboratory, FES-I, UBIMED, Nati onal Autonomous University of Mexico,  Av. De los Barrios 1, 54090, México 5 Biotechnology Program, Institutional Program of  Molecular Biomedicin e, National School of Medicine and Homeopathy of the National Polytec hnic Institute, Guillermo Massieu Helguera 239, 07320, Mexico; E-Mail: lmarchat@ipn.mx  * Author to whom correspondence should be a ddressed; E-Mail: cesar .lopez@uacm.edu.mx;  Tel.: +55-5488-6661 ext. 15307. Received: 20 November 2011; in revised form: 14 December 2011 / Accepted: 16 December 2011 /  Published: 23 December 2011  Abstract:  Solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is an important environmental factor that leads to immune suppression, in flammation, photoaging, and skin carcinogenesis. Here, we reviewed the specific signal transduction pathways and tran scription factors involved in the cellular response to UV-irradia tion. Increasing experimental da ta supporting a role for p38,
MAPK, JNK, ERK1/2, and ATM kinases in the response network to UV exposure is discussed. We also reviewed  the participation of NF- κB, AP-1, and NRF2 transcription factors in the control of gene expression after UV-irradia tion. In addition, we discussed the promising chemotherapeutic in tervention of transcription factors signaling by natural OPEN ACCESS
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 143   compounds. Finally, we focused on the review of data emerging from the use of DNA microarray technology to determine changes in gl obal gene expression in keratinocytes and melanocytes in response to UV treatment. Effort s to obtain a comprehensive portrait of the transcriptional events regulating photodama ge of intact human epidermis after UV exposure reveals the existence of novel factors participat ing in UV-induced cell death. Progress in understanding the multitude of mechanisms induced by UV-irradiation could lead to the potential use of protein kinases and novel proteins  as specific targets for the prevention and control of skin cancer. Keywords:  ultraviolet radiation; skin cancer; skin photoaging; p38; MAPK; JNK; ERK1/2; ATM; SKR kinases; NF- κB; AP-1; NRF2 transcription factors Abbreviations:  Ultraviolet (UV); Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS); Tumor Necrosis
Factor Receptor (TNFR); Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases, (MAPK); Phosphoinositide 3-Kinases, (PI-3K); Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor, (EGFR); Protein Kinase C, (PKC); Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated, (ATM ); ATM-Related, (ATR); c-Jun NH 2-Terminal Kinases (JNK); p90 Ribosomal S6 Kinase 2 (R SK2); Mitogen-and Stre ss-Activated Protein Kinase (MSK1); Mitogen-Activat ed Protein Kinase Phosphata ses (MKPs); Phosphatase 2A (PP2A); Wild-Type p53-Induced  Phosphatase (Wip1); Protein-Tyrosine Phosphatase (PTP); Phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-Bisphosphate  (PIP2); Activator Protein-1 (AP-1);  Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs); Nuclear Factor kappa B, (NF- κB); NF-κB Inducing Kinase (NIK); IκB Kinase (IKK); NF- κB Essential Modulator (NEMO) ; Casein Kinase II (CK2); Long Terminal Repeat (LTR); Human Immun odeficiency Virus-1 (H IV-1); Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor 2 α (eIF2α); Protein Kinase Like  Endoplasmic Reticulum
Kinase (PERK); ( −)-Epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) ; Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor (bFGF); Matrix Metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1 ); Oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs); Phorbol Ester 12- O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-Acetate (TPA); Musculo-Aponeurotic Fibrosarcoma (MAF); NF-E2-Related Factor 2 (Nrf2); Antioxidant Responsive Element (ARE); Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF); Fa ctor of Activated T Cells, (NFAT);  Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2)  1. Introduction Ultraviolet radiation from sunlight is an environmen tal factor that has a variety of physiological and biological effects, including immune suppressi on, cellular aging, DNA damage and initiation of apoptosis [1,2]. In addition, UV radiation promotes  the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can cause oxidative damage, and ultimately lead  to tumor formation. Solar UV radiation is also a very prominent environmental toxic agent and it is known to be one of  the main causes of human skin
cancers, such as cutaneous, malignant melanomas and non-melanoma tumors that include basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas [3,4]. UV  is classified in three bands according to wavelength: UV-A (320–400 nm), UV-B (290–320 nm ) and UV-C (<290 nm). UV-A is also
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 144   subclassified into UV-A1 (340–400 nm) and UV- A2 (320–340 nm). The UV component of the sunlight reaching the earth surface (daylight UV) consists in 90% UV-A and 10% UV-B, while UV-C and almost all UV-B (80–90%) are absorbed by ozone  layer [5,6]. The biological effect induced by UV depends largely on wavelength [7,8]. The hypot hesis is that UV wave length-specific “action spectrum” is stemmed from distinct direct damage s to various biomolecules.  Conjugated bonds, linear repeats or ring structures in or ganic molecules absorb shortwave UV radiation (200–300 nm). Proteins containing tryptophan or ty rosine can therefore absorb UV ra diation and start up photochemical reactions causing alterations in signaling pathways. UV-A and UV-B portion has a strong carcinogenic effect on the skin [9–11] to directly or indirect ly induce DNA damage leading to genomic mutations
and modified gene expression [ 8,12,13]. UV-C has also be en described as induc tor of genetic and cellular modifications in e xperimentally assays [14]. Exposure to UV-A leads to  oxidative DNA modification s including the formatio n of 8-hydro xyguanine, DNA-protein cross-linking, abasic sites, and DNA strand breaks [7,15]. In contrast, the shorter wavelengths, UV-B and UV-C, directly damage DNA,  causing the formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers or 6–4 photoproducts [11,14 ]. In addition to DNA damage, UV enhances the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and induces activa tion of specific signal transduction pathways, resulting in altered gene expres sion that induce senescence, cell cy cle arrest and cell death [16–18]. 2. Signal Transduction Pathways in the Cellular Response to UV Radiation UV radiation is one of the most important kinds  of environmental stresses for skin damage.
Exposure to UV is known to induce clustering of some kinds of cell-surface receptors and to transducer some cell survival a nd proliferation signals [19,20]. Sk in cells respond to damage by triggering the activation of cell surface receptors, su ch as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and tumor necrosis factor recepto r (TNFR) [19,21], and activate in tracellular signaling mediated by SRC  family of tyrosine kinases [22], the small gua nosine triphosphate binding  proteins, RAS and  RAC [23], phosphatidylinositol 3-ki nase (PI-3K) [24], mitogen-activ ated protein ki nases (MAPKs) pathways [25], ataxia telangectasia mutated (A TM) [26] and ribosomal S6 kinases (RSK) [27]. Activation of intracellular signaling pathways in  response to UV irradiation induces various transcription factors that  transactivate genes involved in DNA re pair, DNA synthesis, transcription and cell cycle regulation [17] (Figure 1). The effects to UV radiati on on gene expression could be
classified as early or late events, according to the activation of specific ge nes and proteins; these UV responses are important in determining cell fate, su ch as growth arrest, apoptosis and survival. UV radiation activates different sign al pathways in a time, dose and wavelength-specific manner [17,28].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 145   Figure 1.  Regulation of proliferatio n and survival pathways by protein kinases activation in response to UV radiation. Mitogen-Activ ated Protein Kinases (MAPK) family and Phosphoinositide 3-Kinases (PI-3K) signaling ac tivation as an outcome of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) activation a nd/or increase in intracellular Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) levels resulting from UV radiation. MAPK and PI-3K pathways can regulate each other in response to UV radi ation; however extracel lular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), p38K and c-Jun NH 2-Terminal Kinases (JNK) activ ate specific transcription factors, which regulate the expression of genes participating in proliferation or cell survival. PI-3K activates AKT, which leads to induction or  repression of cell survival and apoptosis. UV radiation is also able to activate protein kinases to regul ate protein translation through ERK pathway activation.
ERK pathway activation.   2.1. UV-Radiation Activates MAPK Signaling Pathways  MAPKs belong to the serine/threonine protein kinase s family that is activated by several stimuli, including UV irradiation [25]. The MAPK signaling pathways are, in general, subdivided into three different pathways, namely the ex tracellular signal-regul ated kinases (ERK), p38 MAPK (p38 kinase), and c-Jun NH 2-terminal kinases (JNK) signaling pathwa ys [29], which are activated by dual phosphorylation of threonine and tyro sine, at TX-Y motifs within thei r activation loops. Each member of this family can be activated in response to differ ent stimuli and they also ha ve specific intracellular
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 146   targets. The ERK cascade is genera lly activated by mitogeni c stimuli, and evidence suggested that it mediates both cell proliferation and survival, wher eas the JNK and p38 kinase pathways are activated in response to cellular stress, a nd appear to exert both protective a nd pro-apoptotic effects [30–32]. UV radiation could activate the three subgroups of the MAPK family. In fact, some reports suggest that MAPK pathway is the central even t that links UV-induced intracellu lar signal to the nuclear response and modify DNA damage-originated cel lular response [25]. Previous re ports suggested that induction of distinct MAPK signaling path ways by UV is wavelength-specific. Apparently, UV-A induces stronger activation of ERK but JNK is principally  activated by UV-C, while p38 kinases could be activated in response to any UV wavelength to modify DNA damage response [25,33]. Because the
UV-C component of sunlight is filtered by the atmos phere and does not reach the earth’s surface, here we will mainly focus in the studies about activa tion of MAPK pathway in response to UV-A and  UV-B radiation as they are more relevant for skin carcinogenesis. Activation of MAPK by UV may result from the EGFR-tyrosine kinase (TK) domain activation, although the precise mechanism of UV irradiation induced-EGFR activa tion has not been elucidated yet. It has been suggested that UV irradiation might lead clustering of receptors in cell membrane surface in order to allow autophosphorylation and activation of  intracellular signaling pathways [20,34]. Other works indicated that EGFR activation by UV i rradiation might depend on the ROS generation, particularly the increased in tracellular hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2), which has been associated with phosphorylation of the EGFR-TK doma in [20]. The activatio n of three MAP kinases was prevented by
antioxidant reagents, suggesting that an oxidative signal initiates these res ponses [35]. Recently, Xu and co-workers reported that UV irradiation i nduce EGFR nuclear translocation depending of phosphorylation of tyrosines in TK domain in huma n keratinocytes [36]. The biological function of nuclear EGFR remains unclear. It has been sugg ested that EGFR nuclear  may phosphorylate nuclear proteins and transactivate genes [37,38]. These obs ervations suggested that  nuclear EGFR in UV radiated cells might regulate cell proliferation. ERK pathway is prim arily activated in response to activation of growth factors, s uggesting that activation of this pathway might result from EGFR activation in response to UV-A, whereas activation of JNK and p38 kinases is directly induced by stress, including UV-B and UV-C radiation [39]. However, when p38 kinase activation by UV-B exposure is mediated by EGFR, it is  associated with protection agai nst apoptosis [40], while ERK and
JNK activation in response to UV-B radiation coul d be regulated by protein kinase C (PKC) and is associated to cell proliferati on [41]. Phosphorylation of JNK a nd p38 kinase by UV-B irradiation might result in down regulati on of ERK signaling [41].  In human keratinocytes, UV-A and UV-B stimulate the activation MAPK  pathways [42], particularly, ERK1, ERK2 and JNK kinases, but  p38 is fewer stimulated by UV- A. Interestingly, MAPK and transcription factors as AP-1 are not activated in mouse keratinocyt es in response to  UV-A and UV-B, which suggested that a human comp onent, distinct from kinases, c ould regulate the MAPK activation in human keratinocytes. UV-A radiation stimulates ER K signaling pathway in response to activation of EGFR, SRC, RAS and RAF proteins in NCTC 2544 keratinocytes [43]. UV- B mainly acts through JNK and has a weak effect on ERK in human ep idermal keratinocytes [44]. In normal human
epidermal melanocytes, UV-A increas es ERK phosphorylation but it has no effect on the activation of
JNK and has a weak effect on ERK in human ep idermal keratinocytes [44]. In normal human epidermal melanocytes, UV-A increas es ERK phosphorylation but it has no effect on the activation of JNK and p38 kinases [45]. MAPK pa thways activation is a mechanis m for causing early -response gene expression by controlling the activi ties of several transcription fact ors. Activated MAPKs translocate
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 147   to the nucleus, where they phos phorylate target transcription factors, including AP-1, NF- B, and p53. Phosphorylation of transcription fact ors and regulatory cell survival proteins is mediated by activation of effector kinases downstream of the MAPK signa ling cascade. UV-B stimulates the activation of JNK1, p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 2 (RSK2) and mit ogen-and stress-activated protein kinase (MSK1), which are downstream of ERK a nd p38 kinase, respectively [29].  2.2. UV Radiation-Induced Phosphatases  MAPKs are inactivated by dephos phorylation induced by mitogen- activated protein kinase phosphatases (MKPs), thus regulating the physiologi cal outcome of signaling in response to UV radiation. MAPKs are the central el ement of the signaling cascade that  links UV-induced intracellular signals to the nuclear responses by phosphorylated transcription fact ors [25]. MAPK are known to be
differentially activated depending on dose and wavelength of UV ra diation [25,33] and phosphatases activation in response to UV stimul us may be an important mechanis m of regulation of cell response  to UV irradiation. Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a major protein serine/threonine phosphatase that participates in many signaling pathways in ma mmalian cells [46]. UV-induced PP2A activation resulted in down-regulation of p38 MAPK and Akt activities, and diminished apoptosis in human keratinocytes. These findings suggest that PP2A may maintain the equilibrium between cell survival and cell death in UV irradiation- keratinocytes response in p38 MAPK /Akt-dependent manner [47].  The c-JUN-JNK and p53-p38 kinase pathways may regulate activation of wild-type p53-induced phosphatase (Wip1) in response to UV-radiation. Wip1 dephosphorylat es several proteins, included MAPK activated by stress stimuli. Apparently, p38 kina se-activated p53 is more  efficient to activate
Wip1, than c-Jun-JNK. As the pathways execute some what different cellular responses with regard to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to  UV irradiation, Wip1 may regulate negatively UV irradiation-induced apoptosis by dephosphorylate some kinases [48]. EG FR activation in UV  radiated-cells may be result of in tercross of EGFR in cel l membrane or due to phosphorylation induced by ROS. Protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family  can dephosphorylate EGFR in order to negatively regulate its activity. PTP contain an active site cyst eine residue, which is re quired for phosphohydrolase activity. This active site cysteine is highly susceptible to oxidation by ROS, particularly by H 2O2 [49]. This mechanism could be important for activation of EGFR by UV irradiation. Therefore, inactivation of PTP activity as a consequence of intracellular ROS production may regulate activation of EGFR by
UV radiation [50,51]. Activation of kinases and phosphatases in UV irra diated cells may represent a feedback mechanism to regulate the ultimate fate of the cell. 2.3. UV Radiation Induces PI-3K Path way for Promoting Cell Survival One of the best characterized e ffectors of cell survival and pro liferation is the phosphoinositide  3-kinases (PI-3K) pathway [52]. When active, PI-3K converts phospha tidylinositol-(4,5 )-bisphosphate (PIP2) into phosphatidylinositol-(3 ,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3, in turn, binds the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of Akt, stimu lating its kinase activ ity. Akt, also known as protein kinase B,  is catalytically activated by phosphorylation at Thr308 and Se r473 [53]. Recently, many new downstream targets of Akt have been identified and shown to promote prolifera tion by facilitating cell cycle progression, or raise survival by transcription-dependent or transcription-independent means [54]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 148   or by phosphorylation of other proteins  that affect apoptosis and cell proliferation [53]. UV-B exposure may stimulate PI-3K activity more strongly that exposure to UV-A [55]. UV-B irradiation induces survival signals via activation of PI-3K-Akt pathway [56]; this activation could be a direct effect of UV or via activation of EGFR [51]. This activity was associated with overexpression of c-FOS and phosphorylation of Akt and p70s6k. UV induces suppression of cell death through phosphorylation of apoptotic proteins and Akt activates  transcription factors in order to stimulate gene s that promote survival [53]. In other words, the activ ation of receptor cell membrane surface, i.e., clustering of receptors (dimerization) in response to UV- B radiation, results in PI-3K activation.  The activation of PI-3K-Akt pathway is directly activated by EGFR activation in response to UV-B
irradiation, but activation of this  pathway is weaker in response to UV-A radiation. Activation of  PI-3K-Akt pathway can induce ph osphorylation and activation of other kinases, such as p70s6k and p90RSK, to promote synthesis and activation of tran scription factors for the expression of genes associated with cell survival [55]. 2.4. RSK Activation and UV Radiation UV-A-induced signal transduction leads to the ac tivation of a complex network of downstream effector molecules, including RSK p70s6k and p90RSK, also known as MAPKAP-K1, which in turn phosphorylate the 40S  ribosomal protein S6, resulting in an increase of the translational machinery component [57]. p90RSK is a member of the family of 90- kDa ribosomal S6 kinases, which are phosphorylated by ERKs. p90RSK is involved in signal transduction leading to proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis [58]. In respon se to UV-A irradiation, EGFR activates p70s6k and p90RSK
kinases through the activation of ERK, but not JNK and p38 [33,59]. The activa tion of RSKs can occur by the MAPK pathways or PI-3K according to the phosphorylation si te of each kinase, i.e., MAPK and Akt phosphorylate different RS K protein residues [58]. p70s6k activation in response to UV-A irradiation is mediated by the act ivation of EGFR and PI-3K-Akt. The effects on phosphorylation and activation of Akt and p70s6k may be mediated by MSK1 in respons e to activation of p38 and ERK, but not JNK [59]. EGFR activation in res ponse to UV-A irradiation activates p70s6k and p90RSK kinases through the activation of ERK. An increased activation of ba sal and EGF-inducible MAPK, p90RSK and p70s6k is associated with the activation of AP-1 in cell transformation a nd tumor promotion [60]. 3. ATM and UV Radiation  ATM is a member of the PI-3K family [61]; it is a serine-threonine protein kinase with a
carboxy-terminal domain similar to the catalytic subunit of PI-3K. In  particular, ATM binds to and phosphorylates the tumor suppressor p53 in respons e to DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) [62]. Both p53 and ATM function as tumor suppressors  [63]. Experimental knockout of both p53 and atm genes  resulted in a marked acceleration of tumorigenesi s in comparison with that observed with a knockout of only one of these genes [64]. ATM does not only regulate the response to DSB (see section 4) but it also plays an important role in the response to oxidative stress and for m odulating cell growth through growth factor receptors [26,65]. AT M is activated by UV-A and is involved in the cellular decision to trigger p53- and JNK-dependent apopt osis after radiation exposure [2 6]. ATM is also activated in response to ionizing radiation [ 66]. Unlike UV-A, UV-C does not activate ATM [26] . Instead, UV-C
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 149   appears to stimulate ATM-related (ATR), a kinase structurally and functionally related to ATM, that may function as a sensor of DNA damage to activ ate JNK and p53 signaling lead ing to apoptosis [67]. Thus, these two related kinases, ATM and ATR, may be  selective sensors of different types of cellular stress, with ATM responsive to UV-A and ionizing ra diation and ATR responsiv e to UV-C irradiation. Activation of survival pathways and cell prolif eration induced by divers e UV wavelengths occurs through a complex network of protein kinases (T able 1). The activation of MAPK pathway by  UV-radiation, not only has association with activation of membrane receptors, su ch as EGFR, but it is also associated with increased intracellular ROS levels. UV radiat ion can promote cell survival through PI-3K-Akt pathway, in a dependent or indepe ndent way of EGFR activ ation, according to UV
wavelength, time exposure and dose. MAPK pathway c ould regulate the PI-3K activity in response to UV-irradiation independently of EGFR  activation. Some investigators have reported that the activation of AP-1 and NF- κB transcription factors by UV radiation is mediated through membrane-associated signaling proteins and is not depe ndent on a nuclear signal [68]. DNA damage is directly induced by UV exposure, and is an important mechanism for UV-induced tumor initiati on [69]. Cell response to DNA damage includes cell cycle G1-arrest through ATM and ATR activation, using or not the p53 signal transduction pathways. Ther efore the signaling from nucleus in response to UV-irradiation could be regulated by p53, which is found to be a negative regulator of AP-1 and NF- κB activation in response to UV radiation. This mechanism is linke d, on one hand, with the inhibition of JNK and p38 pathway but not ERK, and on the other hand, with the overexpression of PTEN, which negatively
regulates activation of PI-3K-Akt pa thway. Both events are related to the low activation of AP-1 and NF-κB [8].  Table 1.  Protein kinases and transcription fact ors activated by specific UV wavelengths .  MAPK pathway PI-3K pathway Transcription factors UV-A EGFR, SRC, RAS, RAF,  ERK1/2, p70s6k and p90RSK ATM c-JUN, Nrf2, NFAT  UV-B PKC, JNK, p38 kinase,  RSK2, MSK1  EGFR, PI-3K, Akt, p70s6k and p90RSK  c-FOS, NF- κB NFAT  UV-C EGFR, SRC, ERK, p38 kinase JNK1/2  ATR  AP-1  4. Role of Transcription Factors in Response to UV Radiation Exposure to UV leads to premature aging of the sk in and it also increase s the risk of acquiring cancer. UV-B radiation of cells induces  the activation of specific transc ription factors, which in turn regulate the expression of a numb er of genes termed the “UV response genes”. Two transcription factors that are activated in  this way are the activator  protein-1 (AP-1) and NF- κB [9]. The study of
these two transcription f actors and the cross-talk between th em in response to UV-B exposure may help to the development of new chemopreventive strategies for the prevention of UV-B induced  skin carcinogenesis.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 150   4.1. The Nuclear Factor NF- κB NF-κB represents a family of transcription fact ors involved in the regulation of inflammation, immune response, development, cellular survival, a nd cell proliferation. They are the effectors of a signaling system that is responsive to a large number of stimuli, including inflammatory cytokines recognized by TNFR, and pathogens and virus recogni zed by Toll-like receptors (TLRs), and receptors of the NACHT-LRR (leucine-rich repeat) families [70]. NF- κB also regulates the expression of genes outside of the immune sy stem. In the skin, NF- κB plays a role in epidermal homeostasis. The range of stimuli activating NF- κB is extensive and continuously growi ng, which emphasizes its key role in transcriptional responses. Notably, NF- κB has important functions in th e transcriptional response to cytotoxic agents like chemotherapeutic drugs, oxidativ e and physical stress, UV and ionizing radiations.
In addition, recent work has highlighted its role in  development and physiology of tissues including mammary gland, bone, and skin. Thus, the NF- κB system operates on transient or short timescales, relevant to inflammation and imm une responses, and on lo nger-term timescales du ring cell differentiation and organ formation [71].  NF-κB exists in the cytoplasm as homodimers or hete rodimers of a family of  structurally related DNA-binding proteins [72]. In mammals, NF- κB family members are represented by five “Rel” proteins: RelA (p65), c-Bel, RelB, and two “NF- κB” proteins NF- κB1 (p50/p105) and NF- κB2 (p52/p100), which dimerize in almost any comb ination to activate transcription. NF- κB 1 and NF- κB2 are synthesized as large precursors (p105 and p100) and processed to generate the mature transcriptional active proteins. Only RelA, c-Rel,  and RelB, but not p50 or p52, shar e the C-terminal transactivation
domains, whereas Rel and NF- κB B proteins contai n the N-terminal Rel homology domain (RHD), which is involved in dimerization, DNA binding and nuclear localization. In most cells, NF- κB is present as a latent and inactive cyto plasmic complex bound to inhibitory I κB proteins. In the canonical NF-κB activation pathway, the activity of NF- κB is negatively regulated by in teraction with inhibitory IκB factors (I κBα, IκBβ, IκBγ, IκBδ, IκBε, and Bcl-3), which prevents DNA binding and promotes cytoplasmic accumulation of the interacting p50/RelA dimeric complex. I κB proteins have different affinities for diverse NF- κB dimers, which greatly contributes to the complex fine-tuning of NF- κB functions [73]. Positive regulation of NF- κB is controlled by the I κB kinase (IKK) complex, which is in turn activated by cytokines, growth factors, antigen receptor s, MAPKs and other kinases. IKK
complex, which contains the IKK α and IKK β catalytic subunits and the regulatory scaffold sensing protein called NF- κB essential modulator (NEMO), phosphorylates I κB proteins leading to their ubiquitination and subsequent proteasome-dependent de gradation [72]. The result ing nuclear accumulation of the released NF- κB complexes leads to transcriptional activation of targets genes. Inputs for the classical pathway include TNFR1/2, TCR and BCR,  TLR/IL-1R, among others. In the alternative pathway, activation of IKK α occurs by the activity of NF- κB inducing kinase (NIK) that leads to the phosphorylation and processing of p100 bound to RelB, generating p52/RelB heterodimers, which in turn translocate to nucleus to activate gene transc ription. Activating signals fo r the alternative pathway include ligation of LT βR, BAFFR, and CD40R [74]. An importan t issue about the ce llular response to
UV irradiation is the  existence of  crosstalk between NF- κB and specific signali ng pathways, including the MAPKs, such as JNKs, ERKs and p38 MAP kina ses. These observations have been extensively
the MAPKs, such as JNKs, ERKs and p38 MAP kina ses. These observations have been extensively reviewed [75], therefore they will not be discussed here.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 151   UV-B radiation of mammalian cells induces the activation of several transcription factors including NF-κB and the subsequent transcripti on of genes [9]. Here, we review ed relevant aspects about NF- κB activation in the context of UV-induced stress. The original evidence for NF- κB regulation by UV comes from the initial observation that UV exposure of culture cells induces transcription from the long terminal repeat (LTR) promot er of human immunodeficiency vi rus 1 (HIV-1), the collagenase gene and the cellular oncogene fos. Transcriptional activation of HIV-1 depends on the two  NF-κB-binding sites located in the LTR  (-105 and -79 nucleotide positio ns), whereas the heterodimer of JUN and FOS (AP-1) appears to  bind to the collagenase enhancer , and the serum response factors p67 and p62 bind to c-fos  gene promoter. In addition, DNA- binding activities of the factors
recognizing the HIV-1 and collagenase  enhancers were augmented in extracts from UV-treated cells. These data indicated that UV, like TNF α or IL-1α, targets NF- κB to the nucleus. However, the canonical NF- κB activation mechan ism described above does not occur in UV-induced earl y phase (12 h).  NF-κB-dependent HIV-LTR activation requ ired lower doses of UV-C (2 J/m2) in cells from patients with Xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) than in  cells from healthy huma n individuals (20 J/m2), which supports the idea that DNA damage is required for proper NF- κB activation [76].  Other studies showed that UV-C radiat ion results in degradation of NF- κB inhibitor I κBα, nuclear translocation of RelA (p65 ), and induction of NF- κB DNA-binding activity. It was suggested that UV-C induces phosphorylation-inde pendent degrad ation of I κBs by the ubiquitin and proteasome pathway.
Interestingly, expression of a catalytically inactive IKK β mutant did not prevent NF- κB activation by UV-C, indicating that activation occurs through a mechanism independent of IKK activation [77].  UV-induced NF- κB activation depends on phosphorylation of I κBα by casein kinase II (CK2) through a mechanism that depends on the activation of p38 MAP kinase (Figure 2). Notabl y, inhibition of this pathway prevents UV-induced I κBα degradation and increases UV-induced cell death [78]. NF-κB activation may occur sequential ly in time by different mechanis ms. For instance, it has been observed that UV radiation i nduces a delayed and prolonged (3–20 h) activation of NF- κB, whereas TNFα exposure induced an immediate and acute ( 10–90 min) activation. It was reported that UV causes IκB degradation in an early phase (30 min to 6 h), which does not involve the phosphorylation of IκB by IκB kinase (IKK complex); while a late mechanism established in cultured cells beyond 15 h
requires the phosphorylation of I κBα, and the DNA damage-induced release of IL-1 α which in turn binds to its receptor and activates the IKK complex. This late phase of NF- κB activation appears to be due to DNA damage-dependent activation of the I KK complex. In contrast, early phase activation was independent of DNA damage [79] . UV-B radiation induction of NF- κB activity independently from chromosomal DNA damage has been previously obs erved using UV irradiated  cell-free cytosolic extracts [80]. In agreement with these obser vations, the UV response doe s not require a signal generated in the nucleus and is not dependent on  DNA damage. Enucleated ce lls are fully responsive to UV irradiation through NF- κB induction and activation of addi tional key signaling events [68].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 152   Figure 2. Signaling pathways leading to transcription factors activation in response to  UV-radiation.  UV-induced Nuclear Factor kappa B (NF- κB) pathway activa tion depends on phosphorylation of I κBα by Casein Kinase II (CK2) throu gh the activation of  p38-MAP kinase. Phosphorylation-induced  degradation of I κBα releases NF- B subunits RelA/p50, which enter into nucleus to activa te gene transcri ption of targets genes. UV -induced phospho rylation of Eukaryotic Translati on Initiation Factor 2 α (eIF2α) inhibits de novo  IκBα translation, whereas the existing I κBα is degraded, leading to NF- κB activation. The chemopr eventive inhibition of NF-κB by natural compounds parthenolide and magnolol, as well as p38 blocking by  (−)-Epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) is depict ed. In AP-1 pathway, UV-induced activation of membrane receptors leads to the activation of MEKK, c-Jun NH 2-Terminal Kinases (JNK),
and p38. MAPKs phosphorylate tran scription factors le ading to increased expression of AP-1. In Nrf2 pathway, Nrf2 acts as a sensor for oxidative a nd electrophilic stress. In these conditions, phase 2 inducers cause th e modification of Keap1 and/or phos phorylation of Nrf2 resulting in the release of Nrf2 from Keap1. Nrf2 is stab ilized and translocate to the nucleus, where it heterodimerizes with MAF protei ns, to bind to the antioxidant responsive element which leads to activation of cyto protective genes.   A novel mechanism mediating the early phase-NF- κB activation by UV radiation involved an endoplasmic reticulum-stress-induced translational inhibition pathway [81]. UV- induced phosphorylation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 α (eIF2α), inhibits de novo  IκB translation, whereas the existing I κB is degraded through the ubiquitin-dependent proteaso mal pathway, leading to NF- κB
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 153   activation in mouse embryo fibroblasts . In this model, inhibition of I κB mRNA translation was initiated by UV-C-induced (0.03 kJ/m2) phosphorylation of eIF2 α through activation of the protein kinase like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PER K) leading to early pha se activation of NF- κB. Other studies evidenced the activation of NF- κB via a non-canonical pathway. It was reported that both TNFα and UV-B stimuli enhanced NF- κB DNA-binding activity in nor mal human keratinocytes, however these events occur through different mechanisms. NF- κB response following TNF α treatment occurs by the canonical pathway and leads to I κBα phosphorylation and degradation; whereas activation of NF- κB by UV-B is independent of I κBα degradation. Moreover, TNF α or UV-B treatment results in the activation or repression of a subset of specific gene s [82]. These observations
provide further experimental evidence about the stimuli and cell-type dependence of NF- κB activation.  4.2. Chemopreventive Intervention of NF- κB Pathway The UV induced-skin photoaging is characterized by keratinocytes pr oliferation and degradation of collagen fibers, leading to skin wrinkli ng and laxity. It is  well known that NF- κB activity greatly contributes to the skin photoaging process. Ther efore, it is plausible that inhibition of NF- κB pathway could directly prevent skin photoaging effects. Th e natural compound parthe nolide, a sesquiterpene lactone from the plant feverfew ( Tanacetum parthenium ) can inhibit the gene expression mediated by NF-κB and the production of basic fibr oblast growth factor (bFGF) a nd matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1). Notably, this compound also inhibited the UV-B-induced proliferati on of keratinocytes and melanocytes in mouse skin [83,84]. Parthenolide induced apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation and
the expression of VEGF in vitro . Moreover, inhibition of NF- κB activity by expressing a mutant I κBα suppressed lung cancer metastasis in vivo  [85]. Magnolol is a bioactive compound found in the Japanese whitebark Magnolia ( Magnolia ovovata ) that specifically inhibited the NF- κB-dependent transcription. In addition, extern al swabbing with Magnolia extracts prevented skin photoaging process in mice. Magnolol was also effec tive in inhibiting the production of bFGF and MMP-1 from cells overexpressing p65, a major subunit of NF- κB. Interestingly, magnolol did not affect the phosphorylation and degradation of I κBα, but it inhibited the nuclear tr anslocation of the activated NF- κB [86]. Treatment of normal human epidermal keratinocytes w ith grape seed pro-anthocyanidins (GSP) inhibited UV-B-induced hydrogen peroxide, lip id peroxidation, protein oxidati on, and DNA damage. GSP also
inhibited UV-B-induced phosphorylat ion of ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. Moreover, GSP inhibited the  UV-B induced activation of NF- κB/p65 through inhibition of degr adation and activation of I κBα and IKKα, respectively [87]. ( −)-Epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) from green tea leaves  (Camellia sinensis ) is a potent antioxidant that  may have therapeutic applications in the treatment of many disorders (e.g., inflammation, cancer). It has been  described that EGCG is able to inhibit p38, therefore blocking NF- κB activation and c-fos  transcription (Figure 2). In  conclusion, these findings suggest that NF- κB inhibitors and modulators are useful  in preventing the skin photoaging,  UV-radiation-induced oxidative stre ss, as well as proliferation and metastasis of tumoral cells. Alternative strategies to target NF- κB functions have been develope d for potential therapeutically intervention. Experimentally indu ced sunburn reactions in mice coul d be specifically prevented by
blocking UV-induced, NF- κB-dependent gene transactivati on with oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) containing the NF- κB cis element (NF- κB decoy ODNs). Local UV-induced inflammatory changes
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 154   represented by cellular swelling, leukocyte infiltration, epidermal hyperplasia, and accumulation of proinflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6, TNF α, and VEGF were inhibited by topically applied decoy ODNs [88]. Similarly, NF- κB decoy ODNs lead to increased UV-B induced apoptosis of mouse transfected keratinocyte Pam 212 cells. In addition, cell sunburn formation was significantly enhanced by topical NF- κB decoy ODNs treatments, while UV-induced erythema was not affected [89]. These data promise for the potential application of decoy ODNs targeting NF- κB function as a new therapeutic modality for the treatment of skin diseases. 4.3. The Activator Protein-1: AP-1 Exposure to UV-B leads to the activation of cell surface growth factor and cytokine receptors, which induces multiple signal transduction pathwa ys that converge to stimulate DNA binding of
specific transcription factors, such  as the activator protein-1 (AP- 1), and subsequent modulation of gene expression [9]. The AP-1 transc ription factor family is composed  of homodimers or heterodimers of basic region-leucine zipper (bZI P) proteins that belong to the JUN (c-JUN, JUNB and JUND), FOS (c-FOS, FOSB, FRA-1 and FRA-2), Jun dimerizati on partners (JDP1 and JDP2), the activating transcription factors (ATF2, LRF1 /ATF3 and B-ATF) and musculoapo neurotic fibrosarcoma (MAF) subfamilies [90]. The bZIP domains allow binding to ot her proteins that contain a similar bZIP domain. DNA-binding specificity and a ffinity is governed by th e broad combinatorial possi bilities resulting from the large number of AP-1  proteins, which greatly increases th e spectrum of regulated genes.  AP-1 transcription factor is mainly composed of  JUN, FOS and ATF dimers , which after activation
by phosphorylation, mediate gene expression regulati on in response to a vari ety of physiological and pathological stimuli, incl uding cytokines, growth fact ors, hormones, stress si gnals, bacterial and viral infections, as well as oncogenic st imuli. In turn, AP-1 regulates a wi de range of cellular processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, survival , apoptosis and transformation [91]. These effects are mediated through activation and binding of AP-1 dimers to DNA consensus sequences, leading to expression regulation of ta rget genes, such as collagenase-1, c- JUN, cyclin D1, p21, p19 and p16 [92]. JUN-FOS heterodimers bind to the heptamer c onsensus sequence known as the TPA responsive element (5 ′-TGA(C/G)TCA-3 ′), whereas Jun-ATF dimers bind with higher affinity to the consensus sequence known as the cyclic AMP responsive element (5 ′-TGACGTCA-3 ′). Transactivation of AP-1 is required for tumor pr omoter-induced transforma tion in mouse epidermal
JB6 cells and for progression in mouse and human kera tinocytes. The relevant ro les of AP-1 in skin cancer promotion were early describe d in clonal genetic variants of mouse epidermal JB6 cells that are susceptible or resistant to promoti on of transformation by phorbol ester 12- O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Using constructs containing AP-1 cis-enhancer sequences upstream of a reporter gene, Bernstein and Colburn [93] evidenced an associ ation between induced AP-1 function and oncogenic transformation in JB6 cells. Constitutive AP-1 DNA binding and subsequent transactivating abilities occur in malignant but not in benign mouse epid ermal cell line 308, suggesting that AP-1 activation resulted in deregulation of gene ex pression leading to cel l neoplastic transformati on. In contrast, stable expression of a c-JUN deletion mutant (TAM67) in two malignant mouse epidermal cell lines blocked
tumor formation in nude mice [94] . Exposure of dominant negative TAM67 under the control of the human keratin-14 promoter blocked tumor promot er-induced AP-1 transac tivation and neoplastic
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 155   transformation [95]. Expression of  TAM67 inhibited AP-1 and NF- κB transactivation and suppresses anchorage independent growth of HPV immortalized human keratinocytes, revealing the existence of a “crosstalk” between AP-1 and NF- κB transcription factors [96]. Th e same group reported additional evidences suggesting that “cros s-coupling” of AP-1 and NF- κB activation might contribute to the process of tumor promoter-induced tr ansformation induced by TPA and TNF α [97]. Using okadaic acid, a prototypical non-phorbol este r skin tumor-promoting agent, in  transgenic mice expressing TAM67, Thompson and coworkers [98] observed that TAM67 was able to bloc k okadaic acid-induced skin tumor promotion, which indicates that func tional AP-1 is required  for TPA induced tumor promotion in multistage mouse skin carcinogenesis in vivo . Potential target genes responsible for
TAM67 inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz( a)anthracene-TPA-induced tumorigenesis were identified using microarray expression profiling of epider mal tissues. Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2/Ptgs2) and osteopontin (Opn/Spp1), which are known to be important  contributors in driving carcinogenesis, were identified as TAM67-modulated genes [99]. Cooper et al.  [100] expressed the TAM67 mutant transgene in the epidermis of SKH- 1 hairless mice and bred with mice expressing an AP-1 luciferase reporter gene. Authors showed that  expression of TAM67 efficiently inhibits UV-B-induced squamous cell carcinoma number and size in the SKH-1 hairle ss mouse, which correlated with a diminution in cyclin D1 expression. Taken altogether, these data s uggested that specific si gnaling pathways that are inhibited by a dominant negati ve c-JUN are involved in both ch emical and UV-B-induced skin carcinogenesis. They also evidence d that AP-1 is a good candidate target for the development of
chemoprevention strategies to prevent sunlight-induced skin cancers. Crosstalk between AP-1 subunits and MAPKs may exist. Involveme nt of signaling molecules in AP-1 activation has been reviewed [101]. In  addition, crosstalk between AP-1 and NF- κB has been recently reviewed [9], thus they will not be discussed here. The roles of p38 and ERK on UV-B induced c-fos  transcription factor gene expression were previously studied in the human keratinocytes cell line FL30 [102]. Using specific  inhibitors, authors showed that  suppression of both p38 and ERK completely blocked UV-B induced c-fos  expression. In addition, inhibition of p38 and ERK in a squamous cell carcinoma cell line SCL-1 has been shown to inhibit UV-A and UV-B-induced matrix metalloproteinases MMP-1 (stromelysin-2) and MMP -10 (interstitial collage nase) expression both  in vitro  [103] and in vivo  [104]. These findings iden tify the JNKs and p38 as important players in
UV-B-induced AP-1 activation in UV-B-induced skin carcinogenesis, which argues for the identification of novel specific inhibitors as chemopreventive agents. 4.4. The NF-E2-Related Factor 2: Nrf2 The accumulation of ROS contributes to a wide va riety of degenerative diseases including skin cancer. Cytoprotection is provided by the expression of antioxidant pr oteins and phase 2 detoxifying enzymes that are induced upon exposure to low leve ls of electrophiles or oxidative stress. These cellular antioxidants prevent the occurrence and re duce the severity and a ppearance of UV-induced photoaging and skin cancer. The protective mechanisms  described involves the NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), which binds to a cis-acting sequence called the antioxida nt responsive element (ARE) or electrophile responsive elem ent within the regulatory upstream re gion of target cytoprotective genes
coding for antioxidant proteins. Under basal conditi ons, Kelch-like ECH associ ating protein 1 (Keap1)
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 156   regulates the intracellular localizati on of Nrf2 by direct binding to its N-terminal Neh2 domain [105]. Keap1 interaction with Neh2 allows  the sequestration of Nrf2 in the cytosol and the enhancement of Nrf2 degradation by proteasomes, c onferring the fine tuning to regul ation of response [106]. During periods of oxidative/electrophilic stress, phase 2 inducers cause the modifi cation of Keap1 (Cys151) and/or PKC phosphorylation of Keap1 (Ser40) resulti ng in the release of Nrf2  from Keap1. Nrf2 is stabilized and translocates to the nucleus, where it forms a complex with MAF proteins and binds to ARE motifs to promote transcription of “anti-oxidant” genes. Therefore,  Nrf2 and its cytoplasmic anchor protein Keap1, regulate the cellular antioxidant response through the expression and coordinated induction of a battery of defensiv e genes encoding detoxifying enzymes and antioxidant proteins.
Nrf2 was first isolated as a protein closel y related to p45 NF-E2. F our members of the  p45 NF-E2-related proteins, p45 NF-E2, Nrf1, Nrf2, an d Nrf3, have been isolated in mammals and referred to as Cap‘n’collar (CNC)-t ype basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors [107]. The roles of Nrf2 and phase 2 genes in chemopreventi on of carcinogenesis have been well described in several tissues and organs; however only few studies ha ve focused in the elucid ation of their functions in skin [108]. Many harmful effects of UV radiation are associated w ith the generation of ROS, thus cellular antioxidants shoul d act to prevent UV-induced skin da mage. Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), a potent mitogen for epithelial cells, promot es survival under stress conditions, including ROS generation. Braun and colleges [109] reported a role for KGF-regulated Nrf2 in the control of gene expression and inflammation during cutaneous wound repair in vivo . UV-A, but not UV-B, could
activate Nrf2 in dermal fibroblasts  to ensure protection of dermis against photo-oxidative stress. In addition, using dermal fibroblasts derived from nrf2 or keap1  gene knockout mice, they demonstrated that disruption of nrf2 increased the number of apoptotic cells after UV-A radiation, whereas disruption of keap1  decreased the apoptotic cell number by half  as compared with wild-type animals. These observations evidenced that Nrf2-Keap1 comple x has an important function in the protection of skin against UV-A irradiation. However, the role of  Nrf2 in response to UV- B exposure has not been clearly demonstrated and contra dictory data have been reporte d [110]. Only low UV-B doses  (7.5 J/m2) could stimulate Nrf2 transcriptional activity in  normal human fibroblas ts. Intriguingly, high UV-B dose (20 J/m2) led to the nuclear exclusion of Nrf2  and down-regulation of chemoprotective
gene expression [111]. In contrast, Durchdewald et al.  [112] reported that elec trophilic chemicals, but not UV radiation, could activate Nr f2 in mouse keratinocytes.  These countered points have been reconciled by observations indicating that p53 may compete with Nrf2 and suppress the Nrf2 transcription of phase 2 genes [113]. Authors proposed that if the oxidative stress causes DNA damage, a second response base d on the activation of p53 takes place, which induces cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis. p53 activation countera cts the Nrf2-induced transcription of ARE-containing promoters in antioxid ant genes. Thus, it seems that a p53-dependant negative control on the Nrf2 transactivation should be activated to block the generation of a strong antioxidant intracellular environment that could dam the induc tion of apoptosis. Additional evidences about the role of Nrf2 in the UV response of the skin were obtained using a transgenic mice expressing an Nrf2
mutant (K5cre-caNrf2), which lacks the N-terminal Neh2 domain responsible for binding to the
role of Nrf2 in the UV response of the skin were obtained using a transgenic mice expressing an Nrf2 mutant (K5cre-caNrf2), which lacks the N-terminal Neh2 domain responsible for binding to the inhibitory Keap1, resulting in a specifically activati on of Nrf2 in the epidermis. Results showed that Nrf2 activates the production and release of glutathione and cystei ne by suprabasal keratinocytes, resulting in protection of basal cel ls from UV-B-induced apoptosis thro ugh activation of cytoprotective
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 157   genes. In addition, Nrf2 protec ts keratinocytes from UV-B cyto toxicity through enhanced ROS detoxification [114]. The involvement of Nrf2 in sk in cancer prevention  was demonstrated by auf dem Keller et al. [115]. Intriguingly, authors did not find gross abnormalitie s in the epidermis of transgenic mice, which express a dominant-negative Nrf2 mutant in the epid ermis; however, the incidence and multiplicity of chemically induced skin papillomas were enhanced. In addition, they evidenced that increased tumorigenesis results from a reduced basal expression  of cytoprotective Nrf ta rget genes, leading to accumulation of oxidative damage driving to genom ic instability and neopl astic transformation. In contrast, Kawachi et al. [116] reported no significant differences  in skin carcinogenesis between  nrf2-null and wild-type mice e xposed to chronic UV-B radiati on. Notably, they observed that
epidermal necrosis, inflammatory cell infiltration, sunburn cell formation, accumulation of oxidative DNA products and cell apoptosis afte r acute UV-B treatment (single dose), were more prominent in nrf2-null mice, suggesting that the Nrf2-Keap1 pathwa y plays an important role  in protection of the skin against acute UV-B reactions.  A concerted interplay between Keap1-Nrf2-Maf signaling and other signali ng pathways such as PKC, MAPKs, PI3K, PERK, p38, ERK2 and JNK1  have been reported and reviewed [117–120  and therefore will not be discussed here. 4.5. Chemopreventive Interventi on of Nfr2-Keap1 Pathway The chemopreventive effects of natural compounds  in photo-dermatological reactions caused by oxidative stress have been well documented. Expos ure to chemopreventive ag ents produces ROS or electrophiles and causes oxidative/el ectrophilic stress in cells, wh ich induces phase 2 detoxification
enzymes and antioxidant enzymes [121]. Treatment of  mouse and human keratino cytes with sulforaphane, a natural compound found in broccoli, Brussels spro uts or cabbages, increase s glutathione and phase 2 enzymes protecting against oxidative stress generate d by UV radiation. Moreover, topical application of sulforaphane-containing br occoli sprout extracts prot ects against UV-B (30 mJ/cm2)-induced skin carcinogenesis in SKH-1 high-risk mi ce, suggesting that this approach  constitutes a promising strategy for protecting skin against tumor formation after exposure to UV radiation [122]. In other studies, quercetin, a polyphenol found in fruits , vegetables, leaves and grains , protected human keratinocyte HaCaT cells from UV-A induced apoptosis and DNA damage by enha nced accumulation of Nrf2, which leads to elevating intracellular antioxidati ve activity and reduced production of ROS [123]. 4.6. Factor of Activated T Cells (NFAT) is Activated in Response to UV Radiation
NFAT is a family of nuclear tr anscription factors that are regul ated by calcium/calcineurin  signals [124]. They were identified for the first time as transcription factors of genes associated to immune response and play an important role during T cell activation. NFAT is expressed in T cells and some tissues such as the nervous system, bone and epidermis, and rece nt data suggest that NFAT is involved in the skin’s responses to UV radiation.  NFAT is predominantly located in an inactive hyperphosphorylated state in the cytoplasm, but when NFAT is dephosphor ylated by phosphatase calcineurin, its import into the nucleus in order to regulate gene transcription [125].  The UV-A-induced oxidative stress leads to calcineurin ac tivation, therefore, NFAT could be in an active form in response to
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 158   low doses of UV-A radiation. While high doses of  UV-A radiation induce phosphorylation of c-JUN through JNK, JNK bound to c-JUN may phosphorylate NFAT. These re sults suggest that NFAT in activate or inactivated state may be depending to different doses of UV-A [126]. Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) protein levels become elev ated in the epidermis of human sk in following UV-B irradiation and also in squamous cell carcinomas and actinic kera tosis. Heterozygous COX- 2 knockout mice showed that COX-2 is required for the deve lopment of UV-induced skin tumo rs. The COX-2 promoter contains binding sites for NFAT, and in some reports, it has been shown that overexpression of COX-2 is dependent of NFAT, which has antiapopt otic effect in response to UV-B [127]. This result suggested that NFAT in an activated or inactivated state is depending of doses and UV wavelength radiation. UV
radiation-induced NFAT may be negatively re gulated by MAPK activation, while phosphatase activations in response to UV irradiati on may regulate positiv ely NFAT [128].  5. Deciphering Cellular Response to UV Radiation in Skin Using Genomic Tools Sunburns are largely owing to UV-B radiation that is considered as the mo st successful inducer  of damaging effects on epidermis, such as wri nkling, aging, keratosis, cancers of keratinocyte  origin [129,130 , as well as a potential contributing factor  to the pathogenesis of melanoma. Several  in vit ro models have been developed to study the molecular mechanism involved in human skin pigmentation and cancer [131,132], inflammation and DNA repair processes [133]. These models include mono-cultured cell lines, co-cultured melanoc ytes and keratinocytes, intact skin or suction blisters, as well as reconstructed epidermis.  DNA microarray technology has beco me one of the crucial tools fo r understanding the biological
mechanisms associated with skin damage. One of the first studies s howed that UV-B radiation affects the expression of at least 198 genes in normal epider mal keratinocytes cultures from human skin [44]. At 0.5–2 h after irradiation, altera tions in gene expression of tr anscription factors, kinases, phosphatases, proteases, RNA processing enzymes, si gnal transducers, and cytoskeleton components, were notable, which suggests that keratinocytes  have sensed DNA damage and changed their physiology to respond to UV stimulation. The early  induced transcription factors included JUNB, JUND, c-FOS, ETR101, EGR1, HRY, and XBP-1. Thei r expression was relatively fast and short, which suggests that they could be  activating the expression of DN A damage sensors and DNA repair factors. The overexpression of TAFII30, a TATA- box binding protein associat ed factor, could be related to the enhanced transcription observed for many genes. In contrast, UV irradiation induced a
strong and persistent suppression of c-Myc, whic h is known to inhibit the expression of DNA  damage-induced growth-arrest proteins. The regula tion of kinases, phosphatases, small GTP binding proteins and their associated factors induced thr ee RING3 proteins, which is consistent with the activation of intracellular signaling processes. It is known that the main signal-transducing mechanism directly induced by UV irradiation implies th e participation of JNK and JNK-phosphorylated transcription factors [134–136]. Th e early suppression of the desmos omal proteins was noteworthy; since desmosomes keep cells closely attached one to another [137], their re duction may make easy the movement of keratinocytes, assembly of the cornifie d layer, and arrangement of the stratum corneum, which is the dead protective layer of skin. The mo st induced genes early after UV treatment include mitochondrial proteins (cytochrom e c-1, cytochrome c oxidase subun it VIIb, and cytochrome b) and
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 159   genes involved in energy generation (NADH de hydrogenase, mitochondrial ATP synthase,  nucleoside-diphosphate kinase, an el ectron transfer flavoprotein, and α-enolase). In contrast, both transporters and gluconeoge nic and lipogenic enzymes e xpression were repressed.  At 4–8 h, cells secreted growth factors, and produced cytokines and chemokines to alert the surrounding tissues to the UV damage. Specifically, fi ve members of the IL-8 family were induced: IL-8, Gro- α, Gro-β, MDCNF and MIP2. These ch emokines act as chemotactic  and stimulate basophils, neutrophils, and macrophages, appa rently promoting inflammatory response into UV-damaged tissue and activating melanocytes [138]. It has been demonstrated that keratinocytes do not produce interferon γ (IFNγ) but they have the capacity  to respond to its presence inducing the expression of
K17, the keratin in contr actile epithelia [139]. In fact, at la te time points after UV irradiation, IFN γ responsive genes were induced, such as p27, 17-kDa/15-kDa protein, IRF7A, hPA28 β and IFN γ receptor accessory factor 1. At these times, genes fo r components of the cornified layer of skin were induced too, including differentia tion markers, such as calgranu lin, elafin, involucrin and S100 calcium-binding protein A13, and four small prolin e-rich proteins [140], which suggests that the epidermal responses to UV comprise s the enrichment of stratum corneum through augmentation of the cornified, dead, protective layer of skin. It seems that one of the epidermal responses to UV is enrichment of stratum corneum.  A comparison of these data with other reports obtained from several time -course cDNA microarrays, revealed a very similar UV-B-regulated gene expression prof ile in keratinocytes [141–144]. Add itional
outcomes in epidermal keratinocytes showed th e induction of neuroendocri ne-immune-related genes involved in water and salt balance, prostaglandin s ynthesis, keratinocyte differentiation, as well as genes coding for stress effectors,  cytokines and metalloproteinase s [145]. Remarkably, HaCaT cells were able to respond to UV-B radi ation in a similar way than hea lthy epidermal kera tinocytes [146]. Among 840 genes tested, 192 changed their expression le vels at different time points. The genes were clustered into four groups in self-organizing maps  and classified into nine functional categories according to the affected biological processes. Those that were first up regulated and then returned to normal levels included genes related to the inhib ition of cell growth and the proteasome processing. On the other hand, the expression of numerous ge nes involved in the cytoskeleton dynamic, signaling,
metabolism and transcription were first down regulat ed or unchanged and then up regulated, reflecting the restoration of UV-B-damaged cellular activ ities. Another study using cDNA microarray technology elucidated th e effect of a cytotoxic dose of UV-B on cancer-related genes in human epidermal keratinocytes (neonatal) at 1, 6, and 24 h post-radiation. Once verified  that viabili ty of the irradiated cells was 75% at 24 h post-irradiation, anal ysis of the hybridization signals revealed that  27 genes were regulated within 1 h after UV-B treatm ent. Moreover, 58 and 28 genes were regulated at 6 and 24 h post-irradiation, respectively. Various cy tokeratins and transcri ption factors were up regulated within 1 h post-irradiatio n. After 6 h, expression of a vari ety of genes rela ted to growth regulation (p21WAF1, notch 4, and smoothened), a poptosis (caspase 10, hTRIP, and CRAF1), DNA
repair (ERCC1, XRCC1), cyt okines (IL-6, IL-13, TGF β, and endothelin 2), and cell adhesion (RhoE, and RhoGDI) were altered in human keratinocytes [147].  Interestingly, in a squamous cell carcinoma line, the effect of UV-B radia tion contrasted from the
and RhoGDI) were altered in human keratinocytes [147].  Interestingly, in a squamous cell carcinoma line, the effect of UV-B radia tion contrasted from the response of normal human keratinocytes. Normal cells were found to be more resistant than carcinoma to UV-B-induced apoptosis, and this resistance was prin cipally associated to the secretion of survival
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 160   factors. The effect of UV-B on normal cells an d carcinoma line induced the up regulation of 251 and 127 genes, respectively, and the dow n regulation of 322 and 117 genes, respectively, in these cultures. Although the response of keratinocytes  to UV-B involved control of cruc ial checkpoint genes, such as p53, MDM2, p21(Cip1), DeltaNp63, as well as antiapoptotic and DNA repair genes, little or no change in the expression of these genes wa s detected in squamous cell carc inoma line [148]. Despite the fact that keratinocytes are the most plentiful skin cell type, they do not completely  represent human skin  in vivo  because epidermis contains Langerhans cells , which are the reside nt antigen-presenting dendritic cells, Merkel cells, the mechanoreceptive cells related to sensory ne urons, and melanocytes that provide pigments as defense from sunlight and comprise about 10% of all epidermal cells.
Facultative pigmentation, as a c onsequence of physiological reac tion to UV radiation and skin constitutive color, commits the epidermal pigmen tation controlled by melanocytes and melanosome metabolism [149]. In addition, low doses of UV-B radiation have been shown to cause a greater increase in melanin synthesis in human co-cultu re models based on melanocyte and keratinocyte  cells [150,151], than in mono-cultured melanocytes [152]. Even though the epidermis might thicken with prolonged UV exposure, the melanocytes undertake crucial physiological modifications, including bigger dendrite formation, melanogenesis, and melanosome translocatio n that are responsible for maintaining an adequate protectio n to minimize UV chronic damage [153]. Molecular approaches on UV responses have al so advanced rapidly using primary melanocyte cultures and cultivated melanoma ce lls. It has been reported that UV exposure induces a G1 arrest in
melanocytes which is in part due to p53 [154 ] and p16INK4a [155]. Notably, a polymorphism in p53 protein (Arg72Pro) is responsible for risk of me lanoma [156]. In melanocytes, many molecules are induced by UV treatment [157–161]. The activated networ k contains transcripti on factors (Id1, N-oct3, p73, p53, Mitf), signaling kinases (JNK, ATR, p38, AKT ), effectors for cell cy cle control (p16INK4a, Gadd45, p21CIP), DNA reparation (Gadd45, Ddb2) and survival  (Bax, Bcl-2) [162–164]. A relevant widespread study ev aluated UV-B-mediated alterati ons in over 47,000 transcripts by microarrays assays, using primary melanocytes culture s as model. A set of p53 targets, including the cell cycle regulator CDKN1A ( p21CIP), WNT pathway regulator DKK1 (dickkopf homolog 1), receptor tyrosine kinase EPHA2, growth factor  GDF15, ferrodoxin-reductase (FDXR), p53-inducible protein (TP53I3), transc ription factor ATF3, DNA repair enzyme DDB2, and β-adrenergic receptor
ADBR2, were identified. Besides, a subgroup of ne urite/axonal developmen tal genes was modulated, suggesting that melanocytic and neuronal arborizat ion may have related mechanisms. Compared to melanomas, the basal level of many of these p53-r esponsive genes was greatly deregulated. Genes like CDKN1A, DDB2 an d ADRB2, showed  a decreased expression in mela nomas, increasing the probability to perform a concomitant functi on in carcinogenesi s events [165]. The role of UV-B radiation in skin  cancer has been cons iderably emphasized. In contrast, the adverse effects of UV-A have often been dismissed and comparatively less st udied. At present,  many published articles showed the protagonist action of UV-A on sk in carcinogenesis. Unlike UV-B, which is partially absorbed by the different epidermal layers and does not penetrate into the skin , UV-A rays affect the dermal compartment by radi cally decreasi ng the amount of superficial fibr oblasts in epider mis [166]. The
prevalence of UV-A mutations in the basal cell layer supports  the essential role th at UV-A may perform in
prevalence of UV-A mutations in the basal cell layer supports  the essential role th at UV-A may perform in the malignant alterations of human skin [167]. Beside s, UV-A radiation induces ep idermal lipid peroxidation,
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 161   which stimulates Langerha ns cells migration from the epidermis, thus contributing to UV-induced immunosuppression [168], as well as alteration of  the expression of TNF α in keratinocytes [169]. Gene expression profiles in melanocytes and other types of skin cells submitted to different types of UV have been recently reported a nd potential previously unidentifie d factors involved in UV-induced responses of human skin have been identified. Whol e human genome microarray analyses were used to characterize human skin in situ  and examine how melanocyte sp ecific proteins and paracrine melanogenic factors are regulated by repetitive exposure to different types of UV. The results showed that UV-B radiation elicited a drama tic increase in a large number of  genes involved in pigmentation, as well as in other cellular functions, while UV-A  had little or no effect on these processes [170].
Another study using microarray technology confirmed that UV-A regulates genes involved in extracellular matrix homeo stasis, oxidative stress, h eat shock responses, cell growth, inflammation and epidermal differentiation [171]. In addition, modulat ions for genes previously unknown to be involved in the UV-A response, such as PL AB, EPO, HBEGF, IGF1 and TGF- α, all correspondi ng to growth factors family were described. Furthermore, this wo rk also revealed that broad-spectrum sunscreen application prior to UV-A exposure abrogated or significantly reduced  these effects, because it was able to normalize gene e xpression in both fibroblasts  and keratinocytes [171]. One last interesting issue is that most experime ntation characterizing the molecular effects of sun exposure in skin has genera lly involved solar simulators. In most cases, the aim was to explore a very drastic UV radiation panorama, which is barely f ound in routinely open-air activities. A non-extreme
UV spectrum denoted as “daily UV radiation” (D -UVR) with a higher UV- A than UV-B radiation ratio, has consequently been consid ered in several experimental pr ojects. The biological impact of exposure to low physiological doses  of D-UVR on a three-dimensiona l reconstructed skin model has been studied. In such conditions, skin morphological alterations could only be identified afterward the highest dose of D-UVR. Outcom es were focused on oxidative stre ss induced by D-UVR. A cell type differential response was observed: it was more rapi d in fibroblasts, with a bulk of inductions and high levels of modulation, in contrast to keratinocyte behavior. Results evidenced a higher sensitivity in response to oxidative stress in dermal fibroblasts lo cated at the bottom of ep idermal layers, giving new insights into the skin molecular processes happe ning as a consequence of daily UV exposure [172].
In conclusion, DNA microarrays assays have emer ged as the golden tec hnique in the overall analysis of gene expression, and their achievements ha ve bettered even the most positive expectations. Their scopes include the understandi ng of molecular events associat ed with unhealt hy epidermis and skin carcinogenesis. Fortunately, these findings shall lead us to the creation and improvement of medical therapies and resources to develop the func tion of healthy skin, as well as the design of new politics of prevention. 6. Concluding Remarks As described above, the cellular response to UV radiation involves multiple and specific signal transduction pathways and transcri ption factors. Deciphering the co mplex interplay between signaling kinases and transcription factors effectors in the control of gene expressi on after UV radiation is imperative to develop novel therapeutic strategies to overcome skin damage. Progress in understanding
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 162   the multitude of mechanisms induced by UV-exposure could lead to the identification and potential development of specific inhibitors for the prevention and control of sk in photoaging and carcinogenesis. Acknowledgements Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Council of Science and Technology (CONACyT), Mexico (grants 112454 a nd 115306), and The Institute of Science and Technology (ICyT-DF), Mexico (grant PIFUTP09- 269). This work was also supported by UACM (Mexico), and COFAA-IPN (Mexico). References  1. Epstein, J.H. Photocarcinogenesis, skin cancer, and aging. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 1983 , 9, 487–502. 2. de Gruijl, F.R.; van Kranen, H.J.; Mullenders, L.H. UV-induced DNA damage, repair, mutations and oncogenic pathways in skin cancer. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 2001 , B63, 19–27. 3. Armstrong, B.K.; Kricker, A. The epidemiology of UV induced skin cancer. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 2001 , B63, 8–18.
Photobiol. 2001 , B63, 8–18. 4. Boukamp, P. UV-induced skin cancer: Similarities—variations. J. Dtsch. Dermatol. Ges . 2005 , 3, 493–503.  5. Setlow, R.B. The wavelengths in sunlight effective in producing skin cancer: A theoretical analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1974 , 71, 3363–3366. 6. Godar, D.E. UV doses worldwide. Photochem. Photobiol . 2005 , 81, 736–749. 7. Kielbassa, C.; Roza, L.; Epe, B.Wavelength de pendence of oxidative DNA damage induced by UV and visible light. Carcinogenesis  1997 , 18, 811–816. 8. Ravanat, J.L.; Douki, T.; Cadet, J. Direct a nd indirect effects of UV radiation on DNA and its components. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 2001 , B63, 88–102. 9. Cooper, S.J.; Bowden, G.T. Ultraviolet B regulati on of transcription factor families: Roles of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF- κB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) in UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis. Curr. Cancer Drug Targets  2007 , 7, 325–334.
10. Cole, C.A.; Forbes, P.D.; Davies, R.E. An action spectrum for UV photocarcinogenesis. Photochem. Photobiol. 1986 , 43, 275–284. 11. de Gruijl, F.R. Photocarcinogenesis: UVA vs. UVB. Methods Enzymol. 2000 , 319, 359–366.  12. Gange, W.R.; Rosen, C.F. UVA effects on mammalian skin and cells. Photochem. Photobiol. 1986 , 43, 701–705. 13. Nomura, T.; Nakajima, M.; Hongyo, T.; Taniguc hi, E.; Fukuda, K.; Li, L.; Kurooka, M.;  Sutoh, K.; Hande, P.; Kawaguchi, T.; et al. Induction of cancer, acidic keratosis, and specific p53 mutations by UVB light in human skin maintain ed in severe combined immunodeficient mice. Cancer Res.  1997 , 57, 2081–2084. 14. Kabuyama, Y.; Homma, M.K.; Kurosaki, T.; Homm a, Y. Early signaling events induced by  280-nm UV irradiation. Eur. J. Biochem. 2002 , 269, 664–670. 15. Runger, T.M.; Kappes, U.P. Mechanisms of muta tion formation with long- wave ultraviolet light (UVA). Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 2008 , 24, 2–10.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 163   16. Scharffetter-Kochanek, K.; Wlaschek, M.; Brenneis en, P.; Schauen, M.; Blaudschun, R.; Wenk, J. UV-induced reactive oxygen species in photocarcinogenesis and photoaging. Biol. Chem. 1997 , 378, 1247–1257. 17. Bender, K.; Blattner, C.; Knebel, A.; Iordanov, M.; Herrlich, P.; Rahmsdorf, H.J. UV-induced signal transduction. J. Photochem. Photobiol. 1997 , B37, 1–17. 18. Tyrrell, R.M. Activation of mammalian gene expression by the UV co mponent of sunlight—from models to reality. Bioessays  1996 , 18, 139–148. 19. Sachsenmaier, C.; Radier-Pohl, A.; Zinck, R.; Nordheim, A.; Herrlich, P.; Rahmsdorf, H.J. Involvement of growth factor recepto rs in the mammalian UVC response. Cell 1994 , 78, 963–972. 20. Zhang, Y.; Dong, Z.; Bode, A.M.; Ma, W.Y.; Che n, N.; Dong, Z. Inducti on of EGFR-dependent and EGFR-independent signaling pathwa ys by ultraviolet A irradiation. DNA Cell Biol . 2001 , 20, 769–779.
769–779. 21. Rosette, C.; Karin, M. Ultraviolet light and osmotic stress: Activati on of the JNK cascade through multiple growth factor  and cytokine receptors. Science 1996 , 274, 1194–1197. 22. Devary, Y.; Gottlieb, R.A.; Smeal, T.; Karin,  M. The mammalian ultraviolet response is triggered by activation of Src tyrosine kinases. Cell 1992 , 71, 1081–1091. 23. Coso, O.A.; Chiariello, M.; Yu, J.C.; Teramoto, H.; Crespo, P.; Xu, N.; Miki, T.; Gutkind, J.S. The small GTP-binding proteins Rac1 and Cdc 42 regulate the activity of the JNK/SAPK signalling pathway. Cell 1995 , 81, 1137–1146. 24. Kabuyama, Y.; Hamaya, M.; Homma, Y. Wavelength specific activation of PI-3kinase by UVB irradiation. FEBS Lett.  1998 , 441, 297–301. 25. Bode, A.M.; Dong, Z. Mitogen-activated prot ein kinase activation in UV induced signal transduction. Sci. STKE 2003 , 2003 , RE2. 26. Zhang, Y.; Ma, W.Y.; Kaji, A.; Bode, A.M.; Dong, Z. Requirement of ATM in UVA-induced
signaling and apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem . 2002 , 277, 3124–3131. 27. Zhang, Y.; Zhong, S.; Dong, Z.; Chen, N.; Bode, A. M.; Ma, W.; Dong, Z. UVA induces Ser381 phosphorylation of p90RSK/MAPKAP-K 1 via ERK and JNK pathways. J. Biol. Chem . 2001 , 276, 14572–14580. 28. Ibuki, Y.; Goto, R. Antiapoptotic effects induced by different wavelengths of ultraviolet light. Photochem. Photobiol.  2002 , 75, 495–502. 29. Pearson, G.; Robinson, F.; Beers Gibson, T.; Xu, B.E.; Karandikar, M.; Berman, K.; Cobb, M.H. Mitogen-activated protein (MAP ) kinase pathways: Regulati on and physiological functions. Endocr. Rev. 2001 , 22, 153–183. 30. Minden, A.; Lin, A.; McMahon, M.; Lange, C.C.; Derijard, B.; Davis, R.J.; Johnson, L.;  Karin, M. Differential activation of ERK and J NK mitogen-activated pr otein kinases by Raf-1 and MEKK. Science 1994 , 266, 1719–1723. 31. Weston, C.R.; Davis, R.J. The JNK signal trans duction pathway. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2002 , 12, 14–21.
12, 14–21.  32. Roux, P.P.; Blenis, J. ERK and p38 MAPK activated protein kinases:  A family of protein kinases with diverse biological functions. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev . 2004 , 68, 320–344. 33. Zhong, J.L.; Yang, L.; Lü, F.; Xiao, H.; Xu, R. ; Wang, L.; Zhu, F.; Zhang, Y. UVA, UVB and UVC Induce Differential Response Signa ling Pathways Converged on the eIF2 α phosphorylation. Photochem. Photobiol . 2011 , 87, 1092–1104.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 164   34. Nakamura, S.; Takahashi, H.; Kinouchi, M.; Manabe, A.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Hashimoto, Y.; Iizuka, H. Differential phosphorylation of mitogen- activated protein kinase families by epidermal growth factor and ultraviolet B irradiatio n in SV40-transformed human keratinocytes.  J. Dermatol. Sci. 2001 , 25, 139–149. 35. Lee, E.R.; Kim, J.H.; Kang, Y.J.; Cho, S.G. Th e anti-apoptotic and anti -oxidant effect of eriodictyol on UV-induced a poptosis in keratinocytes. Biol. Pharm. Bull . 2007 , 30, 32–37. 36. Xu, Y.; Shao, Y.; Zhou, J.; Voorhees, J.J.; Fisher , G.J. Ultraviolet irradiation-induces epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) nuclear translocation in human keratinocytes. J. Cell. Biochem . 2009 , 107, 873–880. 37. Holt, S.; Alexander, P.; Inman, C.; Davies, D.  Epidermal growth factor induced tyrosine phosphorylation of nuclear proteins  associated with translocatio n of epidermal growth factor
receptor into the nucleus. Biochem. Pharmacol.  1995 , 133, 211–222. 38. Lin, S.; Makino, K.; Xia, W.; Matin, A.; Wen, Y.; Kwong, K.; Bourguignon, L.; Hung, M. Nuclear localization of EGF receptor and its poten tial new role as a transcription factor.  Nat. Cell. Biol.  2001 , 3, 802–808. 39. Kyriakis, J.M.; Avruch, J. Mammalian mitogen-ac tivated protein kinase  signal transduction pathways activated by stress and inflammation. Physiol. Rev. 2001 , 81, 807–869. 40. Raingeaud, J.; Gupta, S.; Rogers, J.S.; Dicken s, M.; Han, J.; Ulevitch, R.J.; Davis, R.J.  Pro-inflammatory cytokines and environmental st ress cause p38 mitogen-activ ated protein kinase activation by dual phosphorylat ion on tyrosine and threonine. J. Biol. Chem. 1995 , 270, 7420–7426. 41. Huang, C.; Li, J.; Chen, N.; Ma, W.; Bowden, G.T. ; Dong, Z. Inhibition of atypical PKC blocks ultraviolet-induced AP-1 activation by sp ecifically inhibiti ng ERKs activation. Mol. Carcinog. 2000 , 27, 65–75.
2000 , 27, 65–75. 42. Englaro, W.; Derijard, B.; Ortonne, J.P.; Ballotti, R.  Solar ultraviolet light activates extracellular signal-regulated kinases and th e ternary complex factor in human normal keratinocytes. Oncogene 1998 , 16, 661–664. 43. Djavaheri-Mergny, M.; Dubertre t, L. UV-A-induced AP-1 act ivation requires the Raf/ERK pathway in human NCTC 2544 keratinocytes. Exp. Dermatol.  2001 , 10, 204–210. 44. Li, D.; Turi, T.G.; Schuck, A.; Freedberg, I.M.; Khitrov, G.; Blumenberg, M. Rays and arrays: The transcriptional program in the response of human epidermal keratinocytes to UVB illumination. FASEB J. 2001 , 15, 2533–2535. 45. Yanase, H.; Ando, H.; Horikawa, M.; Watana be, M.; Mori, T.; Matsuda, N. Possible involvement of ERK 1/2 in UVA-induced mela nogenesis in cultured normal human epidermal melanocytes. Pigment Cell Res. 2001 , 14, 103–109. 46. Mumby, M.C.; Walter, G. Prot ein serine/threonine phosphatases:  Structure, regulation, and
functions in cell growth. Physiol. Rev.  1993 , 73, 673–699.  47. Lee, E.R.; Kim, J.H.; Choi, H.Y.; Jeon, K.; Cho, S. G. Cytoprotective Effe ct of Eriodictyol in UV-irradiated Keratinocytes via Phosphatase-d ependent Modulation of both the p38 MAPK and Akt Signaling Pathways. Cell. Physiol. Biochem . 2011 , 27, 513–524. 48. Song, J.Y.; Han, H.S.; Sabapathy, K.; Lee, B.M.; Y u, E.; Choi, J. Expressi on of a homeostatic regulator, Wip1 (wild-type p53-induced phosphatase),  is temporally induced by c-Jun and p53 in response to UV irradiation. J. Biol. Chem. 2010 , 285, 9067–9076.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 165   49. Denu, J.; Tanner, K. Specific and reversible inac tivation of protein tyro sine phosphatases by hydrogen peroxide: Evidence for a sulfenic acid intermediate and implications for redox regulation. Biochemistry  1998 , 37, 5633–5642.  50. Knebel, A.; Rahmsdorf, H.; Ullrich, A.; Herrlich, P. Dephosphorylation of receptor tyrosine kinases as target of regulation by radiatio n, oxidants or alkylating agents. EMBO. J. 1996 , 15, 5314–5325. 51. Xu, Y.; Shao, Y.; Voorhees, J.J.; Fisher, G. J. Oxidative inhibiti on of receptor-type  protein-tyrosine phosphatase kapp a by ultraviolet irradiation activ ates epidermal growth factor receptor in human keratinocytes. J. Biol. Chem.  2006 , 281, 27389–27397. 52. Cantley, L.C. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. Science  2002 , 296, 1655–1657. 53. Franke, T.F.; Cantley, L.C. A Bad kinase makes good. Nature 1997 , 390, 116–117.
54. Datta, S.R.; Dudek, H.; Tao, X.; Masters, S. ; Fu, H.; Gotoh, Y.; Greenberg, M.E. Akt phosphorylation of bad couples su rvival signals to the cell -intrinsic death machinery. Cell 1997 , 91, 231–241. 55. Ibuki, Y.; Goto, R. Suppression of apoptosis by UVB irradiati on: Survival signaling via  PI3-kinase/Akt pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2000 , 279, 872–878. 56. Wan, Y.S.; Wang, Z.Q.; Shao, Y.; Voorhees, J.J.; Fish er, G.J. Ultraviolet ir radiation activates PI 3-kinase/Akt survival pathway via EGF receptors in human skin in vivo . Int. J. Oncol. 2001 , 18, 461–466. 57. Dufner, G.T. Ribosomal S6 kinase si gnaling and the contro l of translation. Exp. Cell Res. 1999 , 253, 100–109. 58. Frodin, M.; Gammeltoft, S. Role and regulation of 90 kDa ribosomal  S6 kinase (RSK) in signal transduction. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 1999 , 151, 65–77. 59. Zhang, Y.; Dong, Z.; Nomura, M.; Zhong, S.; Chen, N.; Bode, A.M.; Dong, Z. Signal
Transduction Pathways Involved in Phosphor ylation and Activation of p70S6K Following Exposure to UVA Irradiation. J. Biol. Chem.  2001 , 276, 20913–20923. 60. Watts, R.G.; Huang, C.; Young, M.R.; Li, J.J.; Pennie, W.D.; Colburn, N.H. Expression of dominant negative Erk2 inhibits AP-1 tran sactivation and neopl astic transformation. Oncogene 1998 , 17, 3493–3498. 61. Rotman, G.; Shiloh, Y. ATM: A mediator of  multiple responses to genotoxic stress. Oncogene 1999 , 18, 6135–6144. 62. Kastan, M.B.; Lim, D.S. The many substrates and functions of ATM. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2000 , 1, 179–186. 63. Banin, S.; Moyal, L.; Shieh, S.; Taya, Y.; Anderson, C.W.; Chessa, L.; Smorodinsky, N.I.; Prives, C.; Reiss, Y.; Shiloh, Y.; et al. Enhanced phosphorylation of p53 by ATM in response to DNA damage. Science 1998 , 281, 1674–1677. 64. Westphal, C.H.; Rowan, S.; Schmaltz, C.; Els on, A.; Fisher, D.E.; Leder, P. Atm and p53
cooperate in apoptosis and suppre ssion of tumorigenesis, but not in  resistance to acute radiation toxicity. Nat. Genet. 1997 , 16, 397–401. 65. Shiloh, Y. ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) : Expanding roles in the DNA damage response and cellular homeostasis. Biochem. Soc. Trans.  2001 , 29, 661–666.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 166   66. Canman, C.E.; Lim, D.S.; Cimprich, K.A.; Taya , Y.; Tamai, K.; Sakaguchi, K.; Appella, E.; Kastan, M.B.; Siliciano, J.D. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53. Science 1998 , 281, 1677–1679. 67. Shiloh, Y. ATM and ATR:  Networking cellular re sponses to DNA damage. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2001 , 11, 71–77. 68. Devary, Y.; Rosette, C.; DiDonato, J.A.; Karin, M. NF- κB activation by ultraviolet light not dependent on a nuclear signal. Science  1993 , 261, 1442–1445. 69. Nishigori, C. UV-induced DNA damage in carcinogenesis and its repair. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2000 , 23, S41–S44. 70. O’Dea, E.; Hoffmann, A. NF- κB signaling. Wiley Interdiscip. R ev. Syst. Biol. Med . 2009 , 1,  107–115. 71. O’Dea, E.; Hoffmann, A. The regulatory logic of the NF- κB signaling system. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol . 2010 , 2, a000216.
Perspect. Biol . 2010 , 2, a000216. 72. Gilmore, T.D. Introduction to NF- κB: Players, pathways, perspectives. Oncogene  2006 , 25, 6680–6684. 73. Neumann, M.; Naumann, M. Beyond I κBs: Alternative regulation of NF- κB activity. FASEB J . 2007 , 21, 2642–2654. 74. Matthew, S.H.; Ghosh, S. Signaling to NF- κB. Genes Dev . 2004 , 18, 2195–2224. 75. Muthusamy, V.; Piva, T.J. The UV response of the skin: A review  of the MAPK, NF- κB and TNFα signal transduction pathways. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 2010 , 302, 5–17. 76. Stein, B.; Rahmsdorf, H.J.; Ste ffen, A.; Litfin, M.; Herrlich, P.  UV-induced DNA damage is an intermediate step in UV-induced expression  of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, collagenase, c-fos, and metallothionein. Mol. Cell Biol . 1989 , 9, 5169–5181. 77. Li, N.; Karin, M. Ionizing radiation and short wavelength UV activate NF- κB through two distinct mechanisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  USA 1998 , 95, 13012–13017.
78. Kato, T., Jr.; Delhase, M.; Hoffmann, A.; Karin, M. CK2 is a C-terminal I κB kinase responsible for NF-kB activation during UV response. Mol. Cell 2003 , 12, 829–839. 79. Bender, K.; Gottlicher, M.; Whiteside, S.; Rahmsdorf, H.J.; Herrlich, P. Sequential DNA damage-independent and -dependent activation of NF- κB by UV. EMBO J.  1998 , 17, 5170–5181. 80. Simon, M.M.; Aragane, Y.; Schwarz, A.; Luger, T.A.; Schwarz, T. UVB light induces nuclear factor kB (NFkB) activity independently from chromosomal DNA damage in cell-free cytosolic extracts. J. Invest. Dermatol . 1994 , 102, 422–427. 81. Wu, S.; Tan, M.; Hu, Y.; Wang, J.L. ; Scheuner, D.; Kaufman, R.J. Ul traviolet light activates NF-κB through translational inhibition of I Bα synthesis. J. Biol. Chem . 2004 , 279, 34898–34902. 82. Lewis, D.A.; Spandau, D. F. UVB activation of NF- B in normal human keratinocytes occurs via a unique mechanism. Arch. Dermatol. Res . 2007 , 299, 93–101.
83. Tanaka, K.; Asamitsu, K.; Uranishi, H.; Iddama lgoda, A.; Ito, K.; Kojima, H.; Okamoto, T. Protecting skin photoaging by NF- κB inhibitor. Curr. Drug Metab . 2010 , 11, 431–435. 84. Tanaka, K.; Hasegawa, J.; Asamitsu, K.; Okamoto, T. Prevention of the ultraviolet B-mediated skin photoaging by a nuclear factor kappaB inhibitor, parthenolide. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.  2005 , 315, 624–630.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 167   85. Kishida, Y.; Yoshikawa, H.; Myoui,  A. Parthenolide, a na tural inhibitor of Nuclear Factor-kappaB, inhibits lung colonization of murine osteosarcoma cells . Clin. Cancer Res.  2007 , 13, 59–67. 86. Tanaka, K.; Hasegawa, J.; Asamitsu, K.; Okamoto, T. Magnolia ovovata extract and its active component magnolol prevent skin photoaging vi a inhibition of nucle ar factor kappaB. Eur. J. Pharmacol.  2007 , 565, 212–219. 87. Mantena, S.K.; Katiyar, S.K. Grape seed pr oanthocyanidins inhibi t UV-radiation-induced oxidative stress and activation of MAPK and NF- κB signaling in human epidermal keratinocytes. Free Radic. Biol. Med.  2006 , 40, 1603–1614.  88. Abeyama, K.; Eng, W.; Jester, J.V. ; Vink, A.A.; Edelbaum , D.; Cockerell, C.J. ; Bergstresser, P.R.; Takashima. A. A role for NF- κB-dependent gene transactivation in sunburn. J. Clin. Invest.  2000 , 105, 1751–1759.
105, 1751–1759. 89. Yokoyama, S.; Nakano, H.; Yamazaki, T.; Tamai, K.; Hanada, K.; Takahashi, G. Enhancement of ultraviolet-indu ced apoptosis by NF- κB decoy oligonucleotides. Br. J. Dermatol . 2005 , 153, S47–S51. 90. Eferl, R.; Wagner, E.F. AP-1: A dou ble-edged sword in tumorigenesis. Nat. Rev. Cancer  2003 , 3, 859–868. 91. Shaulian, E. AP-1 The Jun proteins: Oncoge nes or tumor suppressors in disguise? Cell Signal.  2010 , 22, 894–899. 92. Shaulian, E.; Karin, M. AP-1 as a regulator of cell life and death. Nat. Cell Biol . 2002 , 4,  E131–E136. 93. Bernstein, L.R.; Colburn, N.H. AP1/Jun function is  differentially induced in promotion-sensitive and resistant JB6 cells. Science  1989 , 244, 566–569. 94. Domann, F.E., Jr.; Levy, J.P.; Finch, J.S.; Bowden, G.T. Constitutive AP-1 DNA binding and transactivating ability of malignant but not benign mouse epidermal cells. Mol. Carcinog.  1994 , 9, 61–66.
9, 61–66. 95. Domann, F.E.; Levy, J.P.; Birrer, M.J.; Bowden, G.T. Stable expression of a c-JUN deletion mutant in two malignant mouse epidermal cell lines blocks tu mor formation in nude mice.  Cell Growth Differ.  1994 , 5, 9–16. 96. Li, J.J.; Rhim, J.S.; Schlegel, R.; Vousden, K.H. ; Colburn, N.H. Expression of dominant negative Jun inhibits elevated AP-1 and NF- κB transactivation and suppre sses anchorage independent growth of HPV immortalized human keratinocytes. Oncogene  1998,  16, 2711–2721. 97. Li, J.J.; Westergaard, C.; Ghosh, P.; Colburn, N.H.  Inhibitors of both nuclear factor-kappaB and activator protein-1 activa tion block the neoplastic transformation response. Cancer Res.  1997 , 57, 3569–3576. 98. Thompson, E.J.; MacGowan, J.; Young, M.R.; Colbur n, N.; Bowden, G.T. A dominant negative c-jun specifically blocks okadaic acid-induced skin tumor promotion. Cancer Res.  2002 , 62, 3044–3047.
3044–3047. 99. Matthews, C.P.; Birkholz, A.M.; Baker, A.R. ; Perella, C.M.; Beck, G.R., Jr.; Young, M.R.; Colburn, N.H. Dominant-negative activator pr otein 1 (TAM67) targets cyclooxygenase-2 and osteopontin under conditions in  which it specifically inhibits tumorigenesis. Cancer Res.  2007 , 67, 2430–2438.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 168   100. Cooper, S.J.; MacGowan, J.; Ranger-Moore, J. ; Young, M.R.; Colburn, N.H.; Bowden, G.T. Expression of dominant negative c-jun inhibits ultraviolet B-i nduced squamous cell carcinoma number and size in an SKH-1 hairless mouse model. Mol. Cancer Res . 2003 , 1, 848–854. 101. Zenz, R.; Wagner, E.F. Jun signalling in the epid ermis: From developmental defects to psoriasis and skin tumors. Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol . 2006 , 38, 1043–1049. 102. Chen, W.; Bowden, G.T. Activation of p38 MAP ki nase and ERK are required for ultraviolet-B induced c-fos  gene expression in human keratinocytes. Oncogene  1999 , 18, 7469–7476. 103. Ramos, M.C.; Steinbrenner, H. ; Stuhlmann, D.; Sies, H.; Brenne isen, P. Induction of MMP-10 and MMP-1 in a squamous cell carci noma cell line by ultraviolet radiation. Biol. Chem.  2004 , 385, 75–86. 104. Fisher, G.J.; Datta, S.C.; Talwar, H.S.; Wan g, Z.Q.; Varani, J.; Kang, S.; Voorhees, J.J.
Molecular basis of sun- induced premat ure skin ageing and retinoid antagonism. Nature  1996 , 379, 335–339. 105. Itoh, K.; Wakabayashi, N.; Katoh, Y.; Ishii, T. ; O’Connor, T.; Yamamoto, M. Keap1 regulates both cytoplasmic-nuclear shuttling and degradat ion of Nrf2 in response to electrophiles. Genes  Cells  2003 , 8, 379–391. 106. Itoh, K.; Tong, K.I.; Yamamoto, M. Molecular mechanism activating Nrf2-Keap1 pathway in regulation of adaptive re sponse to electrophiles. Free Radic. Biol. Med.  2004 , 36, 1208–1213. 107. Motohashi, H.; O’Connor, T.; Katsuoka, F.; Engel,  J.D.; Yamamoto, M. Integration and diversity of the regulatory network composed of Maf and CNC families of transcription factors. Gene  2002 , 294, 1–12. 108. Slocum, S.L.; Kensler, T.W. Nrf2: Control of sensitivity to carcinogens. Arch. Toxicol.  2011 , 85, 273–284. 109. Braun, S.; Hanselmann, C.; Gassmann, M.G.; auf dem Keller, U.; Born-Berclaz, C.; Chan, K.;
Kan, Y.W.; Werner, S. Nrf2 transc ription factor, a novel target of  keratinocytes growth factor action which regulates gene expression and inflammation in the healing skin wound. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2002 , 22, 5492–5505. 110. Hirota, A.; Kawachi,  Y.; Itoh, K.; Nakamura, Y.; Xu, X.; Ba nno, T.; Takahashi, T.; Yamamoto, M.; Otsuka, F. Ultraviolet A irradiation induces NF-E2-related factor 2 activation in dermal fibroblasts: Protective role in UVA-induced apoptosis. J. Invest. Dermatol . 2005 , 124, 825–832. 111. Kannan, S.; Jaiswal, A.K. Low and high dose UVB regulation of tran scription factor  NF-E2-related factor 2. Cancer Res . 2006 , 66, 8421–8429. 112. Durchdewald, M.; Beyer, T.A.; Johnson, D.A.; Johnson, J.A.; Werner, S.; auf dem Keller, U. Electrophilic chemicals but not UV irradiatio n or reactive oxygen species activate Nrf2 in keratinocytes in vitro  and in vivo . J. Invest. Dermatol . 2007 , 127, 646–653.
113. Faraonio, R.; Vergara, P.; Di Marzo, D.; Pieran toni, M.G.; Napolitano, M.; Russo, T.; Cimino, F. p53 suppresses the Nrf2-dependent transcri ption of antioxidant response genes. J. Biol. Chem.  2006 , 281, 39776–39784. 114. Schäfer, M.; Dütsch, S.; auf dem Keller, U.; Navid, F.; Schwarz, A.; Johnson, D.A.;  Johnson, J.A.; Werner, S. Nrf2 es tablishes a glutathione-mediated gradient of UVB cytoprotection in the epidermis.  Genes Dev. 2010 , 24, 1045–1058.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 169   115. auf dem Keller, U.; Huber, M.; Beyer, T.A. ; Kümin, A.; Siemes, C.; Braun, S.; Bugnon, P.; Mitropoulos, V.; Johnson, D.A.; Johnson, J.A.; et al. Nrf transcription fact ors in keratinocytes are essential for skin tumor pr evention but not for wound healing. Mol. Cell. Biol.  2006 , 26, 3773–3784. 116. Kawachi, Y.; Xu, X.; Taguchi, S.; Sakurai, H.; Naka mura, Y.; Ishii, Y.; Fujisawa, Y.; Furuta, J.; Takahashi, T.; Itoh, K.; et al. Attenuation of UVB-induced sunburn reaction and oxidative DNA damage with no alterations in UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis in Nrf2 gene-deficient mice.  J. Invest. Dermatol.  2008 , 128, 1773–1779. 117. Cullinan, S.B.; Diehl, J.A. PERK-dependent acti vation of Nrf2 contributes to redox homeostasis and cell survival following en doplasmic reticulum stress. J. Biol. Chem . 2004 , 279, 20108–20117. 118. Huang, H.C.; Nguyen, T.; Pickett, C.B. Phosphoryl ation of Nrf2 at Ser-40 by protein kinase C
regulates antioxidant response el ement-mediated transcription . J. Biol. Chem . 2002 , 277,  42769–42774. 119. Yu, R.; Chen, C.; Mo, Y.Y.; Hebbar, V.; Owuor , E.D.; Tan, T.H.; Kong, A.N. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase  pathways induces antioxidant response element-mediated gene expression via a Nrf2-dependent mechanism. J. Biol. Chem . 2000 , 275, 39907–39913.  120. Yu, R.; Mandlekar, S.; Lei, W.; Fahl, W.E. ; Tan, T.H.; Kong, A.N. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase negatively regulates the inducti on of phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes that detoxify carcinogens. J. Biol. Chem . 2000 , 275, 2322–2327.  121. Hu, R.; Saw, C.L.; Yu, R.; Kong, A.N. Regulation of  NF-E2-related factor 2 signaling for cancer chemoprevention: Antioxidant coupled with antiinflammatory. Antioxid. Redox Signal  2010 , 13, 1679–1698. 122. Dinkova-Kostova, A.T.; Jenkins, S.N.; Fahey, J.W.; Ye, L.; Wehage, S.L.; Liby, K.T.;
Stephenson, K.K.; Wade, K.L.; Tala lay, P. Protection against UV-li ght-induced skin carcinogenesis in SKH-1 high-risk mice by sulforaphane-containing br occoli sprout extracts. Cancer Lett . 2006 , 240, 243–252. 123. Kimura, S.; Warabi, E.; Yanagawa, T.; Ma, D.; Itoh, K. ; Ishii, Y.; Kawachi, Y.; Ishii, T. Essential role of Nrf2 in keratinocyte protection from UVA by quercetin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun . 2009 , 387, 109–114.  124. Rao, A.; Luo, C.; Hogan, P.G. Transcription f actors of the NFAT family: Regulation and function. Annu. Rev. Immunol . 1997 , 15, 707–747.  125. Hogan, P.G.; Chen, L.; Nardone, J.; Rao, A. Tran scriptional regulation by calcium, calcineurin, and NFAT. Genes. Dev . 2003 , 17, 2205–2232. 126. Maziere, C.; Morliere, P.; Louandre, C.; Conte, M.A.; Gomilla, C.; Santus, R.; Antonicelli, F.; Hornebeck, W.; Maziere, J.C. Low UVA doses activ ate the transcription f actor NFAT in human
fibroblasts by a calcium -calcineurin pathway. Free. Radic. Biol. Med . 2005 , 39, 1629–1637. 127. Akunda, J.K.; Chun, K.S.; Sessoms, A.R.; Lao, H.C.; Fischer, S.M.; Langenbach, R. Cyclooxygenase-2 deficiency increases epiderma l apoptosis and impairs recovery following acute UVB exposure. Mol. Carcinog.  2007 , 46, 354–362. 128. Flockhart, R.J.; Diffey, B.L.; Farr, P.M.; Lloyd, J.; Reynolds, N.J. NFAT regulates induction of COX-2 and apoptosis of keratinocytes in re sponse to ultraviolet radiation exposure. FASEB J.  2008 , 22, 4218–4227.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 170   129. Slominski, A.; Pawelek, J. Animals under the sun:  Effects of ultraviolet radiation on mammalian skin. Clin. Dermatol.  1998 , 16, 503–515. 130. Nickoloff, B.J.; Qin, J.Z.; Chaturvedi, V.; Bac on, P.; Panella, J.; Denning, M.F. Life and death signaling pathways contributing to skin cancer. J. Investig. Dermatol. Symp. Proc . 2002 , 7,  27–35. 131. Scott, M.C.; Suzuki, I.; Abdel-Malek, Z.A. Re gulation of the human melanocortin 1 receptor expression in epidermal melanocytes by paracrin e and endocrine factor s and by ultraviolet radiation. Pigment Cell Res . 2002 , 15, 433–439. 132. Corre, S.; Primot, A.; Sviderskaya, E.; Bennett, D.C.; Vaulont, S.; Goding, C.R.; Galibert, M.D. UV-induced expression of key component of the tanning process, the POMC and MC1R genes, is dependent on the p-38-activated up stream stimulating factor-1 (USF-1). J. Biol. Chem.  2004 , 279, 51226–51233.
279, 51226–51233. 133. Pillai, S.; Oresajo, C.; Hayward, J. Ultraviolet ra diation and skin aging: Roles of reactive  oxygen species, inflammation and protease activ ation, and strategies for prevention of  inflammation-induced matrix  degradation—a review. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci . 2005 , 27, 17–34. 134. Assefa, Z.; Garmyn, M.; Bouillon, R.; Merlevede, W.; Vandenheede, J.R.; Agostinis, P. Differential stimulation of ERK and JNK activi ties by ultraviolet B irradiation and epidermal growth factor in human keratinocytes . J. Invest. Dermatol . 1997 , 108, 886–891. 135. Derijard, B.; Hibi, M.; Wu, I.H.; Barrett, T.; S u, B.; Deng, T.; Karin, M.; Davis, R.J. JNK1: A protein kinase stimulated by UV light and Ha -Ras that binds and phosphorylates the c-Jun activation domain. Cell 1994 , 76, 1025–1037. 136. Garmyn, M.; Degreef, H.; Gilchrest, B.A. The ef fect of acute and chronic photodamage on gene expression in human keratinocytes. Dermatology  1995 , 190, 305–308.
137. Delva, E.; Tucker, D.K.; Kowalczyk, A.P. The desmosome. Cold Spring Harb.  Perspect. Biol . 2009 , 1, a002543.  138. Fujisawa, H.; Wang, B.; Sauder, D.N.; Kondo, S. Effects of interferons  on the production of interleukin-6 and interleuki n-8 in human keratinocytes. J. Interferon Cytokine Res.  1997 , 17, 347–353. 139. Aragane, Y.; Kulms, D.; Luger, T.A.; Schwarz, T. Down-regulation of interferon gamma-activated STAT1 by UV light. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  1997 , 94, 11490–11495. 140. Freedberg, I.M.; Tomic-Canic, M.; Komine, M.; Blumenberg, M. Keratins and the keratinocyte activation cycle. J. Invest Dermatol.  2001 , 116, 633–640. 141. Sesto, A.; Navarro, M.; Burslem, F.; Jorcano, J.L. Analysis of  the ultraviole t B response in primary human keratinocytes using oligonucleotide microarrays. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  2002 , 99, 2965–2970. 142. Takao, J.; Ariizumi, K.; Dougherty, I.I.; Cruz, P. D., Jr. Genomic scale an alysis of the human
keratinocyte response to broad-ba nd ultraviolet-B irradiation. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol.  Photomed . 2002 , 18, 5–13. 143. Howell, B.G.; Wang, B.; Freed, I.; Mamelak, A. J.; Watanabe, H.; Sauder, D.N. Microarray analysis of UVB-regulated genes in keratinocyt es: Downregulation of angiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin-1. J. Dermatol. Sci . 2004 , 34, 185–194.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 171   144. Serre, C.; Lebleu, A.; Bergeron,  L.; Plantivaux, A.; Botto, J. M.; Dal, F.C.; Domloge, N. Microarray profiling of gene expression in hu man keratinocytes suggests a new protective activity against UV-induced DNA damage for a compound previously known to interact with SCF-KIT signalling pathway. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci . 2011 , 33, 398–407. 145. Pisarchik, A.; Wortsman, J.; Slominski, A. A novel  microarray to evaluate stress-related genes in skin: Effect of ultrav iolet light radiation. Gene  2004 , 341, 199–207. 146. Lee, K.M.; Lee, J.G.; Seo, E.Y.; Lee, W.H.; Nam, Y.H.; Yang, J.M.; Kee, S.H.; Seo, Y.J.;  Park, J.K.; Kim, C.D.; et al. Analysis of genes responding to u ltraviolet B irradi ation of HaCaT keratinocytes using a cDNA microarray. Br. J. Dermatol.  2005 , 152, 52–59. 147. Murakami, T.; Fujimoto, M.; Ohtsuki, M.; Nakaga wa, H. Expression prof iling of cancer-related
genes in human keratinocytes following non-lethal ultravio let B irradiation. J. Dermatol. Sci.  2001 , 27, 121–129. 148. Dazard, J.E.; Gal, H.; Amariglio, N.; Rechavi, G.; Domany, E.; Givol, D. Genome-wide comparison of human keratinocyte and squamous cell carcinoma responses to UVB irradiation: Implications for skin and epithelial cancer. Oncogene  2003 , 22, 2993–3006. 149. Nordlund, J.J. The melanocyte and the epider mal melanin unit: An expanded concept. Dermatol . Clin. 2007 , 25, 271–281. 150. Duval, C.; Regnier, M.; Schmidt, R. Distinct  melanogenic response of human melanocytes in mono-culture, in co-culture with keratinocytes and in reconstruc ted epidermis, to UV exposure. Pigment Cell Res.  2001 , 14, 348–355. 151. Duval , C.; Smit, N.P.; Kolb, A.M.; Regnier, M.; Pa vel, S.; Schmidt, R. Keratinocytes control the pheo/eumelanin ratio in cultured  normal human melanocytes. Pigment Cell Res.  2002 , 15, 440–446.
152. Regnier, M.; Duval, C.; Galey, J.B.; Philippe, M.; Lagrange, A.; Tuloup, R.; Schmidt, R. Keratinocyte-melanocyte co-culture s and pigmented reconstructed human epidermis: Models to study modulation of melanogenesis. Cell Mol. Biol . 1999 , 45, 969–980. 153. Rees, J.L. Genetics of hair and skin color. Annu. Rev. Genet.  2003 , 37, 67–90. 154. Barker, D.; Dixon, K.; Medrano, E.E.; Smalara,  D.; Im, S.; Mitchell, D.; Babcock, G.;  Abdel-Malek, Z.A. Comparison of the responses of human melanocytes with different melanin contents to ultraviolet B irradiation. Cancer Res.  1995 , 55, 4041–4046. 155. Pavey, S.; Conroy, S.; Russell, T.; Gabrielli, B. Ultraviolet radiation induces p16CDKN2A expression in human skin. Cancer Res.  1999 , 59, 4185–4189. 156. Sheen, I.S.; Jeng, K.S.; Wu, J.Y. Is p53 gene mutati on an indicatior of the bi ological behaviors of recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma? World J. Gastroenterol . 2003 , 9, 1202–1207.
157. Chouinard, N.; Valerie, K.; Rouabhia, M.; Huot, J. UVB-mediated activation of p38  mitogen-activated protein kinase enhances resistance of normal hum an keratinocytes to apoptosis by stabilizing cytoplasmic p53. Biochem. J . 2002 , 365, 133–145. 158. McGill, G.G.; Horstmann, M.; Widl und, H.R.; Du, J. ; Motyckova, G. ; Nishimura, E. K.; Lin, Y.L.; Ramaswamy, S.; Avery, W.; Ding, H.F.; et al . Bcl2 regulation by the melanocyte master regulator Mitf modulates lineage survival and melanoma cell viability. Cell 2002 , 109, 707–718. 159. Tada, A.; Pereira, E.; Beitner-Johnson, D.; Ka vanagh, R.; Abdel-Malek, Z.A. Mitogen- and ultraviolet-B-induced signaling path ways in normal human melanocytes. J. Invest. Dermatol.  2002 , 118, 316–322.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2012 , 13 172   160. Kadekaro, A.L.; Kanto, H.; Kavanagh, R.; Abdel- Malek, Z.A. Significance of the melanocortin 1 receptor in regulating human melanocyte pi gmentation, proliferation, and survival. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.  2003 , 994, 359–365. 161. Zhang, H.; Rosdahl, I. Ultraviolet A and B diffe rently induce intracellular protein expression  in human skin melanocytes—a speculation of se parate pathways in initiation of melanoma. Carcinogenesis  2003 , 24, 1929–1934. 162. Valery, C.; Grob, J.J.; Verrando, P. Identifica tion by cDNA microarray technology of genes modulated by artificial ultrav iolet radiation in normal hu man melanocytes: Relation to melanocarcinogenesis. J. Invest. Dermatol.  2001 , 117, 1471–1482. 163. Hoek, K.; Rimm, D.L.; Williams, K.R.; Zhao, H.; Ariyan, S.; Lin, A.; Kluger, H.M.;  Berger, A.J.; Cheng, E.; Trombetta, E.S.; et al. Expression profiling rev eals novel pathways in
the transformation of melanocytes to melanomas. Cancer Res . 2004 , 64, 5270–5282. 164. Winnepenninckx, V.; Lazar, V.; Michiels, S.; Desse n, P.; Stas, M.; Alonso, S.R.; Avril, M.F.; Ortiz Romero, P.L.; Robert, T.; Balacescu, O.; et al . Gene expression profiling of primary cutaneous melanoma and clinical outcome. J. Natl. Cancer Inst . 2006 , 98, 472–482. 165. Yang, G.; Zhang, G.; Pittel kow, M.R.; Ramoni, M.; Tsao, H. Ex pression profiling of UVB response in melanocytes identifies a set of p53-t arget genes. J. Invest. Dermatol . 2006 , 126, 2490–2506. 166. Runger, T.M. Role of UVA in the pathogenesis of melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. A short review. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed.  1999 , 15, 212–216. 167. Duval, C.; Schmidt, R.; Regnier, M.; Facy, V.; Asselineau, D.; Bernerd, F. The use of reconstructed human skin to evaluate UV-in duced modifications and sunscreen efficacy.  Exp. Dermatol.  2003 , 12, 64–70.
Exp. Dermatol.  2003 , 12, 64–70. 168. Halliday, G.M.; Bestak, R.; Yuen, K.S.; Ca vanagh, L.L.; Barnetson, R.S. UVA-induced immunosuppression. Mutat. Res . 1998 , 422, 139–145. 169. Agar, N.S.; Halliday, G.M.; Barnetson, R.S.; Anan thaswamy, H.N.; Wheeler, M.; Jones, A.M. The basal layer in human squamous tumors har bors more UVA than UVB fingerprint mutations: A role for UVA in huma n skin carcinogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  2004 , 101, 4954–4959. 170. Choi, W.; Miyamura, Y.; Wolber, R.; Smuda, C.; Reinhold, W.; Liu, H.; Kolbe, L.; Hearing, V.J. Regulation of human skin pigmentation in situ by repetitive UV exposure: Molecular characterization of responses to UVA and/or UVB. J. Invest. Dermatol.  2010 , 130, 1685–1696. 171. Marionnet, C.; Grether-Beck, S.; Seite, S.; Marini, A.; Jaenicke, T.; Lejeune, F.; Bastien, P.; Rougier, A.; Bernerd, F.; Krutmann, J. A broad-spectrum sunscreen prevents UVA
radiation-induced gene expres sion in reconstructed skin in vitro  and in human skin in vivo .  Exp. Dermatol . 2011 , 20, 477–482. 172. Marionnet, C.; Pierrard, C.; Lejeune, F.; Sok, J. ; Thomas, M.; Bernerd, F. Different oxidative stress response in keratinocytes  and fibroblasts of reconstruc ted skin exposed to non extreme daily-ultraviolet radiation. PLoS One  2010 , 5, e12059. © 2012 by the authors; licensee MD PI, Basel, Switzerland. This arti cle is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of  the Creative Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons .org/licenses/by/3.0/).
