REVIEWpublished: 26 June 2018doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00188Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 1 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188Editedby:PeterWolf,MedizinischeUniversitätGraz,AustriaReviewedby:KevinSondenheimer,Leibniz-InstitutfürUmweltmedizinischeForschung(IUF),GermanyMauroPicardo,SanGallicanoHospital,ItalyFranzJ.Legat,MedizinischeUniversitätGraz,Austria*Correspondence:SalvadorGonzálezsalvagonrod@gmail.comSpecialtysection:ThisarticlewassubmittedtoDermatology,asectionofthejournalFrontiersinMedicineReceived: 15February2018Accepted: 08June2018Published: 26June2018Citation:ParradoC,PhilipsN,GilaberteY,JuarranzAandGonzálezS(2018)OralPhotoprotection:EffectiveAgentsandPotentialCandidates.Front.Med.5:188.doi:10.3389/fmed.2018.00188Oral Photoprotection: EffectiveAgents and Potential CandidatesConcepciónParrado1,NeenaPhilips2,YolandaGilaberte3,4,AngelesJuarranz5andSalvadorGonzález6*
SalvadorGonzález6*1DepartmentofHistologyandPathology,UniversityofMálag a,Málaga,Spain,2SchoolofNaturalSciences,FairleighDickinsonUniversity,Teaneck,NJ,UnitedState s,3DermatologyService,HospitalMiguelServet,Zaragoza,Sp ain,4Dermatology,HospitalUniversitarioMiguelServet,Zarag oza,Spain,5BiologyDepartment,InstitutoRamónyCajaldeInvestigaciónSanitaria,UniversidadAutónomadeMadrid,M adrid,Spain,6MedicineandMedicalSpecialtiesDepartment,InstitutoRamónyCajaldeInvestigaciónSanitaria,AlcaláUn iversityMadrid,Madrid,SpainElectromagneticradiationintheultraviolet,visible,an dinfraredrangesproducesbiologiceffects in humans. Where some of these effects are beneﬁcial, others are harmful tothe skin, particularly those stemming from ultraviolet rad iation (UVR). Pharmacologicalphotoprotection can be topical or systemic. Systemic photo protection is oftenadministeredorally,complementingtopicalprotection.N ewandclassicoralagents(e.g.,
essential micronutrients as vitamins, minerals, polyphen ols, carotenoids) are endowedwith photoprotective and anti-photocarcinogenic propert ies. These substances bearthe potential to increase systemic protection against the e ffects of electromagneticradiation in the UV, visible, and infrared ranges. Protecti ve mechanisms vary and includeanti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, and immunomodulatory ef fects. As such, they provideprotection against UVR and prevent photo-induced carcinog enesis and aging. In thisreview, we present state of the art approaches regarding the photoprotective effects ofvitamins and vitamin derivatives, dietary botanical, and n on-botanical agents. A growingbody of data supports the beneﬁcial effects of oral photopro tection on the health ofthe skin. More studies will likely conﬁrm and expand the posi tive impact of oral dietarybotanicals as complementary measures for photoprotection .
Keywords: oral photoprotection, oxidative stress, dietar y botanical, photodamage, photocarcinogenesisINTRODUCTION: PHOTOPROTECTIVE AGENTSSunscreen-based photoprotection is a major part of the ﬁrst lin e of prevention to combatphotoaging and skin cancer. Topical photoprotection is usually ca rried out by applying athin ultraviolet radiation (UVR)-absorbing layer on the skin before sun exposure. Despite theincorporationofnewtechnologyandinnovativeapproachesint opicalphotoprotection,inadequateuse, and lack of optimization still limit usefulness of sunsc reens. Topical sunscreens also haveintrinsic limitations, among them, chieﬂy short half-life o n the skin, which highlights the needfor frequent reapplication, a lack of systemic eﬃcacy, and pote ntial side eﬀects ( 1,2). Despite thewidespreaduseofsunscreens,sunburnremainscommonplace.Conversely, oral photoprotectors do not directly protect the s kin against the damage induced
by high energy photons; therefore, they are not very eﬀective a gainst the erythema and otherdeleteriouseﬀectscausedbythesun.However,theydopossess severaladvantages,mainlytheireaseofuse.Also,theireﬃciencyisnotalteredbyexternalcondi tions,theirhalf-livescanbedetermined
deleteriouseﬀectscausedbythesun.However,theydopossess severaladvantages,mainlytheireaseofuse.Also,theireﬃciencyisnotalteredbyexternalcondi tions,theirhalf-livescanbedeterminedpharmacologically, and their eﬀects do not depend on the degree of absorption through the skin.
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisTheidealphotoprotectiveagentwouldbeanoralphotoprotectorwith cutaneous aﬃnity. The overarching idea is that oralphotoprotectiveagentsneedtoprovideuniformprotectionofth eskin to be useful in the primary prevention of skin cancer andphotoaging( 1).These oral photoprotective products usually contain one ormore active principles that activate diﬀerent mechanisms ofphotoprotection, especially those related to their anti-oxid antactions (1,3). These substances act by increasing the anti-oxidant eﬃcacy of the body following the loss of endogenousanti-oxidants after UVR exposure. UV radiation induces DNAdamage,triggersinﬂammatoryphenomena,andpromotestumorgrowth. It also contributes to aging through alterations incollagen remodeling and mitochondrial deletion. Most ofthese detrimental eﬀects are mainly mediated by oxidativestress (2). Some of these substances also reduce UVR-inducedimmunosuppression.
immunosuppression.The following sections provide an update of state of the artregardingthepropertiesoforalphotoprotectors.VITAMIN DERIVATIVES WITHANTI-OXIDANT PROPERTIESSingle Vitamins (Table 1)CarotenoidsCarotenoids are pigments existing in a wide variety ofvegetables and fruits, especially in tomatoes. They also appea r inconsiderable amounts in human plasma and tissues. However,carotenoids are exclusively synthesized by plants. Hence th oseappearing in animals and humans have been acquired throughthe diet. Carotenoids decrease reactive oxygen species (ROS) inaerobicmetabolism( 29).About 50 variants of carotenes are present in a typicalhuman diet and, of these, six are found mainly in the blood:α-carotene, β-carotene, zeaxanthin, lutein, β-cryptoxanthin, andlycopene. Of these, lycopene is the most eﬃcient regarding ant i-oxidant activity ( 30).In vitroandin vivostudies have revealedthat carotenoids can suppress UVA and UVB-mediated ROS
formation,thereby,preventingphotoinactivationofanti-o xidantenzymes, lipid peroxidation, and induction of DNA damagecausedbyoxidativestress( 30,31).LycopeneLycopene is the predominant carotenoid present in tomatoesand other vegetables and red fruits, except in cherriesand strawberries. Lycopene, a polyunsaturated hydrocarbon(C40H56), is endowed with a very high anti-oxidant capacityquenching singlet oxygen ( 32).in vitrostudies with humanskin ﬁbroblasts disclosed a reduction of UVB-induced lipidperoxidationbylycopene( 33).Several investigators have reported on the eﬀects of lycopenein humans. Subjects treated with oral lycopene for 10 weekshad 40% less dorsal erythema formation in response toUVR compared to untreated subjects ( 6), as measured bychromametry ( 6). Similarly, an intervention study in whichhealthy women received tomato paste rich in lycopene during
12 weeks supplemented with olive oil suggested that lycopeneexerted beneﬁcial properties ( 7). Lycopene reduced matrixmetalloproteinases 1 (MMP-1) overexpression and mtDNA3,895-bp deletion produced by UVR. The mechanism proposedfor lycopene relates to its anti-oxidant capacity, decreasin gROS production, and protecting cellular structures from UVR-induceddamage( 7).A recent study described how 12-weeks of oral treatmentwith lycopene-rich tomato nutrient complex (TNC) inhibitedthe expression of UVB/A triggered genes that mediated skin’sresponse to UV radiation ( 8). Lycopene inhibited UVA/Binduced overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), anindicator of oxidative stress, and also decreased UVA/B induc edoverexpression MMP-1, a metalloproteinase involved in thebreakdown of collagen and skin photoaging. Finally, lycopenecurbed the expression of the inﬂammatory mediator ICAM-1,suggesting that this agent can inhibit the recruitment of
leukocytes to the skin upon UVR-mediated damage andinﬂammation ( 8). Another recent study has shown thattreatment of Skh-1 mice for 34 weeks with tomato-rich diet
leukocytes to the skin upon UVR-mediated damage andinﬂammation ( 8). Another recent study has shown thattreatment of Skh-1 mice for 34 weeks with tomato-rich dietsigniﬁcantly decreased tumor induction by UVB irradiationcompared to animals receiving a regular food ( 15). Moreover,the combination of lycopene with other carotenoids andLactobacillus johnsonii also protected against UVA-inducedpolymorphouslighteruptioninhumansubjects( 14).The three clinical trials referenced above ( 6–8) had incommonthedurationofthetreatment(12weeks).However,th eyused diﬀerent concentrations of lycopene and/or supplements,e.g., olive oil. Hence, it is not possible to properly correlatethe doses with the observed eﬀects. The anti-oxidant power oflycopene is well-proven regarding photoprotection, but there i snot a consensus regarding the preventive dose required and th eeﬀect of combining it with other substances, highlighting th e
need for additional clinical research in the use of lycopene fo roralphotoprotection.Beta ( β)-carotene is a compound often administered forsystemic photoprotection. However, studies demonstrating aprotective eﬀect of oral treatment with β-carotene againstskin photodamage are scarce or revealed contradictory resul ts.Intervention studies showed that a high intake of β-carotenedecreasedUVRinducederythema,buttheeﬃcacyof β-carotenedepended on the dose and duration of treatment ( 31). Healthyvolunteers receiving a supplement of β-carotene exhibited aslight increase of the threshold of minimal erythema dose(MED) (4). Similarly, partial protection against UVA and UVBradiation were observed in a study in which β-carotene wasadministered orally ( 5). Speciﬁcally, β-carotene reduced serumlipidperoxidationinadose-dependentmanner( 5).Regardingtheeﬀectof β-caroteneinUVR-inducederythema,a placebo-controlled study showed that pretreatment with β-
carotenediminishedtheintensityoferythemacausedbysun light(34). Similarly, oral administration of β-carotene in volunteerswith Fitzpatrick’s skin phototype II decreased the severity ofUVR-induced erythema ( 35). Thus, in the supplemented groupwithβ-carotene, /Delta1α-values signiﬁcantly decreased by 37.3%after 12 weeks of treatment compared to untreated group ( 35).In all the studies that documented some protection againstUVR-inducederythema,theperiodforthesupplementationwasFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisTABLE 1 | Photoprotective effects of vitamins and their molecular ta rgets.UVeffectstissue/cellular/moleculartargetCompound(s) Results Models ReferencesErythema β-carotene Slight increase in MED/Min.protection/ ≥10weeksdoseshigh ≥12mgcarotenoids/dayHuman ( 4,5)Lycopene Decreases erythema Human ( 6,7)Oxidative stress Lycopene Inhibits HO-1 Human ( 8)Astaxanthin Inhibits reductions SOD, GSH invitro (9)DNA damage Lycopene Inhibits mtDNA deletion Human ( 7)Inﬂammation Lycopene Inhibits ICAM-1 expression Human ( 8)Astaxanthin Inhibits MIF, IL-1 β, TNF- αexpression invitro (10)Decreases masts cells Mice ( 11)Sustains trans-UCA levels Mice ( 10)Lutein/Zeaxanthin Suppresses skin edema Mice ( 12)Decreases masts cells number Mice ( 13)Lycopeneβcarotene, LactobacillusJohnsoniiInhibits PMLE Human ( 14)Immuno-suppression – – –Photo carcinogenesis Lycopene Inhibits skin tumor formatio n Mice ( 15)
Astaxanthin Inhibits apoptosis invitro (10)Lutein/Zeaxanthin Decreases BrdU +epidermal cells Mice ( 12)Decreases PCNA +epidermal cells Mice ( 12)Increases tumor-free survival time Mice ( 13)Inhibits tumor volume and multiplicity Mice ( 13)UV-ECM damage Lycopene Inhibits MMP-1 Human ( 7,8)Lutein/Zeaxanthin Inhibits MMP-1, MMP-7. Stimulate TIMP-2 invitro (16)Inhibits MMP-13 Mice ( 10)Decreases overexpression of HO-1, ICAM-1, MMP1genesHuman ( 8)Lycopene,β-carotene, LactobacillusjohnsoniiInhibits MMP-1 Human ( 14)UVeffectstissue/cellular/moleculartargetInterventions Results Models ReferencesErythema Vit. E +Carotenoids Suppression/decrease erythema Human ( 17,18)Vit. C+Vit. E Increases MED Human ( 19)Oxidative stress Vit E +Carotenoids Decreases levels of lipoperoxide Human ( 18)DNA damage Nicotinamide Prevents depletion of cellular NAD + invitro (20)Inhibits PARP-1 invitro (20)Inhibits CPD and 8oxoG Human ( 21)invitro (22)Vit. D Reduces thymine dimers Human ( 23)
Vit. D Reduces thymine dimers Human ( 23)Mice ( 24)Inhibits CPD invitro (25)Inﬂammation Vit. D Inhibits NO products invitro (23)Decreases edema and epidermal vesiculation Human ( 26)(Continued)Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisTABLE 1 | ContinuedUVeffectstissue/cellular/moleculartargetInterventions Results Models ReferencesDecreases TNF- αand iNOS Human ( 26)Induces overexpression of ARG1 Human ( 26)and genes involved in skin repairImmuno-suppression Nicotinamide Prevents suppression of M antoux reactions Human ( 27)Vit. D Reduces CHS response Mice ( 24)Photo carcinogenesis Nicotinamide Reduces AK by 29% Human ( 21)Lowers the rate of new NMSC and AK Human ( 28)Vit. D Increases keratinocyte survival invitro (23)Increases p53 expression invitro (23)UV-ECM damage – – –CHS,contacthypersensitivity;HO-1,Hemeoxygenase-1;MED,mini malerythemadose;PMLE,polymorphiclighteruption.relatively long ( ∼≥10 weeks) with high doses ( ∼≥12 mg/day)(4,5). This fact has raised concerns regarding the safety ofadministeringsuchhighdosesof β-carotene.Anepidemiologicalstudy suggested that high levels of β-carotene may have a
deleterious eﬀect in individuals at high risk of lung cancer, e.g.,in smokers (more than a pack a day for 35 years) and asbestosworkers.Inthesehigh-risksubjects β-caroteneintakeresultedinan enhanced risk of lung cancer compared to subjects bearing alowerriskoflungcancer( 36).Inarecent invitrostudypublishedin 2018, the group of Lohan et al. has measured the anti-oxidantactivityof β-caroteneinakeratinocytecellline(HaCaT)usingelectronicparamagneticresonancespectroscopyandfou ndthat the anti-oxidant protection against UVR was achievedonly with low doses of β-carotene whereas high doses wereprooxidant( 37).However, based on long-term experience from the resultsobtained in the 1970s ( 4) and controlled trials ( 38) oraladministration of β-carotene has been the treatment of choiceto improve the photosensitivity of patients with erythropoieti cprotoporphyria. Photosensitivity was reported being reduced i n∼80% of patients to allow them normal life activities ( 38). The
doses recommended range from 30 to 90 mg/day for childrenand60–180mg/dayforadults,toreachamaximumplasmalevelof 600–800 µg/dl. More recently, subcutaneous administrationof afamelanotide, an analog of the α-melanocyte-stimulatinghormone, that darkens the skin, has been proposed as a noveltreatmentforerythropoieticprotoporphyria( 39).XanthophyllsXanthophylls include some other carotenoids, e.g., lutein,astaxanthin, and zeaxanthin, which all have been shown topreventphotodamageinducebysunlight( 9).AstaxanthinAstaxanthin is a non-provitamin A carotenoid mainly foundin ﬁsh and shellﬁsh ( 10). It is endowed with an anti-oxidanteﬀect more potent than other carotenoids, including β-caroteneand exerts anti-oxidant beneﬁts without having prooxidant s ideeﬀects. Astaxanthin inhibits the production of lipid peroxidesinduced by UVA. in vitro experiments have indicated itsanti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatory activity. In human skin
ﬁbroblasts astaxanthin prevented UVA-induced alterations ofsuperoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and the anti-oxidantglutathione(GSH)( 40).Furthermore, treatment with astaxanthin reduced UVB- orUVC-induced expression of macrophage migration inhibitoryfactor (MIF), interleukin-1 ( βIL-1β), and tumor necrosisfactor α(TNF- α) (41). Astaxanthin signiﬁcantly inhibited UV-irradiation-induced apoptosis in HaCaT keratinocytes ( 10).Treatment with astaxanthin before and after irradiation wi thUVB and UVA ( 41) decreased MMP-1 expression ( 11). Also,astaxanthin inhibited the UVB-induced expression of activat orprotein AP-1 and reduced UVB-induced phosphorylation ofseveral MAPK family members via AP-1 transactivation inhumanﬁbroblasts( 11).A recent study reported the beneﬁcial eﬀects of oralastaxanthin on skin photoaging prevention in vivo(10). In amouse model, astaxanthin inhibited the UVA-induced decreaseofpyroglutamicacid(PCA)andurocanicacid(UCA),whichare
the primary natural moisturizing factors in the epidermis ( 10).
mouse model, astaxanthin inhibited the UVA-induced decreaseofpyroglutamicacid(PCA)andurocanicacid(UCA),whicharethe primary natural moisturizing factors in the epidermis ( 10).In this murine model, astaxanthin also inhibited UVA-inducedexpression of matrix metalloprotease 13 (MMP-13), which mayunderline its photoprotective eﬀect against skin photodamage(10).Beneﬁcial eﬀects of astaxanthin have been reported withregard to human skin aging by Chung et al. ( 42). The samegroup of investigators is conducting a clinical trial to dete rminethe eﬀects of supplementation with astaxanthin or isoﬂavone onskinelasticity,epidermalhydration,andchangestheskinb arrierintegrity. However, the results of this study are yet to beco meavailable.LuteinandzeaxanthinThe xanthophylls, zeaxanthin, and lutein stand for 20–30% ofthetotalcarotenoidspresentinhumanserumand80–90%ofthecarotenoidsinthehumanretina.Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 4 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisZeaxanthin is equitably distributed among plants,accompanying other carotenoids. It is typical of corn (maize) ,and also many bacteria produce it. Lutein is found in manyvegetables, such as green beans, spinach, or broccoli, altho ughits color is masked by chlorophyll. Zeaxanthin and lutein andare found in the macula where they contribute to preventingmaculardegeneration( 43).Lutein also accumulates in the skin. Its anti-aging and anti -carcinogenic properties are based on its anti-oxidants and an ti-inﬂammatory eﬀects against UVR damage. In mice, dietarylutein supplementation decreased ROS generation followingUVR exposure ( 44). Speciﬁcally, our group reported thebeneﬁcial eﬀects of orally administered lutein and zeaxanth inagainst the deleterious eﬀects of UVB radiation. In hairlessSKh-1 mice, supplementation with 0.4% lutein plus 0.04%zeaxanthin decreased the UVB-induced acute inﬂammatory
responses ( 12). These photoprotective eﬀects also includedlower numbers of bromodeoxyuridine and proliferating cellnuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive cells in the epidermis, redu cedskinfold thickness, and lower number of mast cells in theskin following UVB irradiation ( 13). Regarding UVR inducedphotocarcinogenesis, we found that oral supplementation withlutein/zeaxanthin signiﬁcantly increased tumor-free sur vivaltime, decreased the total tumor volume, and reduced tumormultiplicity in comparison with control animals ( 13). Wealso reported lutein’s photoprotective eﬀects in UV irradiateddermal ﬁbroblasts and melanoma cells. Lutein improvedmembraneintegrity,increasedcellviability,anddecreas edelastinexpression. Lutein also inhibited UVR-induced overexpressio nof MMP-1 and MMP-2 while stimulating the endogenous tissuemetalloproteinaseinhibitorTIMP-2( 16).Recently a placebo-controlled, double-blinded, randomized ,
crossover study reported that orally supplemented lutein caus eda signiﬁcant reduction of the overexpression of HO and MMP-1 genes induced by UVA radiation ( 8). Since these genes arereliable indicators of oxidative stress and photoaging, the seresults suggest that lutein may protect against photodamageproducedbysolarradiation( 8,45).NicotinamideNicotinamide is an amide form of vitamin B3 and a precursorof the essential coenzymes such as nicotinamide adeninedinucleotide (NAD+) (21). Its primary dietary sources are liver,meats, yeast, legumes, nuts, green leafy vegetables, cerea ls, tea,and coﬀee ( 2,21). It has been used to treat a variety ofdermatological diseases such as atopic dermatitis and acne ( 2).Recentstudieshighlightedtheroleofnicotinamide,admini steredboth orally and topically, as a chemopreventive agent againstskin cancer. Its anti-cancer function is due to its correcti veaction toward UVR-induced DNA damage, also preventingimmunosuppression.
immunosuppression.Nicotinamide promotes genomic stability and DNA repair.NAD+is a substrate for poly-ADP-ribose polymerase 1 (PARP-1), which detects DNA damage ( 21). Nicotinamide prevents thedepletionofcellularNAD+levelsinresponsetoexposuretoUVR(20). Therefore, nicotinamide supplementation may prevent theprogressionofactinickeratosis(AK)tomalignantsquamous cellcarcinoma ( 27,46–48). In a very recent study, we found thatniacin and its derivatives signiﬁcantly promoted the express ionof elastin, ﬁbrillin-1, and ﬁbrillin-2 in non-irradiated, a nd UVA-radiated ﬁbroblasts, and directly inhibited MMP or elastaseactivity(49).Nicotinamide also prevents UVR-induced intracellulardepletionofadenosinetriphosphateboostingcellularenergyan denhancing DNA repairin HaCaT cells ( 20). In human, exposureto UV solar-simulated radiation triggered the formationof cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8oxoG). Nicotinamide reduced CPDs and
8oxoGformationboth invivoandinvitro(22,48).Nicotinamide also inhibits the activity of sirtuins, which are
dihydroguanine (8oxoG). Nicotinamide reduced CPDs and8oxoGformationboth invivoandinvitro(22,48).Nicotinamide also inhibits the activity of sirtuins, which areNAD+dependent enzymes. Sirtuins play a mandatory role incellular responses to environmental stress ( 47). Its eﬀect onvarious transcription factors, including p53, contributes t o theregulation of cell survival. Sirtuin expression is triggere d byUV irradiation and is upregulated in AK and squamous cellcarcinoma, suggesting that sirtuins may be associated with earlystages of skin cancer. In healthy volunteers, using the Manto uxmodelofskinimmunity,oralnicotinamidesigniﬁcantlyred ucedUVR-inducedimmunosuppression( 27).A potential protective role of nicotinamide inphotocarcinogenesis has been reported in non-melanomaskin cancer (NMSC). In two clinical trials, nicotinamidedecreased the incidence of NMSC and AK ( 28,50). Immune-competent volunteers with ≥4 palpable AKs (face, scalp, and
upper limbs) were treated with 500mg of nicotinamide once aday for 4 months. Nicotinamide resulted in a relative reduct ionof 29% in AK count in the active treatment group comparedwiththeplacebogroup( 50).Alongthesameline,adouble-blind,phase III controlled trial revealed that patients have suﬀeredtwo or more NMSC and treated with nicotinamide had 23%lower rates of new NMSC and 11% less actinic keratoses thanplacebo-treated patients ( 28). This chemopreventive eﬀect onlypersisted with continuous treatment ( 28). Adverse eﬀects ofnicotinamide were rare, and unlike niacin, nicotinamide is not avasodilator. The administered dose of nicotinamide was 500 mgtwice daily, and no more signiﬁcant beneﬁts were observed wi thhigherdoses( 28).However, a controversy emerged in response to a publicationby Yelamos etal.( 51).The authorsconcluded thatnicotinamidemayreducethenumberofAKs,butonlythelessaggressivetype s,whereas in overall it may increase the rate of more aggressiv e
types. The eﬀect of oral nicotinamide as a chemopreventiveagent against skin cancer may be due to its ability to enhanceDNA repair and prevention of photoimmunosuppression ( 52).Additionalclinicaltrialswithlargercohortsofpatientsa ndmoreextended follow-up periods are necessary to solve this apparentcontroversy.Vitamin DVitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is obtained mainly from twoessential sources: diet (10%) and endogenous production byphotochemical conversion from 7-dehydrocholesterol in theepidermis (90%). Endogenous synthesis is induced by exposureof the skin to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation. The skin is also aFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesistarget tissue for the active form of Vitamin D3 [calcitriol, 1,25(OH) 2D3] and other biologically active metabolites of vita minD3 (53). 25-hydroxyvitamin D 3and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D 3are also produced by keratinocytes and macrophages ( 54,55).Vitamin D3 modulates inﬂammatory, immune responses andcarcinogenesis ( 56,57). Vitamin D3 decreases the inﬂammatoryresponse by negatively regulating pro-inﬂammatory mediator s,including TNF- αand nuclear factor- κB (NF- κb) one of theessential factors in inﬂammation. Vitamin D3 also decrease scyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), with the consequent decrease inprostaglandinlevels( 56,58).Theactionofthisvitaminhasbeenreported in a mouse model of chemically-induced skin injurywhere a single dose of it attenuated the inﬂammatory responsebyinhibitionofiNOSprotein(or NOS2)geneandTNF- αprotein(orTNFAgene)(59).Similartomanyothersteroidhormones,1,25(OH)2D3exerts
its action primarily through two signal transduction pathway s:the classical genomic and the non-genomic pathway. The non-genomic eﬀects depend on the levels of intracellular calciumwhereas the genomic eﬀects are mediated by the vitamin Dreceptor (VDR) ( 56). Recent ﬁndings support the role of VDRas a tumor suppressor in the skin. The anti-tumor eﬀects ofVDR are mediated, at least in part, by its interaction with p53gene in response to UVR-induced DNA damage. Several studieshave proposed that vitamin D3 also regulated the Hedgehog(Hh) signaling pathway. The Hh signaling pathway has beenrelated to basal cell carcinomas ( 60). In the skin, keratinocytes,melanocytes, ﬁbroblasts, and Langerhans cells express the V DR(53).In vitro andin vivostudies showed that treatment with1,25(OH)2D3 increased the survival of keratinocytes post-UVR compared to vehicle ( 23,25). 1,25(OH)2D3 caused asigniﬁcant reduction in the formation of CPD ( 23,25) and
increased the expression of p53 in keratinocytes ( 23). Moreover,dietary supplementation of 25(OH)D3 reduced UVB mediatedcontact hypersensitivity (CHS) response in C57BL/6 mice, amurinemodelwithhighsusceptibilitytoUVB-inducedsystemi cimmunosuppression compared to mice with a deﬁcient diet ofthiscompound.Similarly,therewasalsoareductioninCPDsa ndinﬂammationintheanimalssupplementedwith25(OH)D3( 24).In a recent clinical trial, participants were treated with asingle oral dose of vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) 1h after UVRexposure. After irradiation, the human skin showed histolog icaldamage,includingedemaformationandepidermalvesiculatio n,which was diminished in a vitamin D3 dose-dependent manner.Skin expression of TNF- αand inducible isoform of nitric oxidesynthase (iNOS) was lower in participants receiving VitaminD3 as compared in those receiving placebo ( 26). In the samestudy, the genetic proﬁle of the participants was evaluated
independently of the treatment. Two distinct groups wereidentiﬁed. Group 1 was characterized by a lower expressionof arginase (ARG)-1, which favors tissue repair and inhibitsinﬂammation. Group 2 was marked by overexpression of ARG1and genes involved in the restoration of the skin barrier.When assessing the treatments given in both groups, it wasfound that in group 2 all the participants had received a highdose of vitamin D3 and no participant received placebo. Asa result, most participants in group 1 received placebo, andsome received diﬀerent doses of vitamin D3. Group 2 wasidentiﬁed as vitamin D3 responders of and group 1 vitaminD3 non-responders. The Vitamin D3 non-responders (group 1)had overexpression of proinﬂammatory genes, for example, IL-1α, MMP-1, and MMP3. In contrast, vitamin D3 responders(group 2) did not exhibit this characteristic. Similarly, I L-6was activated signiﬁcantly in patients who did not respond to
vitamin D3. The authors of this trial proposed that a single ora ldose of vitamin D3 rapidly mitigated the local UVR-induced
was activated signiﬁcantly in patients who did not respond tovitamin D3. The authors of this trial proposed that a single ora ldose of vitamin D3 rapidly mitigated the local UVR-inducedinﬂammatory response in sensitive individuals. They also foun dthat vitamin D3 responder showed a marked decrease in facialrednessafteranexperimentalsunburn,lessevidenceofepide rmaldamage and a lower expression of proinﬂammatory markers inthe skin. As outlined above, the vitamin D3 responders hada genetic proﬁle of overexpression of cutaneous barrier repairgenes. Since the dose of vitamin D used had no adverse eﬀects,and the calcium levels remained normal, the investigators o fthe study concluded that a single dose of high vitamin D3could be of clinical use to prevent photodamage ( 26). Growingevidence sustains the perception that vitamin D pathway isrelevant for photocarcinogenesis and that the pharmacologic alaction of vitamin D, 1,25 (OH)2D3 and its analogs represent an
advantageous new strategy for the prevention of UVR-induceddamage(26,61).Vitamin CVitamin C given alone does not prevent the deleterious eﬀectsof UVR in the skin ( 19). Consequently, dietary supplementationof vitamin C (500 mg/day) for 8 weeks did not aﬀect theUVR-induced erythema response. Furthermore, vitamin Csupplementation in this group of healthy volunteers produced aparadoxical eﬀect since the content of malonaldehyde and thio l-containing,andglutathione-bindingproteinswerereduced intheskin(62).Vitamin ESkin exposure to UVR depleted the cutaneous levels of vitaminE (alpha-tocopherol), implying that vitamin E is eﬃcientlyquenching ROS in UVR skin exposure ( 63). However, thereis no evidence about the beneﬁcial eﬀects of oral vitamin Esupplementation in the reduction of UVR-induced skin damage(19,64).Conversely,supplementationofothercomponentswithvitaminEdoesshowsomebeneﬁt(seebelow)( 19,65).Likewise,MED was not changed by 400 IU of oral vitamin E alone
after administration of 1 and 6 months ( 64). A side-by-sidecomparisonoftheeﬀectsof β-carotene(15mg/day)vs.vitaminE(400 IU/day) for 8 weeks revealed that only vitamin E decrease dthe skin malondialdehyde concentration. However, neither β-carotene nor vitamin E changed other measures of oxidationUVR-exposedskin( 65).Vitamin Mixtures (Table 1)Several groups or researchers from pharmaceutical companiesand academic institutions developed mixtures of anti-oxida nt.Suchcombinationswerefoundtopossessslightphotoprotectiv e,but they need to be administered at high doses and for anFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 6 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesisextended period of time to obtain a modest degree of protection(17).Carotenoids and Vitamin ESupplementation with carotenoids and vitamin E for 3months provided minimal photoprotection. Erythema wasdiminished with carotenoids (decreased of /Delta1αerythemavalues by 34.5% after 8 weeks of treatment), but erythemasuppression was ampliﬁed by the combination of carotenoidsand vitamin E (decreased /Delta1α-values by 43.19%) ( 66). Ananti-oxidant complex with vitamin E with b-carotene andlycopene (with additional selenium and RRR-a-tocopherol) alsoprotected against UVR-induced skin damage ( 18). Thisanti-oxidant compound increased the actinic erythemathreshold, increasing MED by 20%. The anti-oxidantcomplex also decreases the p53 expression and lipoperoxidelevels(18).On the other hand, mixtures of anti-oxidants containingcarotenoids (b-carotene and lycopene), vitamins C and E,
selenium, and proanthocyanidins revealed no signiﬁcant cha ngein light sensitivity. However, they showed a decrease in UVR-dependentexpressionofMMP-1( 67).Vitamin C and Vitamin EBased on the rationale that supplementation of vitamin Cregenerates cutaneous vitamin E from its radical form, thecombination of both was thought to act synergistically. In t hisregard, diﬀerent studies investigating supplementation with amixture of vitamin C and vitamin E has been reported. In aretrospective human study, the combination of ascorbic and a -tocopherol during 7 weeks increased the MED by 77.6% (from103±29 mJ/cm2before supplementation to 183 ±35 mJ/cm2)(19). Similarly, during 1-week of oral intake of C and vitamin Eincreased protection of skin against UVR, as it increased MEDby 21% (68). In another study, the same group of investigatorsstudied the administration of ascorbic acid and α-tocopherolover a period of 12 weeks, which increased MED by 41%
and decreased UVR-induced CPD ( 69). In another study ofthe same group of investigators ascorbic acid and α-tocopherolwere given over a period of 12 weeks, and they found anincrease of the MED by 41% and decrease of UVR-inducedCPD (72). The addition of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxycinnamic aci d(ferulic acid) did improve the stability of the combinationof both vitamins. 1% alpha-tocopherol and vitamins (C +E)provided doubled photoprotection to solar-simulated radiatio nof skin as measured by both sunburn cell formation anderythema. Inhibition of apoptosis with the combination of bot hvitaminsandferulicacidwasassociatedwithinhibitionof UVR-induction of caspase-3 and caspase-7 ( 70). The mechanism ofthis synergy does not seem to be clear, but it could be due tothe power of ascorbate to produce a reduction of tocopherol,by transferring free radicals captured to the medium. On theskin, these free radicals are neutralized by other anti-oxi dantsystems.
systems.DIETARY NON-BOTANICALS (TABLE 2)ω-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty AcidsOmega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have been considered totreat skin conditions related to UVR exposure. They modestlydecreased the appearance of sunburn cells and inﬂammationupon UVR treatment as well as long-term eﬀects of UVAexposure( 75).Omega-3fattyacidswereeﬀectiveinthetreatmentofHydroavacciniforme(HV),ararephotodermatosis( 76).Theirmain limitation as an oral photoprotector is that a relativelyhigh dose is needed for the eﬀect, often being higher than thegastrictolerancethreshold.Anotherdrawbackistheirunple asanttaste.TABLE 2 | Photoprotective effects of non-botanical compounds and th eir molecular targets.UVeffectstissue/cellular/moleculartargetCompound(s) Results Models ReferencesErythema – – –DNA damage – – –Inﬂammation ProbioticsLactobacillusjohnsonii (La1)Increases IL-10 Mice ( 71)Immuno-suppression ProbioticsLa1 Suppresses CHS reaction Mice ( 71)
La1 Suppresses CHS reaction Mice ( 71)Lactobacillusrhamnosus GG Increases number of activated dendritic cells in themesenteric lymph nodesMice ( 72)
Immuno-suppression ProbioticsLa1 Suppresses CHS reaction Mice ( 71)Lactobacillusrhamnosus GG Increases number of activated dendritic cells in themesenteric lymph nodesMice ( 72)La1 Facilitates recovery of eLc Human ( 73)La1+carotene β-decreases PMLE Human ( 74)La1+carotene β-decreases CD45 +dermal inﬂammatory cells. Human ( 74)Photo carcinogenesis ProbioticsLactobacillusrhamnosus GG Delays appearance of skin tumors Mice ( 72)UV-ECM damage – – –eLc,epidermalLangerhanscells.EPP,erythropoieticprotoporphyria;P MLE,polymorphiclighteruption;CHS,contacthypersensitivity.Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 7 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisProbioticsProbiotics are living microorganisms that regulate the imm unesystem of the gut and defend it against inﬂammatory andinfectiousdiseases.InhairlessSkh-1miceexposedtoUVR,supplementationwithL. johnsonii NCC 533 (La1) conferred protection against theUVR-induced suppression of CHS and increased IL-10 serumlevels (71). Oral administration of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GGdelayed the onset of skin tumors in mice chronically irradia tedwith UV radiation. A signiﬁcant improvement of the immuneresponse was found in the small intestine of Lactobacillusrhamnosus GG treated mice with an increase of activateddendriticcells( 72).In humans, La1 supplementation accelerated the recovery ofthe function of Langerhans cell after UVR exposure in humans(73). Also a human dietary supplement combining La1 withnutritional doses of β-carotene prevented sunburn and sun
intolerance in most of the study participants, protecting agai nstthe development of UVA-induced polymorphous light eruption(74).The role of probiotics in photoprotection is promising, butit is necessary to carry out more extensive clinical trials b eforemaking a deﬁnitive recommendation on the use of probiotics asoralphotoprotectiveagents( 77).IdebenoneIdebenone, a lipophilic coenzyme Q10 analog, has a relativelyhigh penetration into the skin upon topical administration.Its eﬃcacy as an oral photoprotector has not been studied,but its oral administration increased the expression of nerv egrowth factor (NGF), and it is beneﬁcial in patients with Lebe r’shereditaryopticneuropathy( 78).DIETARY BOTANICALS (TABLE 3)This general term includes anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammat orypolyphenols found in vegetable foods. In the last decade, plent yof interest has emerged regarding the possible health beneﬁts ofpolyphenols as anti-oxidants. The main classes of polyphenols
are phenolic acids, ﬂavonoids, stilbenes, and ligands. Flav onoidsrepresent the most signiﬁcant natural anti-oxidants present indietary botanicals. Due to their chemical nature, which con tainsphenolic rings, they can absorb free radicals to form phenoxyradicals ( 1,3). There are diﬀerent subfamilies of ﬂavonoidsowing their chemical structure, which include ﬂavanonols,aurones, isoﬂavones, ﬂavonols, ﬂavones, and anthocyanins . Onthe following pages, we summarize the main ﬁndings regardingseveralsubclassesofpolyphenolsasoralphotoprotectiveagen ts.Green Tea Polyphenols (GTPs)Theprimaryanti-oxidantmoietyofgreentea( Camelliasinensis )is a mixture of polyphenols (frequently referred to as catechi nsor green tea polyphenols, GTPs). The major catechins of greentea are epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), epicatechin-3- gallate(ECG) and epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechin (EGC). EGCGconstitutes ∼40% of total GTPs at the source (green tea leaves)
(117). Numerous studies have demonstrated that tea catechinsare eﬃcient scavengers of ROS. Besides their anti-oxidantactivity, catechins exhibit a modulating eﬀect on inﬂammato ryand immunomodulation responses playing an essential role inhost defense against tumor development and progression ( 117).Interestingly, green tea confers protection against skin ca ncer inmiceinducedbyUVAandUVBradiation( 118).Following standard photocarcinogenesis protocols usinghairless mice, oral administration of GTPs in drinking wate rresulted in signiﬁcant protection against the development ofNMSC regarding tumor multiplicity, tumor size, and tumorincidence (percentage of mice with tumors) compared to no-GTPs-treated UVB-irradiated mice ( 109). Also, hairless micereceiving oral GTPs reduced UVB-induced overexpression ofMMP-2 MMP-9 and enhanced expression of tissue inhibitor ofMMPs. Oral GTPs administration also reduced UVB-inducedexpressionsofvascularendothelialgrowthfactor(VEGF),C D31
and inhibited expression of PCNA, resulting in decreased
MMPs. Oral GTPs administration also reduced UVB-inducedexpressionsofvascularendothelialgrowthfactor(VEGF),C D31and inhibited expression of PCNA, resulting in decreasedapoptosis and lower activation of the mitogen-activated prote inkinase(MAPK)pathway( 119).GTPs also act against photoaging by preventing of UVR-induced activation of inﬂammatory transcription factors AP -1 and NF- κB (98,120). When added in cultured humankeratinocytes before, and/or after UVB irradiation, EGCGinhibitedAP-1activity( 121).It is precisely established that IL-12 deﬁciency increases th eUVR-inducedinﬂammatoryresponseanddecreasesDNArepairin response to UVR-induced damage ( 91). In keratinocytes andhumanlivingskinequivalentmodels,GTPsinducedthesecret ionof IL-12 and decreased keratinocyte apoptosis caused by UVBradiation ( 97). GTPs in drinking water signiﬁcantly reduced theUVB-induced tumor development (volume and number of thetumors)andthenumberofCPD+cellsinwild-typemicebutdid
notaﬀectIL-12-deﬁcientmice( 91).ThesedatasuggestthatGTPsprevent the photocarcinogenesis primarily by a mechanism thatinvolvesIL-12.GTPsalsoincreasetheexpressionofnucleotideexcisionrepai r(NER) genes. Oral GTPs in mice had in the skin a reducedthe number of CPD+cells, showing thus faster repair of UVR-induced DNA damage. Also, GTPs decreased the migration ofCPD+cells to draining lymph nodes ( 92). Moreover, greentea catechins (GTC) reduced UVR-induced inﬂammation andprotected from UVR-radiation immunosuppression and photo-carcinogenic eﬀects in rodent models, but human studies arescarceandcontroversial.Rhodes and colleagues examined the ability of GTPs toprotect the skin from the eﬀects of UVR. Sixteen healthyhuman subjects were given GTPs incombination with a vitamincomplex. The preparation reduced UVR-induced erythema andinhibited UVR-mediated up-regulation of pro-inﬂammatorymetabolites produced by 12-lipoxygenase (12-LOX). 12/15-
LOX enzymatic balance plays a role in the pathogenesis ofskin disorders as it regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis .The investigators concluded that the intake of GTPs resulte din the incorporation of catechin metabolites to human skinassociated with a decrease of the 12-LOXE metabolite, possibl ypromoting protection against inﬂammation from sunburn anddamage mediated by UVR ( 79). However, in a more recentFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 8 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisTABLE 3 | Photoprotective effects of Botanical compounds and their m olecular targets.UVEffectsTissue/cellular/moleculartargetCompound(s) Results Models ReferencesErythema Green tea Decrease erythema Human ( 79)Polyphenols Greenteacatechins +VitaminCCocoa extract Decreases erythema/Increases MED Human ( 80,81)PL Decreases erythema/Increases MED Human ( 82,83)(84)Citrus+Rosemary Increases MED Human ( 85,86)Oxidative stress PL Inhibits lipid peroxidation Humaninvitro(87,88)Enhances anti-oxidant plasma capacity Mice ( 89)Pomegranate Inhibits lipid peroxidationInhibits hydrogen peroxideMice ( 90)DNA damage Green teapolyphenolsDecrease CPD Mice ( 91,92)Increase NER genes Mice ( 92)PL Reduces 8oxoG Mice ( 93)Reduces number of DNA mutations Mice ( 93)Inhibits CPD Mice ( 93)Human ( 83,94)Reduces common mitochondrial deletions Human ( 95)Pomegranate Reduces 8oxoG Mice ( 90)Inhibits CPD Mice ( 90)
Inhibits CPD Mice ( 90)Forskolin Improves NER invitro (96)Inﬂammation Green tea polyphenols Induce the secretion of IL-12 invitro (97)Inhibit AP-1 NF- κB Mice ( 98)Inhibit 12-LOXE metabolites Human ( 79)PL Inhibits TNF- α, iNOS, AP-1 NF- κB expression invitro (99)Increases IL-10 expression invitro (100)Inhibits leukocyte extravasation Mice ( 101)Decreases neutrophil and macrophages Mice ( 93)Decreases mast cells Human ( 83,102)Inhibits COX-2, PGE2 Mice ( 93)Human ( 94)Pomegranate Inhibits COX2, NF- κB; Mice ( 90)Immuno-suppression PL Inhibits trans-UCA isomerization invitro (103)Inhibits glutathione oxidation Mice ( 101,104)Prevents eLC depletion Mice ( 101)Human ( 82,83,105)Reduces PMLE reactionImproves subjective symptoms ofPMLEHuman ( 106,107)(108)Photo carcinogenesis Green teaPolyphenolsDecrease keratinocyte apoptosis invitro (97)Protect against the development of NMSC (tumor incidence,tumor multiplicity, tumor size)Mice ( 109)
tumor multiplicity, tumor size)Mice ( 109)Reduce CD31 and VEGF expression Mice ( 109)Reduce tumor development (number of tumors, tumor volume) M ice ( 91)Inhibit PCNA +epidermal cells Mice ( 109)PL Increases the number of p53( +) cells Mice ( 89,93)Delays skin tumor development Mice ( 89)(Continued)Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 9 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisTABLE 3 | ContinuedUVEffectsTissue/cellular/moleculartargetCompound(s) Results Models ReferencesIncreases the clearance of AKs Decreases the recurrence rate ofAKsHuman ( 110)Increases MED in familial MM Human ( 84)Inhibits epidermalcell proliferation Human ( 83,94)Decreases PCNA, Cyclin D1 expression Human ( 94)Isoﬂavones(Genistein)Inhibit skin tumor formation Mice ( 111)Pomegranate Inhibits PCNA expression Mice ( 90)Resveratrol Inhibits NF-kB expression invitro (96)Inhibits TGF-beta expression Mice ( 112)Decreases tumorigenesis Mice ( 112)Forskolin Reduces sunburn cells invitro (113)UV-ECM DAMAGE Green teapolyphenolsReduce MMP-2 MMP-9Enhance TIMPMice ( 109)CocoaextractAttenuates skin wrinklingDecreases cathepsin G Improves Serpin B6cMice ( 114)PL Increases types I, III, and V collagen invitro (115)Inhibits MMP-1 invitro (88,115)Increases TIMP invitro (115)Mice ( 93)Decreases MMP1
Mice ( 93)Decreases MMP1after VIS-IR radiationHuman ( 116)NER,Nucleotideexcisionrepair.human study (clinicaltrials.gov, NCT01032031) from the sa megroup of investigators ( 122) using equal oral doses GTCs andvitamin C during the same period, no signiﬁcant reduction inskin erythema, or leukocyte inﬁltration was found. Also, th einvestigators did not see alterations in the eicosanoid res ponsetoUVR.Together with the controversial human results, thereare signiﬁcant limitations for the widespread use ofGTPs preparations in preventing photodamage andphotocarcinogenesis. GTPs are very sensitive to oxidation,rapidly losing their activity. Their half-life in the bloods treamis<3h (123). Another limitation is their poor solubility inlipid preparations, which signiﬁcantly decreases its penetrat ionthroughtheskin,whereasitfavorsitsabsorptionandoralupt ake.To improve its penetration into the skin and its stability, GTP scanbemixedwithnon-toxicorganicsolvents,forexample,ol eic
acid.However,itisnecessarytofurtherinvestigatetheto xicityofGTPsathighdoses( 124).Cocoa ExtractCocoa (Chocolate) extracts are rich in polyphenols, mainlyﬂavanols. Cocoa ﬂavanols (CFs) have anti-oxidant properties ,increasing the expression of HO-1 through of nuclear factorerythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) ( 125). Nrf2 is a regulatorof cellular anti-oxidant responses that control the expressi onof genes encoding detoxifying proteins and anti-oxidant, su chas HO-1. Cocoa procyanidins also inhibit MAPK activationand MMP expression ( 126). These mechanisms underlie theirpotential use in photoprotection and photocarcinogenesis ( 80,125)in vivostudies showed that supplementation with cocoapowder in female albino hairless mice (Skh-1) attenuated UVB-induced skin wrinkling formation, regulating genes involv ed inextracellulardermalmatrixdegradation.Dietarycocoadec reasedthe expression of cathepsin G and improved the expression of
Serpin B6c decreasing extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation(114).In humans, oral consumption of CFs has potent anti-inﬂammatory, anti-oxidant, and photoprotective eﬀects. In aclinical trial, two groups of healthy women, with Fitzpatrick ’sskin phototype II, undertook diets bearing high or low CFs for12 weeks. A dietary beverage with cocoa rich in CF decreasedthe degree of erythema following irradiation with a solarlight simulator ( /Delta1αvalued decreased 68% from baseline). UVsensitivity did not change in the women with treatment withcocoabeveragebearinglowdosesofCFs( 80).In 2009, a double-blind study in 30 healthy subjects showedthat consumption of a chocolate rich in ﬂavonoids (HF) couldprevent certain harmful eﬀects of UV radiation in human skin,while conventional chocolate (LF) did not have this eﬀect. MEDafter 12 weeks of HF chocolate treatment more than doubled,whileitremainedunaﬀectedinsubjectstakingLFchocolate( 81).Polypodiumleucotomos Extract(Fernblock®)
Polypodiumleucotomos Extract(Fernblock®)Polypodium leucotomos (PL) is a fern of the Polypodiaceae
whileitremainedunaﬀectedinsubjectstakingLFchocolate( 81).Polypodiumleucotomos Extract(Fernblock®)Polypodium leucotomos (PL) is a fern of the Polypodiaceaefamily, native to Central and South America. PL has beenFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 10 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesisused in traditional medicine in those geographical areas forthe treatment of skin conditions ( 1). A standardized aqueousextract of PL (PL/FernblockR⃝) made from leaves of thefern PL, rich in polyphenols, has been developed to exploitthe photoprotective properties of ferns and to provide asteady phenolic content ( 87,127). Our group has thoroughlyinvestigated FernblockR⃝with regard to its anti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, and immunomodulatory and tumor growthsuppressive properties ( 1). Phenolic compounds identiﬁed inthe aqueous extract FernblockR⃝are 4-hydroxybenzoic acid,3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (protocatechuic acid), 4-hydro xy-3-methoxybenzoicacid(vanillicacid),3,4-dihydroxycinna micacid(caﬀeicacid),4-hydroxycinnamicacid(p-coumaric),3-meth oxy-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (ferulic acid), 4-hydroxycinnamo yl-quinicacid,andﬁvechlorogenicacidisomers( 128).
quinicacid,andﬁvechlorogenicacidisomers( 128).Ferulic and caﬀeic acids are the most potent anti-oxidantspresent in PL. Their apparent permeability shown in the Caco-2 cellin vitromodel was 70–100%, similar to human post-oraladministrationabsorption( 127).ThisextractwasmarketedinEuropeintheyear2000,bothintopical and oral forms, and is currently available in more tha n26 countries, including the U.S. as a dietary supplement since2006 (129). Its mechanisms of action and its success in clinicaltrials,andtheincreasedsocialinterestinnaturalsubsta ncessuchaspolyphenols,haveplacedPLasaninterestingphotoprotectiveandanti-oxidantoption( 130,131).PL increases the ability of the endogenous anti-oxidantsystem. PL neutralizes superoxide anions, hydroxyl radical s,and lipoperoxides produced in the skin after exposure to UVand visible radiation ( 87,88,104,127). The most signiﬁcantdiﬀerences between this extract and conventional anti-oxid ants
refertoitscapacityasasuperoxideanionscavenger.Themajo rityof traditional anti-oxidants such as vitamin C, E, caroteno idsare good quenchers of singlet oxygen; however, PL also exhib itsexcellent anti-oxidant properties against superoxide anion ( 87).Inin vitrostudies our group found that this extract was aneﬃcient quencher of superoxide anion, with ∼40 to 60% ofthe activity of SOD used as a positive control. Furthermore, i talso inhibited lipid peroxidation ( 87,88,127). In addition toits anti-oxidant activity, PL shows promise in the prevention ofphotodamageandphotocarcinogenesisbecauseitenhancesDNArepair and modulates the inﬂammatory and immune responses(1,3,129).In the context of UVR-induced inﬂammation, our studieshaverevealedthatorallyadministeredPLpreventederythem ainthe UVR-treated human skin ( 82,87). After oral administrationof PL, the MED increased by 2.8 ±0.59 fold ( 82). PL is alsoactive on the skin as a photoprotector against PUVA-induced
phototoxicity ( 83,105). The basis of its anti-inﬂammatoryproperties could be its ability to abolish the expression ofthe TNF- α, iNOS (99), redox-sensitive transcriptional factorsactivator protein 1 (AP-1) and nuclear factor κB (NF- κB) (99).PL also decreases the expression of COX-2 and PGE2 ( 93).However, the eﬀect of PL on AP-1 and NF- κB expressionafter exposure to solar simulated radiation (SSR) cannot beexplained only by the anti-oxidant action of PL since treatme ntwith a bona ﬁde anti-oxidant does not decrease the expressionof AP-1 and NF- κB in human keratinocytes subjected toSSR.in vivo experiments showed that COX-2 and PGE2were overexpressed after exposure to UVR, but they bothdecreasedinPL-fedmice( 93).OtherbeneﬁcialeﬀectsoforalPLincluded a decrease in UVR-induced inﬁltration of neutrophilsand macrophages into the skin ( 93). Other studies showed areduction in the levels of the inﬂammatory molecules, both i n
humans ( 83,105) and in mice ( 101). These studies revealedan inhibition of mast cells and leukocyte extravasation in t heirradiated area when PL is administered orally. These data
humans ( 83,105) and in mice ( 101). These studies revealedan inhibition of mast cells and leukocyte extravasation in t heirradiated area when PL is administered orally. These datacomplement in vitro studies using human PHA-stimulatedperipheral blood mononuclear cells, which showed that PLdecreased the production of IL-2, IFN-gamma, and TNF-alphaand completely inhibited the expression of the inﬂammatorycytokine IL-6. In the same experiments, the addition of PLincreased IL-10 production ( 100). PL also inhibited apoptosisand cell death ( 89,99) therefore preventing apoptosis/necrosis-triggeredinﬂammation.Moreover, orally administered PL inhibited UVR-mediatedDNAdamageandmutagenesisinhumansandmice( 83,94,99).PL exerted its eﬀect by a double mechanism by preventingUV-induced accumulation of CPDs and reducing oxidativedamage, with a reduction of 8-OH-dG. Also, even before UVirradiation oral PL decreased the levels of 8-OH-dG in a mouse
model of Xeroderma pigmentosum (Xpc+/−), suggesting thatoral PL relieves constitutive oxidative DNA damage ( 103). Inthis model, we found that PL inhibited expression of COX2and accelerated CPD removal. In this regard, cells containin gCPDs were detected immediately after UVB in both groups ofanimals, vehicle-, and PL-fed mice, conﬁrming similar init ialUVB damage. However, by 72h, 54 ±5% CPDs remained invehicle-fed mice compared to only 31 ±5% in PL-fed mice.These data indicate that PL increases the repair capacity rath erthanpreventingtheformationofthyminedimers.Also,wefoun dthat PL prevented UVR-mediated pro-oxidative DNA damageby quantifying cells containing 8-OH-dG, particularly in sk insections 6–24h after exposure and also reduced the mutationalburden by ∼25% (93). Finally, oral PL decreased UVA-dependent mitochondrial DNA damage by reducing commondeletions(CD)( 95).Regarding photo-immunosuppression PL is endowedwith immunomodulatory properties acting as a
with immunomodulatory properties acting as aphotoimmunoprotective agent by diﬀerent mechanisms. PLpreventsUCAisomerizationintofromits transtothecisisomer(103),whichisatriggeringeventofskinimmunosuppression.Inturn, as the primary UV-absorbing chromophore in the skin, itprevents the expression of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such asTNF-α(99).Also,PLpreventsepidermalLangerhanscells(eLC)depletion produced by UV irradiation in vivo(82,83,101,105).Multiple molecular mechanisms may underlie the improvementof survival of dendritic cells, including inhibition of UCAisomerization, as mentioned above ( 103), blockade of iNOSexpression ( 99), and improvement of endogenous systemicanti-oxidant systems ( 89,93,101). Finally, orally administeredPL also inhibited UVB radiation-induced immunosuppressionin mice sensitized with oxazolone before UVR exposure andpreventedinhibitionofCHS( 102).Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 11 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisPhotoinmunosuppression is an essential area for preventingphotocarcinogenesis. Our group has evaluated the possibleprotective action of oral PL in photocarcinogenesis. in vitroandin vivostudies showed that PL modulates the expression ofmolecules, transcription factors, and gene expression invol vedin photocarcinogenesis ( 1–3,132). We found that PL delayedthe onset of skin cancer in PL-treated hairless mice. PL alsodecreasedthenumberofprecancerouslesioninthesurroundi ngnon-tumoralskinofthesameanimalandelevatedp53expressio nlevels (89). The delay in the initiation of photocarcinogenesiscorrelates with changes in the levels of several markers ofoxidativestressintheskinandblood.In this regard, PL-treated animals had increased anti-oxidant plasma activity, without changes in the levels ofendogenous anti-oxidant enzymes ( 89). Oral PL also inducedp53 overexpression in the Xeroderma pigmentosum Xpc+/−
mousemodelthatdisplaysskincancerhighlycomparabletomil dhumanXPsyndromes.PL-fedandUVB-irradiated,Xpc+/−miceshowed a 2–4 fold increase in the levels of total and pSer15compared to vehicle-treated mice ( 93). DNA damage inducedphosphorylation of p53 on Ser15 and Ser20. Phosphorylationinhibited the ability of negative regulator of p53, to bind p53 ,favoringboththeactivationandaccumulationofp53inrespon seto DNA damage ( 133). In this experimental model, we found aninversecorrelationbetweentheincreaseofp53andthedecre asedCOX-2 levels, suggesting that oral PL treatment reduced UVR-inducedCOX-2levels,atleastinpart,byactivationofp53( 93).Inagreement with the increased p53 expression, PL also decrease depidermal cell proliferation induced by UVR in human andexperimentalanimals( 83,104).Inclinicalstudies,wefoundthatPL reduced the rate of proliferating epidermal cells induced b yUVR (83). A recent study showed that PL decreases the number
ofcyclinD1-andPCNA-positiveepidermalcellscausedbyUVR(134).The ECM provides structural integrity to the tissue andis remodeled during skin aging/photoaging and cancer ( 115).in vitro experiments showed that PL directly inhibited theenzymatic activity and expression of MMPs in melanoma cellsand ﬁbroblasts. PL stimulated the expression of TIMPs inmelanoma cells, reducing melanoma cell growth, and ECMremodeling( 88,115).VLandinfraredradiation(IR)alsopromotesun-inducedskindamage ( 135,136). The energy of IR and VL photons is muchlower than that of UV photons. The most considerable partof solar IR radiation is IRA (IRA, wavelength 700–1,400nm).IRA deeply penetrates into the human skin whereas IR B (IRB,wavelength 1,400–3,000nm) and infrared radiation C (IRC,wavelength 3,000 nm −1mm) only aﬀect the upper layers ( 135).In human skin, IR irradiation generates heat and free radica ls(136). IRA-induced photoaging, by generating mitochondrial
ROS(137)followedbyacascadeofintracellulareventsthatleadsto an increase of MMP-1 and MMP 9 without an increase ofTIMP expression ( 138). Besides its eﬀect on MMP, IRA alsotriggersinﬁltrationofinﬂammatorycellsintotheskin( 139).IRA,also,decreasesthenumberofLangerhanscells,inﬂuencesw oundrepair and alters the expression of transforming growth facto rbeta (TGB- β) (139). Regarding VL (400–700nm), an early studyfrom Pathak ( 140) indicated that VL produced an immediatedarkening of the skin. VL contributed to ROS production in theskin (141) and induced DNA damage through the generationof ROS (142). VL exerts similar eﬀects to UVR in the ECM. IRplus VL increased the expression of MMP-1 and MMP-9 and,in human skin in vivolowered type I procollagen levels andrecruitedmacrophagestotheirradiatedsite( 139).We have also studied the possible eﬀect of PL in preventingdamage induced by IR plus VL. We found that PL was clinically
eﬀective in preventing the deleterious eﬀects of infrared-visi bleIR–VL radiations ( 116). In a recent prospective clinical trial,
damage induced by IR plus VL. We found that PL was clinicallyeﬀective in preventing the deleterious eﬀects of infrared-visi bleIR–VL radiations ( 116). In a recent prospective clinical trial,volunteers received a combination of IR-VL (600 and 200J/cm2,respectively).Glutealbiopsiesweretakenbeforeandafterirradiation.PL(960mg/day)wasadministeredorallyfor21 daysfollowed by another round of IR–VL radiation and biopsy. Theresults showed that MMP-1 was increased after VL-IR radiationconcerning baseline in 71% of the patients, while the percentageofpatientstreatedwithPLwassmaller(51%).As we reported previously, PL reduces UVR-inducedimmunosuppression and mutagenesis. Patients with at least twoAKs on the scalp underwent two sessions of PDT, separatedby 1week. One group received PTD and oral PL treatment for1 week after the last PDT session. Both treatment modalitiesPDT alone or PDT plus oral PL reduced the number ofAK. However, supplementation with oral of PL increased the
clearance rate and decreased the recurrence rate of AKs with in6 months, compared to PDT alone. Oral PL could be used as asupplementaryagentinthetreatmentofﬁeldcancerization( 110).We have also investigated the possible protective role of oraladministration of PL in patients at risk of malignant melanom a(MM) and evaluated the inﬂuence of PL in the interactionbetweenMC1Rpolymorphismsandthecyclin-dependentkinase(CDK) inhibitor 2A gene ( CDKN2A ) status with MED ( 84). 25–50% of familial MM relatives display a mutation in CDKN2Aand variants in MC1Rare common in the white population,conferring low to moderate risk to develop melanoma. In ourtrial,atotalof61patients(25withfamilialand/ormultipleMM,20 with sporadic MM, and 16 without a history of MM) wereexposed to UVB radiation. Oral PL treatment increased by 30%theMEDmeaninallpatients.AmongpatientswithfamilialMM,those individuals with mutations in CDKN2A and/or MC1R
had greater diﬀerences regarding the response to treatment wi thPL (84). According to these results, patients with higher UVRsensitivity (lower basal MED) would beneﬁt the most with oralPL treatment. These results are intriguing and thus studies withlonger-term PL administration in patients with a high risk ofdeveloping MM are needed to consolidate these data. Finally,PL also ameliorates the onset of the polymorphic light eruption ,whichisthemostcommonphotosensitivityconditionoftheski n(106–108).Regarding the safety of oral treatment of PL, a recent studydeterminedthatcapsulescontainingacarefullycontrollede xtractofPL(Heliocare,IFC,Spain)(240mg)havenotproducedsevereadverseeﬀects,after2monthsoftreatment( 143).IsoﬂavonesIsoﬂavones,oneleadinggroupofphytoestrogens,havetheab ilityto act as topical photoprotectors. Oral photoprotection is notwell-documented( 144),andalsonotmuchinformationhasbeen
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 12 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesisreportedfromstudiesinhumans.Someisoﬂavonesorisoﬂavon e-rich compounds are genistein, equol, silymarin, quercetin, andapigenin.GenisteinGenistein, an isoﬂavone obtained from fermented soy, coﬀeebeans, and fava, is a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Genis teinhas a robust anti-oxidant capability ( 145). Expression of thetranscription factor Nrf2 is activated by oral treatment wit hgenistein( 146,147).OralgenisteininhibitedUVB-mediatedskinphotoagingandskintumorformationinarodentmodel( 111).EquolEquol, a metabolite of the genistein analog daidzein, is enr ichednaturally with red clover ( Trifolium pratense ) (148). Althoughequol has yet to be used as an oral photo-protector, recentresearch indicates a high oral tolerance ( 149), suggesting that itmay be appropriate for oral photoprotection. Topically, equolconferedprotectionagainstphotoaging( 150)andalsodecreasedtumorigenesisinducedbyUVR( 149,151).
tumorigenesisinducedbyUVR( 149,151).SilymarinSilymarin is a ﬂavonoid derived from the milk thistle plant(Silybum marianum complex) that contains silybin, silydian in,and silychrisin. Its oral use in photoprotection has notbeen tested, whereas sylimarin topically applied confersphotoprotection due to the amount of silybin in the preparation(152).Silymarininterfereswiththebioavailabilityofotherd rugs(152)whatmaylimittheuseinoralphotoprotection.QuercetinThepolyphenolquercetinisthemostabundantﬂavonoid,anditisfoundinfruits,vegetables,tea,andwine.Quercetinisa potentanti-oxidant, and it works as a topical photoprotector ( 153), butuntil now it has not been evaluated in oral photoprotection.Similartosilymarin,itcanalterthebioavailabilityofot herdrugs(154).ApigeninApigenin is a ﬂavonoid found in several fruits, vegetablesincluding onions, parsley, and sweet red peppers as well as tea.Several studies conducted over the past years have reported
its potential as an anti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, and ant i-cancer compound ( 155). Topically, apigenin decreased tumoremergence after exposure to UVR in a rodent model. This eﬀectmayhavebeencaused,atleastinpart,byinhibitionofbothCO X2andthemammaliantargetofrapamycinsignalingpathway( 156–158).However,itsusefulnessasanoralphotoprotectorhasyettobeaddressed.Pomegranate ( Punicagranatum , fam.Punicaceae)The anti-oxidant activity of pomegranate juice is very high, e.g.,higherthanthatofredwineandgreenteaduetoitspolyphenoliccontent, which includes anthocyanidins and catechins andtannins ( 159). As an oral photoprotector, the Mukhtar grouphas described the eﬃcacy of pomegranate polyphenols in theprevention of photocarcinogenesis in mice irradiated with UVB(90,160,161). These authors claimed that pomegranate fruitextract inhibited the expression of COX-2 and iNOS, as well astheexpressionofcyclinD1inmouseskinafterUVBirradiation.
Also, this extract decreased the expression of MMP2, 3, and 9 intheskinofthemousemodel( 90,160,161).Citrus Plus Rosemary ExtractCitruscontainsalargeamountofﬂavonoids,androsemaryis richin polyphenols and diterpenes. In humans, oral administrationof a combination of citrus and rosemary extracts decreasedsensitivity to erythema induced by UVR, as quantiﬁed by anincreasedMEDthatafter8weeksoftreatmentrangedfrom34%inPerez-Sanchez’sstudy( 85)to29.8%inNobile’sstudy( 86).ResveratrolResveratrol is a polyphenolic phytoalexin stilbenoid found inthe peels and seeds of grapes as well as red wine. The eﬀect ofresveratrolasatopicalphotoprotectoriswelldocumented( 162).Regarding its action as an oral photoprotector in a p53-sensitivemouse tumor model, the administration of oral resveratroldecreasedthetumorigenesismediatedbyUVR( 112)throughthemodulationofTGF-beta( 112)andNF-kB( 163).Also,resveratrolmay have the potential to stimulates the response to radiationtherapies( 164).Forskolin
therapies( 164).ForskolinThe diterpenoid forskolin (FSK) is obtained from the root cor k
may have the potential to stimulates the response to radiationtherapies( 164).ForskolinThe diterpenoid forskolin (FSK) is obtained from the root cor koftheIndiancoleus( Coleusforskohlii ).Itisaclassicalactivatoroftheadenylatecyclaseenzymeresultinginelevatedlevelso fcyclicadenosine monophosphate (cAMP). A recent study addressingthe eﬀect of FSK in UVR-mediated photodamage reported thatFSK accelerated the removal rate of UVR-induced photolesionsin vitroandin vivo(96). Topical application of forskolin alsorestored pigmentation UVR-independent in an MC1R-defectivefair-skinnedanimalmodel( 165).Cutaneous melanocortin one receptor (MC1R) initiatesmultiple protective actions against deleterious eﬀects of UVR,including melanin production. These actions are mediated bythe activation of adenylyl cyclase and cAMP. Eumelanizationby FSK is thought to occur by direct activation of adenylylcyclase in melanocytes and up-regulation of melanocyte cAMP
levels. Polymorphisms of MC1R induce a fair-skinned, sun-sensitive,andcancer-pronephenotype.Micebearinginactivat ingmutations in this gene (Mc1re/e) lacked the ability to gener atecAMPinresponsetoMSH.Inthosemice,cutaneousapplicationofFSKpromotedDNArepairinresponsetoUVRphotodamage.The defect of these transgenic mice underlies in an inabilit yto remove CPD induced by the UVR, which is signiﬁcantlyincreased by FSK to levels comparable to those of Mc1r wild-type mice ( 166). FSK also exerted its photoprotective eﬀect byincreasing epithelial thickening due to increased keratino cyteproliferation in a cAMP-dependent manner ( 167).in vitro, FSKhas also demonstrated a photoprotective impact by increasingepithelial thickness, favoring the proliferation of keratin ocytesin a cAMP-dependent way ( 113).in vitro, FSK inhibitedkeratinocyte apoptosis induced by UVR, reducing sunburn cellscount.Interestingly,melanincontentlevelswereindepend entof
Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 13 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, PhotocarcinogenesisFSKtreatment,showingthattheprotectionagainstapoptosisw asnottheresultofanincreaseinmelaninlevels( 168).FSK also promotes cellular growth to repair skinphotodamage. Speciﬁcally, FSK improves NER after exposure toUVR; however, this eﬀect only appeared in growing skin cells.When cells were cultured at low density, FSK stimulated cAMPresponsive element binding (CREB) phosphorylation, which is amarkerofPKAactivation,producingasigniﬁcantincreasein theactivityofNERcomparedtothecontrol.Theseﬁndingsindica tethat cell growth is critical for FSK to improve NER functionand suggest that cell growth conditions should be considere das a variable while evaluating the FSK eﬃcacy in inhibitingUVR-induced photodamage ( 96). FSK has been used orally fornon-skin-relatedtherapeuticuses,butnotinskindisease( 168).EVALUATING ORAL PHOTOPROTECTIONThe classical model of evaluation of topical photoprotectors
includes SPF assessment, based on prevention of erythema.Another useful indicator is the erythema protection scale, w hichmeasures skin reddening due to inﬂammation. However, oralphotoprotectors are not very eﬀective in reducing erythema andthus cannot be evaluated using SPF and erythema protectionfactor scales. These reagents need to be measured according tootherparameters,whichinclude:Anti-oxidant ActivityApproaches include irradiation of keratinocytes with UVBfollowed by detection of T-T dimers and sunburn cells andhave the potential to become a gold standard to gauge thephotoprotective ability of new oral compounds. An additionaltest could include measuring anti-oxidant potential in vitro. Themaindrawbackisthatthisapproachdoesnotallowtoextrapolat etheeﬀectoforaladministrationdirectly.Ingeneral,theprev iousmethods always need to be complemented with studies on oraltoxicity, metabolic disposition, and careful assessment of the
pharmacodynamicsandpharmacokineticsofanoralagent.Anti-mutagenic ActivityThisapproachiscurrentlyappliedinnonhumanmodels,anditisbasedontheabilityofthecompound(s)underanalysistopreven tmutationsincriticalgenesinvolvedinphotocarcinogenesi s,e.g.,p53 (169). Two common reference assays employ mouse bonemarrow-derivederythrocytesandtheTA100strainof Salmonellatyphimurium ,whichishistidine-dependent.PhotoimmunoprotectionA useful parameter includes measuring the eﬀect of the oralintakeofthecompoundofinterestonUVR-inducedinhibitiono fcontactordelayed-typehypersensitivityresponses.Thismea surecan be done in one or two ways: (i) a single sub-erythemaldose of UV radiation. This protocol enables a more directcomparison with the SPF parameter used to evaluate topicalsunscreens. However, this approach requires a large cohort ofhealthy volunteers. This renders this approach not particular lycost-eﬀective ( 170); (ii) using a pre-sensitization screening with
chemical irritants. A signiﬁcant problem with this approachis that the chemical sensitization is not directly comparabl eto damage induced by UVR. However, it brings a reasonableestimateoftheimmunomodulatorypropertiesofthetreatment .The practical aspects of the use and prescription of oralphotoprotectors need to be evaluated by available informatio non biodisposition, eﬃciency, and safety. A gold standard is s tilllacking in this regard, but one positive is the overall low toxi cityof these agents (after all, many of them are part of nutrients) .However, speciﬁc aspects, e.g., known allergies, must be take nintoaccountwhenusingorprescribingtheseapproaches.FUTURE PERSPECTIVESOral supplementation aims at countering the long-term eﬀects of sun exposure. Many of these eﬀects arerelated to immunosuppression, chronic inﬂammation, andphotocarcinogenesis. The current view of many researchgroups, including ours, is that this developing ﬁeld needs
the establishment of strong standards to enable a rigorousassessment of the eﬀectiveness of oral photoprotection. These
groups, including ours, is that this developing ﬁeld needsthe establishment of strong standards to enable a rigorousassessment of the eﬀectiveness of oral photoprotection. Theseneed to include measurements on anti-oxidant activity, ant i-mutagenic capability, and anti-immunosuppressive function.The FDA, EMA, and other regulatory agencies around theworld need to become involved in the establishment of goldstandards and regulate the research on the growing landscape ofnew substances and combinations of substances that will lik elychangetheﬁeldofphotoprotectioninyearstocome.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSSG conceived the review and wrote the sections of EvaluatingOral Photoprotection andFutures Perspectives. CP, NP, YG, andAJ have contributed to the diﬀerent sections of the manuscriptand have read and corrected the entire manuscript. SG hasoverseen the integration of the entire manuscript and has rea dandcorrectedtheentiremanuscript.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
andcorrectedtheentiremanuscript.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThisworkhasbeenpartiallysupportedbyagrantfromtheCarlosIII Health Institute, Ministry of Science and Innovation, Spa in(PS09/01099).REFERENCES1. González S, Gilaberte Y, Juarranz A. Oral and systemic photoprotecti on.In: Wang SQ, Lim HW, editors. Principles and Practice of Photoprotection .SpringerInternationalPublishing(2016).p.387–403.2. Lim HW, Arellano-Mendoza MI, Stengel F. Current challengesin photoprotection. J Am Acad Dermatol . (2017) 76:S91–9.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2016.09.0403. Parrado C, Mascaraque M, Gilaberte Y, Juarranz A, Gonzalez S. Fernblo ck(Polypodium leucotomos extract): molecular mechanisms and pleiotropicFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 14 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesiseﬀects in light-related skin conditions, photoaging and skin ca ncers.Int JMolSci.(2016)17:1–21.doi:10.3390/ijms170710264. Mathews-Roth MM, Pathak MA, Parrish J, Fitzpatrick TB, Kass EH, TodaK, et al. Clinical trial of the eﬀects of oral beta- carotene on the re sponsesof human skin to solar radiation. J Invest Dermatol. (1972) 59:349–53.doi:10.1111/1523-1747.ep126274085. Lee J, Jiang S, Levine N, Watson RR. Carotenoid supplementation reduceserythema in human skin after simulated solar radiation exposure. ProcSoc Exp Biol Med. (2000) 223:170–74. doi: 10.1046/j.1525-1373.2000.22323.x6. Stahl W, Heinrich U, Wiseman S, Eichler O, Sies H, Tronnier H. Dieta rytomatopasteprotectsagainstultravioletlight-inducederythemainh umans.JNutr.(2001)131:1449–51.doi:10.1093/jn/131.5.14497. Rizwan M, Rodriguez-Blanco I, Harbottle A, Birch-Machin MA,Watson RE, Rhodes LE. Tomato paste rich in lycopene protects against
cutaneous photodamage in humans in vivo: a randomized controlledtrial.Br J Dermatol. (2011) 164:154–62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10057.x8. Grether-Beck S, Marini A, Jaenicke T, Stahl W, Krutmann J. Molec ularevidence that oral supplementation with lycopene or lutein protectshuman skin against ultraviolet radiation: results from a double-blind ed,placebo-controlled, crossover study. Br J Dermatol. (2017) 176:1231–40.doi:10.1111/bjd.150809. Palombo P, Fabrizi G, Ruocco V, Ruocco E, Fluhr J, Roberts R, et al. (2007)Beneﬁcial long-term eﬀects of combined oral/topical antioxidant treatmentwith the carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin on human skin: a doub le-blind,placebo-controlledstudy. SkinPharmacolPhysiol .(2007)20:199–210.doi:10.1159/00010180710. Komatsu T, Sasaki S, Manabe Y, Hirata T, Sugawara T. Preventive eﬀect ofdietary astaxanthin on UVA-induced skin photoaging in hairless mi cePLoSONE(2017)12:e0171178.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0171178
11. Suganuma K, Nakajima H, Ohtsuki M, Imokawa G. Astaxanthin att enuatesthe UVA-induced up-regulation of matrix-metalloproteinase-1 and skinﬁbroblast elastase in human dermal ﬁbroblasts. J Dermatol Sci. (2010)58:136–42.doi:10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.02.00912. González S, Astner S, Wu A, Goukassian D, Pathak M. Dietarylutein/zeaxanthin decreases ultraviolet B-induced epidermalhyperproliferation and acute inﬂammation in hairless mice. J. Investig.Dermatol. (2003)12:399–405.doi:10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12355 .x13. Astner S, Wu A, Chen J, Philips N, Rius-Diaz F, Parrado C, et al. D ietarylutein/zeaxanthin partially reduces photoaging and photocarcinog enesis inchronically UVB-irradiated Skh-1 hairless mice. Skin Pharmacol Physiol .(2007)20:283–91.doi:10.1159/00010757614. Marini A, Jaenicke T, Grether-Beck S, Le Floc’h C, Cheniti A, PiccardiN et al. Prevention of polymorphic light eruption by oral administration
of a nutritional supplement containing lycopene, beta-carotene, an dLactobacillus johnsonii : results from a randomized, placebo-controlled,double-blinded study. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. (2014)30:189–94.doi:10.1111/phpp.1209315. Cooperstone JL, Tober KL, Riedl KM, Teegarden MD, Cichon MJ ,Francis DM, et al. Tomatoes protect against development of UV-inducedkeratinocyte carcinoma via metabolomic alterations. Sci Rep.(2017) 7:1–9.doi:10.1038/s41598-017-05568-716. Philips N, Keller T, Hendrix C, Hamilton S, Arena R, Tuason M, et al.Regulation of the extracellular matrix remodeling by lutein in dermalﬁbroblasts, melanoma cells, and ultraviolet radiation exposed ﬁbroblasts .ArchDermatolRes. (2007)299:373–79.doi:10.1007/s00403-007-0779-017. Stahl W, Heinrich U, Aust O, Tronnier H, Sies H. Lycopene-rich produ ctsand dietary photoprotection. Photochem Photobiol Sci. (2006) 5:238–42.doi:10.1039/B505312A
doi:10.1039/B505312A18. Césarini JP, Michel L, Maurette JM, Adhoute H, Béjot M. Immedia te eﬀectsof UV radiation on the skin: modiﬁcation by an antioxidant complex
doi:10.1039/B505312A18. Césarini JP, Michel L, Maurette JM, Adhoute H, Béjot M. Immedia te eﬀectsof UV radiation on the skin: modiﬁcation by an antioxidant complexcontaining carotenoids. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed . (2003)19:182–9.doi:10.1034/j.1600-0781.2003.00044.x19. Fuchs J, Kern H. Modulation of UV-light-induced skin inﬂammatio nby D-alpha-tocopherol and L-ascorbic acid: a clinical study usin gsolar simulated radiation. Free Radic Biol Med. (1998) 25:1006–12.doi:10.1016/S0891-5849(98)00132-420. Park J, Halliday GM, Surjana D, Damian DL. Nicotinamide preventsultraviolet radiation-induced cellular energy loss. Photochem Photobiol.(2010)86:942–48.doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2010.00746. x21. Surjana D, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Role of nicotinamide in DNAdamage, mutagenesis, and DNA repair. J Nucleic Acids (2010) 25: 157591.doi:10.4061/2010/15759122. Thompson BC, Surjana D, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide
enhances repair of ultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage in primarymelanocytes. ExpDermatol. (2014)23:509–11.doi:10.1111/exd.1243023. Gupta R, Dixon KM, Deo SS, Holliday CJ, Slater M, Halliday GM, et al.Photoprotectionby1,25dihydroxyvitaminD3isassociatedwith anincreasein p53 and a decrease in nitric oxide products . J Invest Dermatol. (2007)127:707–15.doi:10.1038/sj.jid.570059724. Malley RC, Muller HK, Norval M, Woods GM. Dietary vitamin D altersthe response of the skin to UVB-irradiation depending on the geneti cbackground of the mice. Photochem Photobiol Sci. (2013) 12:536–45.doi:10.1039/C2PP25211B25. Trémezaygues L, Seifert M, Tilgen W, Reichrath J. 1,25-dihydro xyvitaminD (3) protects human keratinocytes against UV-B-induced damage:in vitroanalysis of cell viability/proliferation, DNA-damage and -repair.Dermatoendocrinol (2009)1:239–45.doi:10.4161/derm.1.4.970526. Scott JF, Lu KQ. Vitamin D as a therapeutic option for sunburn:
clinical and biologic implications. DNA Cell Biol. (2017) 36:879–82.doi:10.1089/dna.2017.397827. Yiasemides E, Sivapirabu G, Halliday GM, Park J, Damian DL.Oral nicotinamide protects against ultraviolet radiation-inducedimmunosuppression in humans. Carcinogenesis (2009) 30:101–5.doi:10.1093/carcin/bgn24828. Chen AC, Martin AJ, Choy B, Fernández-Pe-as P, Dalziell RA,McKenzie CA et al. A Phase 3 randomized trial of nicotinamidefor skin-cancer chemoprevention. N Engl J Med. (2015) 373:1618–26.doi:10.1056/NEJMoa150619729. Bendich A, Olson JA. Biological actions of carotenoids. FASEB J. (1989)8:1927–32.doi:10.1096/fasebj.3.8.265635630. SiesH,StahlW.Carotenoids,andUVprotection. Photochem.Photobiol.Sci.(2004)3:749–52.doi:10.1039/b316082c31. Stahl W, Sies H. β-Carotene and other carotenoids inprotection from sunlight . Am J Clin Nutr. (2012) 96:1179S −84S.doi:10.3945/ajcn.112.03481932. Srinivasan M, Sudheer AR, Pillai KR, Kumar PR, Sudhakaran PR, M enon
VP.Lycopeneasanaturalprotectoragainstgamma-radiationinduce dDNAdamage, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant status in primary culture ofisolated rat hepatocytes in vitro. Biochim Biophys Acta (2007) 1770:659–65.doi:10.1016/j.bbagen.2006.11.00833. Eichler O, Sies H, Stahl W. Divergent optimum levels of lycopene,beta-carotene and lutein protecting against UVB irradiationin human ﬁbroblasts . Photochem Photobiol. (2002) 75:503–6.doi:10.1562/0031-8655(2002)075 <0503:DOLOLC >2.0.CO;234. GollnickH,HopfenmullerW,HemmesC,ChunSC,SchmidC,SundermeierK, et al. Systemic beta carotene plus topical UV sunscreen are an optimalprotection against harmful eﬀects of natural UV sunlight: Results of theBerlin-Eilathstudy. EurJDermatol. (1996)6:200–5.35. Heinrich U, Gartner C, Wiebusch M, Eichler O, Sies H, Tronnier H,et al. Supplementation with beta-carotene or a similar amount of mixedcarotenoids protects humans from UV-induced erythema. J Nutr.(2003)133:98–101.doi:10.1093/jn/133.1.98
133:98–101.doi:10.1093/jn/133.1.9836. Köpcke W, Krutmann J. Protection from sunburn with beta-Carotene–a meta-analysis. Photochem Photobiol. (2008) 84:284–8.
133:98–101.doi:10.1093/jn/133.1.9836. Köpcke W, Krutmann J. Protection from sunburn with beta-Carotene–a meta-analysis. Photochem Photobiol. (2008) 84:284–8.doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2007.00253.x37. Lohan SB, Vitt K, Scholz P, Keck CM, Meinke MC. ROS productionand glutathione response in keratinocytes after application of β-carotene and VIS/NIR irradiation. Chem Biol Interact. (2018) 280:1–7.doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2017.12.00238. BalwaniM,DesnickR.Theporphyrias:advancesindiagnosisan dtreatment.Blood(2012)120:4496–504.doi:10.1182/blood-2012-05-42318639. Langendonk JG, Balwani M, Anderson KE, Bonkovsky HL, Anste y AV,Bissell DM et al. Afamelanotide for erythropoietic protoporphyria . N EnglJMed.(2015)373:48–59.doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1411481Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 15 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesis40. Lyons NM, O’Brien NM. Modulatory eﬀects of an algal extract con tainingastaxanthinonUVA-irradiatedcellsinculture. JDermatolSci. (2002)30:73–84.doi:10.1016/S0923-1811(02)00063-441. YoshihisaY,RehmanMU,ShimizuT.Astaxanthin,axanthophy llcarotenoid,inhibitsultraviolet-inducedapoptosisinkeratinocytes. ExpDermatol. (2014)23:178–83.doi:10.1111/exd.1234742. Yoon HS, Cho HH, Cho S, Lee SR, Shin MH, Chung JH. Supplementationwithdietaryastaxanthincombinedwithcollagenhydrolysateimprove sfacialelasticity and decreases matrix metalloproteinase-1 and −12 expression:a comparative study with placebo. J Med Food (2014) 17:810–16.doi:10.1089/jmf.2013.306043. Koushan K, Rusovici R, Li W, Ferguson LR, Chalam KV. The role o f luteinineye-relateddisease. Nutrients (2013)22:1823–39.doi:10.3390/nu505182344. Lee EH, Faulhaber D, Hanson KM, Ding W, Peters S, Kodali S, et a l.
Dietary lutein reduces ultraviolet radiation-induced inﬂammationand immunosuppression. J Invest Dermatol . (2004) 122:510–17.doi:10.1046/j.0022-202X.2004.22227.x45. Grether-Beck S, Marini A, Jaenicke T, Krutmann J. Photoprotect ion ofhuman skin beyond ultraviolet radiation. Photodermatol PhotoimmunolPhotomed. (2014)30:167–74.doi:10.1111/phpp.1211146. Gensler HL, Williams T, Huang AC, Jacobson EL. Oral niacin preventsphotocarcinogenesis and photoimmunosuppression in mice. Nutr Cancer(1999)34:36–41.doi:10.1207/S15327914NC34010547. Benavente CA, Schnell SA, Jacobson EL. Eﬀects of niacin res triction onsirtuin and PARP responses to photodamage in human skin. PLoS ONE(2012)7:e42276.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.004227648. Surjana D, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide enhances repai r ofultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage in human keratinocytes a ndex-vivoskin.Carcinogenesis (2013)34:1144–49.doi:10.1093/carcin/bgt017
49. Philips N, Jovinna Chalensouk-Khaosaat JC, Gonzalez S. Stimu lation ofthe elastin and ﬁbrillin in non-irradiated or UVA radiated ﬁbroblasts a nddirect inhibition of elastase or matrix metalloproteinases activity bynicotinamideoritsderivatives. JCosmetSci .(2018)69:47–56.50. Surjana D, Halliday GM, Martin AJ, Moloney FJ, Damian DL. Oralnicotinamide reduces actinic keratoses in phase II double-blinde drandomized controlled trials. J Invest Dermatol. (2012) 132:1497–500.doi:10.1038/jid.2011.45951. Yélamos O, Halpern AC, Weinstock MA. Reply to ’A phase II randomizedcontrolled trial of nicotinamide for skin cancer chemopreventionin renal transplant recipients. Br J Dermatol . (2017) 176:551–2.doi:10.1111/bjd.1520352. Nazarali S, Kuzel P. Vitamin B derivative (nicotinamide)appear s toreduceskincancerrisk. SkinTherapyLett. (2017)22:1–4.53. Mason RS, Reichrath J. Sunlight vitamin D, and skin cancer. AnticancerAgentsMedChem. (2013)13:83–97.doi:10.2174/187152013804487272
54. Lehmann B. Role of the vitamin D3 pathway in healthy and disease dskin–facts,contradictions,andhypotheses. ExpDermatol. (2009)18:97–108.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2008.00810.x55. Bikle DD. Vitamin D prevents sunburn: tips for the summer? J InvestDermatol. (2017)137:2045–7.doi:10.1016/j.jid.2017.07.84056. Bandera Merchan B, Morcillo S, Martin-Nunez G, Tinahones FJ; Macias-Gonzalez M. The role of vitamin D and VDR in carcinogenesis: throug hepidemiologyandbasicsciences. JSteroidBiochemMolBiol. (2017)167:203–18.doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.11.02057. Bivona G, Agnello L, Ciaccio M. Vitamin D and immunomodulation: i s ittimetochangethereferencevalues? AnnClinLabSci. (2017)47:508–510.58. Di Rosa M, Malaguarnera G, De Gregorio C, Palumbo M, NunnariG, Malaguarnera L. Immuno-modulatory eﬀects of vitamin D3 inhuman monocyte and macrophages. Cell Immunol. (2012) 280:36–43.doi:10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.10.00959. AuL,MeischJP,DasLM,BinkoAM,BoxerRS,WenAM,etal.Suppre ssion
of Hyperactive Immune Responses Protects against Nitrogen MustardInjury.JInvestDermatol. (2015)135:2971–81.doi:10.1038/jid.2015.322
59. AuL,MeischJP,DasLM,BinkoAM,BoxerRS,WenAM,etal.Suppre ssionof Hyperactive Immune Responses Protects against Nitrogen MustardInjury.JInvestDermatol. (2015)135:2971–81.doi:10.1038/jid.2015.32260. Hadden MK. Hedgehog and vitamin D signaling pathways in develo pmentand disease Vitam Horm. (2016) 100:231–53. doi: 10.1016/bs.vh.2015.10.00661. Reichrath J, Saternus R, Vogt T. Endocrine actions of vitaminD in skin: relevance for photocarcinogenesis of non-melanomaskin cancer, and beyond. Mol Cell Endocrinol . (2017) 453:96–102.doi:10.1016/j.mce.2017.05.00162. McArdle F, Rhodes LE, Parslew R, Jack CI, Friedmann PS, Jackson MJ.UVR-induced oxidative stress in human skin in vivo: eﬀects of oralvitamin C supplementation . Free Radic Biol Med . (2002) 33:1355–62doi:10.1016/S0891-5849(02)01042-063. Packer L, Valacchi G Antioxidants and the response of skin to oxidativestress:vitaminEasakeyindicator. SkinPharmacolApplSkinPhysiol .(2002)15:282–90.doi:10.1159/000064531
15:282–90.doi:10.1159/00006453164. Werninghaus K, Meydani M, Bhawan J, Margolis R, BlumbergJB, Gilchrest BA. Evaluation of the photoprotective eﬀect of oralvitamin E supplementation. Arch Dermatol. (1994) 130:1257–61.doi:10.1001/archderm.1994.0169010004100565. McArdle F, Rhodes LE, Parslew RA, Close GL, Jack CI, Friedmann PS , et al.Eﬀects of oral vitamin E and beta-carotene supplementation on ultravi oletradiation-induced oxidative stress in human skin. Am J Clin Nutr . (2004)80:1270–75.doi:10.1093/ajcn/80.5.127066. Stahl W, Heinrich U, Jungmann H, Sies H, Tronnier H. Carotenoids, a ndcarotenoidsplusvitaminEprotectagainstultravioletlight-induced erythemainhumans. AmJClinNutr .(2000)71:795–98.doi:10.1093/ajcn/71.3.79567. Greul AK, Grundmann JU, Heinrich F, Pﬁtzner I, Bernhardt J,Ambach A et al. Photoprotection of UV-irradiated human skin: anantioxidative combination of vitamins E and C, carotenoids, se lenium, and
proanthocyanidins. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol. (2002) 15:307–15.doi:10.1159/00006453468. Eberlein-König B, Placzek M,Przybilla B. Protective eﬀect agai nstsunburn of combined systemic ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and D-alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E). J Am Acad Dermatol. (1998) 38:45–8.doi:10.1016/S0190-9622(98)70537-769. Placzek M, Gaube S, Kerkmann U, Gilbertz KP, Herzinger T, Haen E, e t al.Ultraviolet B-induced DNA damage in human epidermis is modiﬁed by theantioxidantsascorbicacidandD-alpha-tocopherol. JInvestDermatol. (2005)124:304–7.doi:10.1111/j.0022-202X.2004.23560.x70. Lin FH, Lin JY, Gupta RD, Tournas JA, Burch JA, Selim MA et al.(2005) Ferulic acid stabilizes a solution of vitamins C and E anddoubles its photoprotection of skin . J Invest Dermatol. 125:826–32.doi:10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23768.x71. Guéniche A, Benyacoub J, Buetler TM, Smola H, Blum S. Supplementati onwith oral probiotic bacteria maintains cutaneous immune homeostasi s after
UVexposure. EurJDermatol. (2006)16:511–17.72. Weill FS, Cela EM, Paz ML, Ferrari A, Leoni J, Gonzalez MaglioDH Lipoteichoic acid from Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG as an oralphotoprotective agent against UV-induced carcinogenesis. Br J Nutr. (2013)109:457–66.doi:10.1017/S000711451200122573. Peguet-Navarro J, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Buetler T, Leclaire J , Smola H,Blum S, Bastien P et al. Supplementation with oral probiotic bacteriaprotects human cutaneous immune homeostasis after UV exposure-doubleblind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Eur J Dermatol . (2008)18:504–11.doi:10.1684/ejd.2008.049674. Bouilly-Gauthier D, Jeannes C, Maubert Y, Duteil L, Queille-R oussel C,Piccardi N et al. Clinical evidence of beneﬁts of a dietary supplementcontaining probiotic and carotenoids on ultraviolet-induced ski n damage.BrJDermatol .(2010)163:536–43doi:10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09888 .x75. Rhodes LE, O’Farrell S, Jackson MJ, Friedmann PS. Dietary ﬁsh-
oil supplementation in humans reduces UVB-erythemal sensitivity butincreases epidermal lipid peroxidation. J Invest Dermatol . (1994) 103:151–5
oil supplementation in humans reduces UVB-erythemal sensitivity butincreases epidermal lipid peroxidation. J Invest Dermatol . (1994) 103:151–5doi:10.1111/1523-1747.ep1239260476. Durbec F, Reguiaï Z, Léonard F, Pluot M, Bernard P. Eﬃcacym,jkof ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids for the treatment ofrefractory hydroa vacciniforme. Pediatr Dermatol. (2012) 29:118–9.doi:10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01486.x77. BaquerizoNoleKL,YimE,KeriJE.Probioticsandprebioticsind ermatology.JAmAcadDermatol. (2014)71:814–21.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2014.04.05078. Lyseng-Williamson KA. Idebenone: a review in leber’s heredita ry opticneuropathy. Drugs(2016)76:805–13.doi:10.1007/s40265-016-0574-379. Rhodes LE, Darby G, Massey KA, Clarke KA, Dew TP, Farrar MD, et a l.Oral green tea catechin metabolites are incorporated into human skinand protect against UV radiation-induced cutaneous inﬂammation i nFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 16 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesisassociation with reduced production of pro-inﬂammatory eicosanoid12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. Br J Nutr. (2013) 110:891–900.doi:10.1017/S000711451200607180. HeinrichU,NeukamK,TronnierH,SiesH,StahlW.Long-terminge stionofhighﬂavanolcocoaprovidesphotoprotectionagainstUV-inducede rythemaand improves skin condition in women. J Nutr.(2006) 136:1565–69.doi:10.1093/jn/136.6.156581. Williams S, Tamburic S, Lally C. J. Eating chocolate can signiﬁcan tlyprotect the skin from UV light. Cosmet Dermatol. (2009) 8:169–73.doi:10.1111/j.1473-2165.2009.00448.x82. González S,Pathak MA, Cuevas J, Villarubia VG,Fitzpatrick TB. Topical ororaladministrationwithanextractof Polypodiumleucotomos preventsacutesunburn and psolaren-induced phototoxic reactions as well as depleti on ofLangerhans cells in human skin. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed.(1997)13:50–60.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0781.1997.tb00108 .x
83. Middelkamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Goukassian D, Rius-Dí az F,Mihm MC, et al. Oral Polypodium leucotomos extract decreases ultraviolet-induced damage of human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. (2004) 51:910–18.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2004.06.02784. Aguilera P, Carrera C, Puig-Butille JA, Badenas C, Lecha M, Gonzá lezS, et al. Beneﬁts of oral Polypodium leucotomos extract in MM high-risk patients. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. (2013) 27:1095–1100.doi:10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04659.x85. Perez-Sanchez A, Barrajon-Catalan E, Caturla N, Castillo J,Benavente-Garcia O, Alcaraz M et al. Protective eﬀects of citrusand rosemary extracts on UV-induced damage in skin cell modeland human volunteers. J Photochem Photobiol B (2014) 136:12–18.doi:10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2014.04.00786. Nobile V, Michelotti A, Cestone E, Caturla N, Castillo J, Benave nte-GarcíaO, et al. Skin photoprotective and antiageing eﬀects of a combinat ion
of rosemary ( Rosmarinus oﬃcinalis ) and grapefruit ( Citrus paradisi )polyphenols. FoodNutrRes .(2016)60:318171.doi:10.3402/fnr.v60.3187187. Gonzalez S, Pathak MA. Inhibition of ultraviolet-inducedformation of reactive oxygen species, lipid peroxidation,erythema and skin photosensitization by Polypodium leucotomos.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. (1996) 12:45–56.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0781.1996.tb00175.x88. Philips N, Smith J, Keller T, González S. Predominant eﬀects ofPolypodium leucotomos on membrane integrity, lipid peroxidation, andexpression of elastin and matrix metalloproteinase-1 in ultraviolet radia tionexposed ﬁbroblasts, and keratinocytes. J Dermatol Sci. (2003) 32:1–9.doi:10.1016/S0923-1811(03)00042-289. Rodríguez-Yanes E, Cuevas J, González S, Mallol J. Oral adminis trationofPolypodium leucotomos delays skin tumor development and increasesepidermal p53 expression and the anti-oxidant status of UV-irradiate d
hairlessmice. Exp.Dermatol. (2014)23:526–8.doi:10.1111/exd.1245490. Afaq F, Khan N, Syed DN, Mukhtar H. Oral feeding of pomegranate f ruitextractinhibitsearlybiomarkersofUVBradiation-inducedcarcin ogenesisinSKH-1 hairless mouse epidermis. Photochem Photobiol . (2010) 86:1318–26.doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2010.00815.x91. Meeran SM, Akhtar S, Katiyar SK. Inhibition of UVB-induced skin tumordevelopment by drinking green tea polyphenols is mediated through DNArepair and subsequentinhibition ofinﬂammation. J Invest Dermatol. (2009)129:1258–70.doi:10.1038/jid.2008.35492. Katiyar SK, Vaid M, van Steeg H, Meeran SM. Green tea polyphenolsprevent UV-induced immunosuppression by rapid repair of DNA damageand enhancement of nucleotide excision repair genes. Cancer Prev Res.(2010)3:179–89.doi:10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-004493. ZattraE, Coleman C, Arad S, Helms E, Levine D, Bord E, et al. Polypodiumleucotomos extract decreases UV-induced Cox-2 expression and
inﬂammation, enhances DNA repair, and decreases mutagenesis in ha irlessmice.AmJPathol .(2009)175:1952–61.doi:10.2353/ajpath.2009.090351
leucotomos extract decreases UV-induced Cox-2 expression andinﬂammation, enhances DNA repair, and decreases mutagenesis in ha irlessmice.AmJPathol .(2009)175:1952–61.doi:10.2353/ajpath.2009.09035194. Kohli I, Shaﬁ R, Isedeh P, Griﬃth JL, Al-Jamal MS, Silpa-Archa N,et al. The impact of oral Polypodium leucotomos extract on ultraviolet Bresponse: a human clinical study. J Am Acad Dermatol. (2017) 77:33–41.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2017.01.04495. Villa A, Viera MH, Amini S, Huo R, Pérez O, Ruiz P, et al. Decrease ofultraviolet A light-induced “common deletion” in healthy volunteers afteroralPolypodium leucotomos extract supplement in a randomized clinicaltrial.JAmAcadDermatol. (2010)62:511–13.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2009.05.04596. LeeJM,ParkJM,KangTH.EnhancementofUV-inducednucleotide excisionrepairactivityuponforskolintreatmentiscellgrowth-dependent. BMBRep.(2016)49:566–71.doi:10.5483/BMBRep.2016.49.10.09797. Schwarz A, Maeda A, Gan D, Mammone T, Matsui MS, Schwarz
T. Green tea phenol extracts reduce UVB-induced DNA damage inhuman cells via interleukin-12. Photochem Photobiol. (2008) 84:350–5.doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2007.00265.x98. Afaq F, Ahmad N, Mukhtar H. Suppression of UVB-inducedphosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and nuclear f actorkappa B by green tea polyphenol in SKH-1 hairless mice. Oncogene (2003)22:9254–64.doi:10.1038/sj.onc.120703599. Janczyk A, Garcia-Lopez MA, Fernández-Penas P, Alonso-Leb rero JL,Benedicto I, Lopez-Cabrera M, et al. A Polypodium leucotomos extractinhibits solar-simulated radiation-induced TNF- αand iNOS expression,transcriptional activation, and apoptosis. Exp. Dermatol. (2007) 16:823–29.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2007.00603.x100. González S, Alcaraz MV, Cuevas J, Pérez M, Jaen P, Alvarez-Mon M , et al.An extract of the fern Polypodium leucotomos (Difur) modulates Th1/Th2cytokines balance in vitroand appears to exhibit anti-angiogenic activities
in vivo, pathogenic relationships and therapeutic implications. AnticancerRes.(2000)20:1567–75.101. Mulero M, Rodríguez-Yanes E, Nogues M.R, Giralt M, Romeu M,González S, et al. Polypodium leucotomos extract inhibits glutathio neoxidation and prevents Langerhans cell depletion induced by UVB/UV Aradiation in a hairless rat model. Exp Dermatol . (2008) 17:653–8.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2007.00684.x102. Siscovick JR, Zapolanski T, Magro C, Carrington K, Prograis S, N ussbaumM et al. Polypodium leucotomos inhibits ultraviolet B radiation-inducedimmunosuppression. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. (2008)24:134–41.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0781.2008.00352.x103. Capote R, Alonso-Lebrero JL, García F, Brieva A, Pivel JP, Gon zálezS.Polypodium leucotomos extract inhibits trans-urocanic acidphotoisomerization and photodecomposition. J Photochem Photobiol.(2006)82:173–79.doi:10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2005.11.005104. Rodríguez-Yanes E, Juarranz A, Cuevas J, Gonzalez S, Mallol J. Polypodium
leucotomos decreasesUV-inducedepidermalcellproliferationandenhancesp53 expression and plasma antioxidant capacity in hairless mice. Exp.Dermatol. (2012)21:638–40.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2012.01544. x105. Middelkamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Garcia-Caballero T, Riu s-Díaz F, Fitzpatrick TB, et al. Orally administered Polypodium leucotomosextract decreases psoralen-UVA induced phototoxicity, pigmentatio n,and damage of human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol . (2004) 50:41–49.doi:10.1016/S0190-9622(03)02732-4106. Caccialanza M, Percivalle S, Piccinno R, Brambilla R. Photoprote ctiveactivityoforalPolypodiumleucotomosextractin25patientswithi diopathicphotodermatoses. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. (2007) 23:46–7.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00274.x107. CaccialanzaM,RecalcatiS,PiccinnoR.OralPolypodiumleuco tomosextractphotoprotective activity in 57 patients with idiopathic photoderma toses.GItalDermatolVenereol .(2011)146:85–7.
ItalDermatolVenereol .(2011)146:85–7.108. Tanew A, Radakovic S, González S, Venturini M, Calzavara-Pi nton P. Oral
photoprotective activity in 57 patients with idiopathic photoderma toses.GItalDermatolVenereol .(2011)146:85–7.108. Tanew A, Radakovic S, González S, Venturini M, Calzavara-Pi nton P. Oraladministration of a hydrophilic extract of Polypodium leucotomos for theprevention of polymorphic light eruption. J Am Acad Dermatol. (2012)66:58–62.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2010.09.773109. Mantena SK, Meeran SM, Elmets CA, Katiyar SK. Orally administere dgreen tea polyphenols prevent ultraviolet radiation-induced skin canc erin mice through activation of cytotoxic T cells and inhibition ofangiogenesis in tumors. J Nutr. (2005) 135:2871–77. doi: 10.1093/jn/135.12.2871110. Auriemma M, Di Nicola M, González S, Piaserico S, Capo A, Amerio P.Polypodium leucotomos supplementation in the treatment of scalp actini ckeratosis, could it improve the eﬃcacy of photodynamic therapy? DermatolSurg.(2015)41:898–902.doi:10.1097/DSS.0000000000000425
111. WeiH,SaladiR,LuY,WangY,PalepSR,MooreJ,etal.Isoﬂavone genistein:photo- protection and clinical implications in dermatology. J Nutr. (2003)133(11Suppl.1):3811S −19S.doi:10.1093/jn/133.11.3811SFrontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 17 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesis112. Kim KH, Back JH, Zhu Y, Arbesman J, Athar M, Kopelovich L, et al.Resveratrol targets transforming growth factor- β2 signaling to blockUV-induced tumor progression. J Invest Dermatol. (2011) 131:195–20.doi:10.1038/jid.2010.250113. Passeron T, Namiki T, Passeron HJ, Le Pape E, Hearing VJ. Forskoli nprotects keratinocytes from UVB-induced apoptosis and increases DN Arepairindependentofitseﬀectsonmelanogenesis. JInvestDermatol .(2009)129:162–6.doi:10.1038/jid.2008.182114. KimJE,SongD,KimJ,ChoiJ,KimJR,YoonHS,etal.Oralsupplemen tationwith cocoa extract reduces UVB-induced wrinkles in hairless mouse sk in.JInvestDermatol. (2016)136:1012–21.doi:10.1016/j.jid.2015.11.032115. Philips N, Conte J, Chen YJ, Natrajan P, Taw M, Keller T, et al.Beneﬁcial regulation of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibit ors,ﬁbrillar collagens and transforming growth factor- βbyPolypodium
leucotomos , directly or in dermal ﬁbroblasts, ultraviolet radiatedﬁbroblasts and melanoma cells. Arch Dermatol Res . (2009) 301:487–95.doi:10.1007/s00403-009-0950-x116. Truchuelo MT, Jiménez N, Mascaraque M, Lucena S, Días IJ, Jua rranzA, et al. Pilot study to assess the eﬀects of a new oral photoprotecto ragainst infrared-visible radiations. J Investig. Dermatol. (2016) 136:S106.doi:10.1016/j.jid.2016.02.636117. Kanwar J, Taskeen M, Mohammad I, Huo C, Chan TH, Dou QP.Recentadvancesonteapolyphenols. FrontBiosci. (2012)4:111–31.118. Lee SR, Im KJ, Suh SI, Jung JG. Protective eﬀect of green teapolyphenol (–)-epigal-locatechin gallate and other antioxidants o n lipidperoxidation in gerbil brain homogenates. Phytother Res. (2003) 17:206–9.doi:10.1002/ptr.1090119. Katiyar S, Elmets CA, Katiyar SK. Green tea and skin cancer:photoimmunology, angiogenesis, and DNA repair. J Nutr Biochem.(2007)18:287–96doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2006.08.004
(2007)18:287–96doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2006.08.004120. Rutter K, Sell DR, Fraser N, Obrenovich M, Zito M, Starke-Ree d P, et al.Greenteaextractsuppressestheage-relatedincreaseincollagencross linkingand ﬂuorescent products in C57BL/6 mice. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. (2003)73:453–60.doi:10.1024/0300-9831.73.6.453121. Barthelman M, Bair WB III, Stickland KK, Chen W, Timmermann BN,Valcic S, et al. (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibition of ultra violet B-inducedAP-1activity. Carcinogenesis (1998)19:2201–4.122. Farrar MD, Nicolaou A, Clarke KA, Mason S, Massey KA, Dew TP, et al.A randomized controlled trial of green tea catechins in protection aga instultraviolet radiation-induced cutaneous inﬂammation. Am J Clin Nutr .(2015)102:608–15.doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.107995123. KimS,LeeMJ,HongJ,LiC,SmithTJ,YangGY,etal.Plasmaandti ssuelevelsof tea catechins in rats and mice during chronic consumption of green teapolyphenols. NutrCancer (2000)37:41–8.doi:10.1207/S15327914NC3701_5
124. Hsu S. Green tea and the skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. (2005) 52:1049–59.doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2004.12.044125. Scapagnini G, Davinelli S, Di Renzo L, De Lorenzo A, Olarte HH,Micali G, et al. Cocoa bioactive compounds: signiﬁcance and poten tialfor the maintenance of skin health. Nutrients (2014) 6:3202–13.doi:10.3390/nu6083202126. Lee KW, Kang NJ, Oak MH, Hwang MK, Kim JH, Schini-Kerth VB, et a l.Cocoaprocyanidinsinhibitexpressionandactivation ofMMP-2i nvascularsmooth muscle cells by direct inhibition of MEK and MT1-MMP activit ies.CardiovascRes. (2008)79:34–41.doi:10.1093/cvr/cvn056127. Gomes AJ, Lunardi CN, Gonzalez S, Tedesco AC. The antioxida ntaction of Polypodium leucotomos extract and kojic acid: reactionswith reactive oxygen species. Braz J Med Biol Res . (2001) 34:1487–94.doi:10.1590/S0100-879X2001001100018128. García F, Pivel JP, Guerrero A, Brieva A, Martínez-Alcazar MP, Caamano-Somoza M, et al. Phenolic components and antioxidant activity of
Fernblock, an aqueous extract of the aerial parts of the fern Polypodiumleucotomos .Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. (2006) 28:157–60.
Fernblock, an aqueous extract of the aerial parts of the fern Polypodiumleucotomos .Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. (2006) 28:157–60.doi:10.1358/mf.2006.28.3.985227129. Choudhry SZ, Bhatia N, Ceilley R, Hougeir F, Lieberman R, Hamzav i I,et al. Role of oral Polypodium leucotomos extract in dermatologic diseases,areviewoftheliterature. JDrugsDermatol .(2014)13:148–53.130. González S, Gilaberte Y, Philips N, Juarranz A. Fernblock, a nutric euticalwith photoprotective properties and potential preventive agent for sk inphotoagingandphotoinducedskincancers. IntJMolSci .(2011)12:8466–75.doi:10.3390/ijms12128466131. Bhatia N. Polypodium leucotomos, a potential new photoprotecti ve agent.AmJClinDermatol .(2015)16:73–9.doi:10.1007/s40257-015-0113-0132. Bosch R, Philips N, Suárez-Pérez JA, Juarranz A, Devmurari A,Chalensouk-Khaosaat J et al. Mechanisms of photoaging and cutan eousphotocarcinogenesis, and photoprotective strategies with phyto chemicals.
Antioxidants (2015)4:248–68.doi:10.3390/antiox4020248133. Kastan MB, Berkovich E.p53: a two-faced cancer gene. Nat Cell Biol . (2007)9:489–91.doi:10.1038/ncb0507-489134. KholiI,GriﬃthJL,IsedehP,Silpa-ArchaN,Al-JamalM,LimHW,e tal.Theeﬀect of oral Polypodium leucotomos extract (PLE) on ultraviolet-inducedchangesintheskin. JAmAcadDermatol. (2017)77:33–41.135. Schroeder P, Calles C, Krutmann J. Prevention of infrared-Aradiation mediated detrimental eﬀects in human skin. Skin Ther Lett .(2009) 14:4–5. Available online at: http://www.skintherapylette r.com/photoaging/infrared-a-radiation/136. ZastrowL,GrothN,KleinF,KockottD,LademannJ,Renneberg R,etal.Themissing link–light-induced (280–1600nm) free radical formation in humanskin.SkinPharmacolPhysiol. (2009)22:31–44.doi:10.1159/000188083137. Krutmann J, Schroeder P. Role of mitochondria in photoaging of h umanskin,thedefectivepowerhousemodel. JInvestig.Dermatol. (2009)14:44–49.doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.1
doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.1138. Shin MH, Moon YJ, Seo JE, Lee Y, Kim KH, Chung JH. Reactiveoxygen species produced by NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase, an dmitochondrial electron transport system mediate heat shock-induce dMMP-1 and MMP-9 expression. Free Radic Biol Med. (2008) 44:635–45.doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.10.053139. Cho S, Lee MJ, Kim MS, Lee S, Kim YK, Lee DH, et al. Infraredplus visible light and heat from natural sunlight participate in theexpression of MMPs and type I procollagen as well as inﬁltration ofinﬂammatory cell in human skin in vivo.J Dermatol Sci . (2008) 50:123–33.doi:10.1016/j.jdermsci.2007.11.009140. Pathak MA, Riley FC, Fitzpatrick TB. Melanogenesis in human s kinfollowing exposure to long-wave ultraviolet and visible light. J InvestigDermatol. (1962)39:435–43.doi:10.1038/jid.1962.136141. Mahmoud BH, Hexsel C, Hamzavi IH, Lim HW. Eﬀects ofvisible light on the skin. Photochem Photobiol . (2008) 84:450–62.
doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2007.00286.x142. Hoﬀmann-Dorr S, Greinert R, Volkmer B, Epe B. Visible light ( >395nm)causes micronuclei formation in mammalian cells without generationof cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Mutat Res. (2005) 572:142–49.doi:10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2005.01.011143. Nestor MS, Berman B, Swenson N. Safety and eﬃcacy of oral Polypodiumleucotomos extract in healthy adult subjects. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol . (2015)8:19–23.144. Lin JY, Tournas JA, Burch JA, Monteiro-Riviere NA, Zielinsk iJ. Topical isoﬂavones provide eﬀective photoprotection toskin.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. (2008) 24:61–6.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0781.2008.00329.x145. Messina MJ, Persky V, Setchell KD, Barnes S. Soy intake, an d cancer risk:a review of the in vitroandin vivodata.Nutr Cancer (1994) 21:113–131.doi:10.1080/01635589409514310146. Zhang T, Wang F, Xu HX, Yi L, Qin Y, Chang H, et al. Activation of n uclearfactor erythroid 2-related factor 2 and PPAR gamma plays a role in the
genistein-mediated attenuation of oxidative stress-induce d endothelial cell
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 and PPAR gamma plays a role in thegenistein-mediated attenuation of oxidative stress-induce d endothelial cellinjury.BrJNutr. (2013)109:223–35doi:10.1017/S0007114512001110147. Zhai X, Lin M, Zhang F, Hu Y, Xu X, Li Y, et al. Dietary ﬂavonoid gen isteininducesNrf2andphaseIIdetoxiﬁcationgeneexpressionviaERK sandPKCpathwaysandprotectsagainstoxidativestressinCaco-2cells. MolNutrFoodRes.(2013)57:249–59.doi:10.1002/mnfr.201200536148. Widyarini S, Spinks N, Husband AJ, Reeve VE. Isoﬂavonoid co mpoundsfromredclover( Trifoliumpratense )protectfrominﬂammationandimmunesuppression induced by UV radiation. Photochem Photobiol . (2001)74:465–70.doi:10.1562/0031-8655(2001)074<0465:ICFRCT>2.0.C O;2149. Schwen RJ, Nguyen L, Plomley JB, Jackson RL. Toxicokinetic s and lackof utero- tropic eﬀect of orally administered S-equol. Food Chem Toxicol.(2012)50:1741–48.doi:10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.039
(2012)50:1741–48.doi:10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.039Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 18 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
Parrado et al. Oral Photoprotection, Photodamage, Photocarcinogenesis150. Widyarini S, Husband AJ, Reeve VE. Protective eﬀect of the i soﬂavonoidequol against hairless mouse skin carcinogenesis induced by UV ra diationaloneorwithachemicalcocarcinogen. PhotochemPhotobiol .(2005)81:32–7.doi:10.1562/2004-06-02-RA-183.1151. Reeve VE, Widyarini S, Domanski D, Chew E, Barnes K. Protecti on againstphotoag- ing in the hairless mouse by the isoﬂavone equol. PhotochemPhotobiol. (2005)81:1548–53.doi:10.1562/2005-07-26-RA-624152. Park JH, Park JH, Hur HJ, Woo JS, Lee HJ. Eﬀects of silymarin andformulation on the oral bioavailability of paclitaxel in rats. Eur J Pharm Sci .(2012)45:296–301.doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2011.11.021153. CasagrandeR,GeorgettiSR,VerriWAJr,DortaDJ,dosSantos AC,FonsecaMJ. Protective eﬀect of topical formulations containing quercet in againstUVB-induced oxidative stress in hairless mice. J Photochem Photobiol B(2006)84:21–7.doi:10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2006.01.006
154. Choi JS, Jo BW, Kim YC. Enhanced paclitaxel bioavailability after oraladministration of paclitaxel or prodrug to rats pretreated with quercet in(2004)EurJPharmBiopharm .57:313–18.doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2003.11.002155. Torkin R, Lavoie JF, Kaplan DR, Yeger H. Induction of caspase- dependent,p53- mediated apoptosis by apigenin in human neuroblastoma. Mol CancerTher.(2005)4:1–11.doi:10.1186/1476-4598-4-1156. Maduni ´c J, Maduni ´c IV, Gajski G, Popi ´c J, Garaj-Vrhovac V. Apigenin:A dietary ﬂavonoid with diverse anticancer properties. Cancer Lett . (2018)413:11–22.doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2017.10.041157. Tong X, Van Dross RT, Abu-Yousif A, Morrison AR, Pelling JC. Apig eninprevents UVB-induced cyclooxygenase 2 expression: coupled mRNAstabilization and translational inhibition. Mol Cell Biol . (2007) 27:283–96.doi:10.1128/MCB.01282-06158. Bridgeman BB, Wang P, Ye B, Pelling JC, Volpert OV, Tong X.Inhibition of mTOR by apigenin in UVB-irradiated keratinocytes: A new
implication of skin cancer prevention. Cell Signal . (2016) 28:460–68.doi:10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.008159. Afaq F, Mukhtar H. Botanical antioxidants in the preventio n ofphotocarcinogenesis and photoaging. Exp Dermatol . (2006) 15:678–84.doi:10.1111/j.1600-0625.2006.00466.x160. Afaq F, Saleem M, Krueger CG, Reed JD, Mukhtar H. (2005) Anth ocyanin-and hydrolyzable tannin-rich pomegranate fruit extract modulates MAPKandNF-kappaBpathwaysandinhibitsskintumorigenesisinCD-1mic e.IntJCancer(2005)113:423–33.doi:10.1002/ijc.20587161. Syed DN, Chamcheu JC, Adhami VM, Mukhtar H. Pomegranate extrac tsand cancer prevention: molecular and cellular activities. AnticancerAgents Med Chem. (2013) 13:1149–61. doi: 10.2174/1871520611313080003162. Flamini R, Mattivi F, De Rosso M, Arapitsas P, Bavaresco L.Advanced knowledge of three important classes of grape phenolics:anthocyanins, stilbenes, and ﬂavonols. Int J Mol Sci . (2013) 14:19651–69.doi:10.3390/ijms141019651
doi:10.3390/ijms141019651163. Adhami VM, Afaq F, Ahmad N. Suppression of ultraviolet B exposure-mediated activation of NF-kappaB in normal human keratinocytes byresveratrol. Neoplasia (2003)5:74–82.doi:10.1016/S1476-5586(03)80019-2164. Reagan-Shaw S, Mukhtar H, Ahmad N. Resveratrol impartsphotoprotection of normal cells and enhances the eﬃcacy of radiationtherapy in cancer cells. Photochem Photobiol. (2008) 84:415–21.doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.2007.00279.x165. D’Orazio JA, Nobuhisa T, Cui R, Arya M, Spry M, Wakamatsu K, et a l.Topical drug rescue strategy and skin protection based on the role of M c1rinUV-inducedtanning. Nature(2006)443:340–4.doi:10.1038/nature05098166. Jarrett SG, Wolf Horrell EM, Christian PA, Vanover JC, Boulanger M C,Zou Y, et al. PKA-mediated phosphorylation of ATR promotes recruitmentof XPA to UV-induced DNA damage. Mol Cell. (2014) 54:999–1011.doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.030167. ScottTL,ChristianPA,KeslerMV,DonohueKM,SheltonB,Wa kamatsuK,
et al. Pigment-independent cAMP-mediated epidermal thickening prot ects
doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.030167. ScottTL,ChristianPA,KeslerMV,DonohueKM,SheltonB,Wa kamatsuK,et al. Pigment-independent cAMP-mediated epidermal thickening prot ectsagainst cutaneous UV injury by keratinocyte proliferation. Exp Dermatol .(2012)10:771–77.doi:10.1111/exd.12012168. Dessauer CW,Watts VJ,Ostrom RS,Conti M,Dove S,Seifert R . Internationalunion of basic and clinical pharmacology. ci. structures and small molec ulemodulators of mammalian adenylyl cyclases. Pharmacol Rev. (2017) 69:93–139.doi:10.1124/pr.116.013078169. MaierT,KortingHC(2005)Sunscreenswhichandwhatfor? SkinPharmacolPhysiol.(2005)18:253–62.doi:10.1159/000087606170. Fourtanier A, Moyal D, Maccario J, Compan D, Wolf P, Quehenber gerF et al. Measurement of sunscreen immune protection factors inhumans: a consensus paper. J Invest Dermatol . (2005) 125:403–9.doi:10.1111/j.0022-202X.2005.23857.xConﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conductedintheabsenceofanycommercialorﬁnancialrelations hipsthatcouldbeconstruedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.ThereviewerFLandthehandlingEditordeclaredtheirsharedaﬃlia tion.Copyright © 2018 Parrado, Philips, Gilaberte, Juarranz and Gonz ález. This isan open-access article distributed under the terms of the Cr eative CommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).Theuse,distributionorrepro ductioninotherforumsis permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyri ght owner are creditedandthattheoriginalpublicationinthisjournaliscited,i naccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice.Nouse,distributionorreproductionis permittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms.Frontiers in Medicine | www.frontiersin.org 19 June 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 188
