Citation: Fang, B.; Card, P .D.;Chen, J.; Li, L.; Laughlin, T.;Jarrold, B.; Zhao, W.; Benham, A.M.;Määttä, A.T.; Hawkins, T.J.; et al.A Potential Role ofKeratinocyte-Derived Bilirubin inHuman Skin Yellowness and ItsAmelioration by SucroseLaurate/Dilaurate. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022 ,23, 5884. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23115884Academic Editor: Libor VitekReceived: 12 April 2022Accepted: 18 May 2022Published: 24 May 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). International Journal of  Molecular SciencesArticleA Potential Role of Keratinocyte-Derived Bilirubin inHuman Skin Yellowness and Its Amelioration bySucrose Laurate/Dilaurate
Sucrose Laurate/DilaurateBin Fang1, Patrick D. Card2, Junjun Chen1, Lijuan Li1, Timothy Laughlin1, Bradley Jarrold1, Wenzhu Zhao1,Adam M. Benham2, Arto T. Määttä2, Timothy J. Hawkins2and Tomohiro Hakozaki1,*1The Procter & Gamble Company, Mason Business Center, Mason, OH 45040, USA; fang.b@pg.com (B.F.);chen.j.96@pg.com (J.C.); li.l.28@pg.com (L.L.); laughlin.lt@pg.com (T.L.); jarrold.bb@pg.com (B.J.);zhao.wh@pg.com (W.Z.)2Department of Biosciences, Durham University, Stockton Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK;patrick.d.card@durham.ac.uk (P .D.C.); adam.benham@durham.ac.uk (A.M.B.);arto.maatta@durham.ac.uk (A.T.M.); t.j.hawkins@durham.ac.uk (T.J.H.)*Correspondence: hakozaki.t.1@pg.com; Tel.: +1-(513)-622-3069Abstract: Sallow and/or dull skin appearance is greatly attributable to the yellow components ofskin tone. Bilirubin is a yellow chromophore known to be made in the liver and/or spleen and is
transported throughout the body via the blood stream. Recent publications suggest bilirubin maybe synthesized in other cells/organs, including the skin. We found human keratinocytes expressthe transcripts involved in bilirubin biosynthesis. In parallel, we also found human keratinocytescould indeed synthesize bilirubin in monolayer keratinocytes and in a 3D human skin-equivalentmodel. The synthesized amount was substantial enough to contribute to skin yellowness. In addition,oxidative stress enhanced bilirubin production. Using UnaG, a protein that forms a ﬂuorescent speciesupon binding to bilirubin, we also visualized the intracellular expression of bilirubin in keratinocytes.Finally, we screened a compound library and discovered that the sucrose laurate/dilaurate (SDL)combination signiﬁcantly reduced bilirubin levels, as well as bilirubin-mediated yellowness. Inconclusion, bilirubin is indeed synthesized in epidermal keratinocytes and can be upregulated
by oxidative stress, which could contribute to chronic or transient yellow skin tone appearance.Application of SDL diminishes bilirubin generation and may be a potential solution to mitigateyellowish and/or dull skin appearance.Keywords: bilirubin; keratinocyte; oxidative stress; skin yellowness; skin tone; skin color; sucroselaurate; sucrose dilaurate1. IntroductionYellow skin color is frequently associated with sallow and/or dull skin appearance,which is considered a barometer of poor health. Coincidentally, dull skin appearance canbe exacerbated by conditions that commonly lead to increased inﬂammation and oxidativestress, such as sleep deprivation, acute and/or chronic mental or physical stresses, andpoor diet [ 1–5]. However, it is not fully understood what underlying factors contribute toyellow skin appearance.Bilirubin is a metabolite of senescent red blood cells largely produced in the spleen,
bone marrow, and/or liver. Bilirubin is transported in the blood stream, mostly ina form tightly bound to albumin. Free or unbound bilirubin is reported to have the
bone marrow, and/or liver. Bilirubin is transported in the blood stream, mostly ina form tightly bound to albumin. Free or unbound bilirubin is reported to have theability to diffuse out of blood vessels and into tissues, where it can act beneficially as anantioxidant [ 6]. However, bilirubin can also be cytotoxic to cells. For instance, excessivebilirubin accumulation induces neurotoxicity in the jaundice condition frequently oc-curring in newborn babies, manifesting with signature yellow skin color [ 7]. Bilirubinformation involves the action of heme oxygenases (HMOXs). Two isoforms of hemeInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23115884 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 2 of 16oxygenase have been characterized: an inducible form, heme oxygenase-1 ( HMOX1 ), anda constitutively expressed form, heme oxygenase-2 (HMOX2 ) [8–11]. HMOXs catalyzethe first rate-limiting step to oxidize and degrade heme into carbon monoxide, ferrousiron, and biliverdin in an equal stoichiometric ratio [ 12,13]. Biliverdin is subsequentlydegraded to produce bilirubin by biliverdin reductase. HMOXs are also reported tobe induced by a variety of stress factors, such as hypoxia, hyperoxia, proinflammatorycytokines, nitric oxide, heavy metals, ultraviolet (UV) ray radiation, heat shock, shearstress, and hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) [14,15].In 1950, London and Gray estimated that 10–20% of bilirubin excreted by humansoriginates extrahepatically [ 16,17]. It has been speculated that free heme and porphyrinthat are not used for hemoglobin synthesis may be functional resources for bilirubin
synthesis outside the liver [ 7]. Corroborating these initial speculations, recent researchhas shown that heme synthesis and subsequent bilirubin production can be detectedin other cell types of nonhematopoietic origin [ 18]. In parallel, inhibitors of hemebiosynthesis downregulate the bilirubin level [ 18]. In addition, Numata et al. reportedthat inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 α, IL-17A, and TNF- αsignificantly increasedHMOX1 mRNA expression in keratinocytes in association with bilirubin accumulationin the stratum corneum of human epidermis [ 19]. These studies suggest the possibilitythat epidermal keratinocytes may be capable of de novo bilirubin synthesis via HMOX1induction under stressed conditions.Here, we hypothesize that human skin keratinocytes house the machinery to performde novo bilirubin synthesis, especially under oxidative stress, and the synthesized bilirubinmay contribute to yellow skin appearance. We also highlight the potential usefulness of
the combination of sucrose laurate and dilaurate (SDL) as a novel cosmetic ingredient inmanaging bilirubin-mediated yellowness.2. Results2.1. Bilirubin-Synthesis-Related Genes Are Expressed in Human Keratinocytes and Upregulated byOxidative StressTo determine the expression of bilirubin-synthesis-related genes and the impact ofoxidative stress, we conducted a transcriptome analysis study using human telomerasereverse-transcriptase-modiﬁed immortalized keratinocytes (tKCs) [ 20]. A simpliﬁed dia-gram of the bilirubin production pathway with three major rate-limiting enzymes encodinggenes ( ALAS1, HMOX1 , and BLVRB ) is shown in Figure 1A. In the tKC keratinocytemonolayer culture, we detected gene expression of various transcripts related to the hemecatabolic pathway such as δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase ( ALAS ), uroporphyrinogenIII synthase ( UROS ), uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase ( UROD ), oxygen-dependent
protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase ( PPO ), and ferrochelatase (FECH ), as well as de novo biliru-bin synthetic pathway gene expression, including biliverdin reductase ( BLVRA ,BLVRB ),HMOX1 , and HMOX2 (Figure 1B). Upon stimulation with H 2O2, the expression of all keygenes, including ALAS ,HMOX1 , and BLVRB , was signiﬁcantly upregulated (Figure 1B).These results suggested that keratinocytes are equipped with an intracellular mechanismto synthesize bilirubin de novo.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 3 of 16Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 17    Figure 1. Transcriptome expression of key genes involved  in heme and bilirubin synthesis detected from tKC cell culture with and with out hydrogen peroxide treatment. ( A) Simplified diagram of heme biosynthesis and bilirubin production ( B) List of key genes with transcriptome expression level, log2 fold changes, and p-values of hydrogen peroxide trea tment group vs. no treatment con-trol group. Genes encoding key enzymes ( ALAS1 , HMOX1 , and BLVRB)  were all significantly up-regulated by hydrogen peroxide treatment (250 µM, 6 h). n = 6/group. 2.2. Evidence for De Novo Synthesis of Bilirub in via Heme Synthesis in Human Keratinocytes Although the culture media did not contain any bilirubin, we detected marginal lev-els of bilirubin in the keratinocyte monolayer culture (Figure 2A). Notably, the bilirubin
concentration increased in a do se-dependent fashion with the ad dition of hemin, a natural substrate of HMOX1  and HMOX2  (Figure 2A). These results strongly suggested the de novo synthesis of bilirubin in  human keratinocytes. The dose-dependent upregulation of bilirubin by hemin further supports the notion that hemin is a natural substrate for HMOXs [21]. Figure 1. Transcriptome expression of key genes involved in heme and bilirubin synthesis detectedfrom tKC cell culture with and without hydrogen peroxide treatment. ( A) Simpliﬁed diagram ofheme biosynthesis and bilirubin production ( B) List of key genes with transcriptome expression level,log2 fold changes, and p-values of hydrogen peroxide treatment group vs. no treatment control group.Genes encoding key enzymes ( ALAS1 ,HMOX1 , and BLVRB) were all signiﬁcantly upregulated byhydrogen peroxide treatment (250 µM, 6 h). n= 6/group.2.2. Evidence for De Novo Synthesis of Bilirubin via Heme Synthesis in Human Keratinocytes
Although the culture media did not contain any bilirubin, we detected marginallevels of bilirubin in the keratinocyte monolayer culture (Figure 2A). Notably, the bilirubinconcentration increased in a dose-dependent fashion with the addition of hemin, a naturalsubstrate of HMOX1 and HMOX2 (Figure 2A). These results strongly suggested the denovo synthesis of bilirubin in human keratinocytes. The dose-dependent upregulationof bilirubin by hemin further supports the notion that hemin is a natural substrate forHMOXs [21].Airyscan confocal microscopy was then used for visualizing and detecting bilirubinin keratinocytes transiently transfected with the UnaG-mCherry bilirubin-binding probe(Figure 2B). Although these keratinocytes were maintained in bilirubin-free medium, thetransfected mCherry-positive keratinocytes coexpressed UnaG-binding bilirubin (greenﬂuorescence) (Figure 2C). These results further underscored the notion that bilirubin was
indeed synthesized by human keratinocytes de novo.We next assessed the role of the heme synthesis pathway in de novo bilirubin pro-duction in keratinocytes using succinyl acetone (SA), an inhibitor of ALAS, which is arate-limiting heme biosynthetic enzyme [ 15,22] (Figure 1A). As expected, the synthesizedbilirubin level was signiﬁcantly inhibited by SA treatment (Figure 3A).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 4 of 16Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 17    Figure 2. (A) Dose–response effect of hemin on de novo  bilirubin production in keratinocytes for 48 h. Bar indicates mean ± SEM. *; p < 0.05 vs. no treatment group. ( B) UnaG-mCherry bilirubin sensor. Observation of mCherry allows identification of tr ansfected and expressing cells in absence of bili-rubin-induced UnaG fluorescence and enables signal normalization to correct for cell-to-cell expres-sion variation. ( C) Human keratinocytes expressing sensor s grown and maintained in bilirubin-free EpiLife media. mCherry (red) confirms sensor expr ession. UnaG fluorescence (green) indicates in-tracellular de novo synthesis of bilirubin in keratinocytes. Scale = 10 µm. Airyscan confocal microscopy was then used for visualizing and detecting bilirubin in keratinocytes transiently transfected with the UnaG-mCherry bilirubin-binding probe
(Figure 2B). Although these keratinocytes we re maintained in bilirubin-free medium, the transfected mCherry-positive keratinocytes co expressed UnaG-binding bilirubin (green fluorescence) (Figure 2C). These results furthe r underscored the notion that bilirubin was indeed synthesized by human keratinocytes de novo. We next assessed the role of the heme sy nthesis pathway in de  novo bilirubin pro-duction in keratinocytes using succinyl acetone (SA), an inhibitor of ALAS, which is a rate-limiting heme biosynthetic enzyme [15,22] (Figure 1A). As expected, the synthesized bili-rubin level was significantly inhibited by SA treatment (Figure 3A). Figure 2. (A) Dose–response effect of hemin on de novo bilirubin production in keratinocytes for48 h. Bar indicates mean ±SEM. *; p< 0.05 vs. no treatment group. ( B) UnaG-mCherry bilirubinsensor. Observation of mCherry allows identiﬁcation of transfected and expressing cells in absence
of bilirubin-induced UnaG ﬂuorescence and enables signal normalization to correct for cell-to-cellexpression variation. ( C) Human keratinocytes expressing sensors grown and maintained in bilirubin-free EpiLife media. mCherry (red) conﬁrms sensor expression. UnaG ﬂuorescence (green) indicatesintracellular de novo synthesis of bilirubin in keratinocytes. Scale = 10 µm.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 17    Figure 3. (A) De novo  bilirubin synthesis in keratinocytes with or without succinyl acetone (SA, an inhibitor of ALA dehydratase) for 48 h. Bar indicates mean ± SEM. n = 4/group. *; p < 0.05 vs. un-treated control group. ( B) Representative images of untreated control keratinocytes (left, endoge-nous bilirubin) and keratinocytes treated wi th SA for 48 h (right). Scale = 10 µm. ( C) Quantification of UnaG green fluorescence (bilirubin) by image anal ysis in nontreated control and 1 mM SA-treated
keratinocytes for 48 h. SA treatment inhibited intr acellular production of bilirubin. Bar indicates mean ± SEM. *; p = 0.001 versus control. The effect of SA on intracellular bilirubi n expression was further tested with the UnaG-mCherry sensor assay in living keratino cytes. SA inhibited the intracellular expres-sion of bilirubin (Figure 3B,C). These data indicated that ALAS is likely to be one of the major regulatory enzymes for bilirubin production in human keratinocytes. 2.3. Enhanced Bilirubin Production by H 2O2 Treatment in Keratinocytes To investigate the impact of oxidative stress on keratinocyte-derived bilirubin pro-duction, the monolayered keratinocytes were treated with H 2O2 for 48 h, followed by bil-irubin quantification using HPLC-MS/ MS. The noncytotoxic levels of H 2O2 significantly upregulated bilirubin production (Figure 4A),  suggesting that oxidative stress could up-regulate the de novo  synthesis of bilirubin in keratinocytes.
Figure 3. (A) De novo bilirubin synthesis in keratinocytes with or without succinyl acetone (SA, an
regulate the de novo  synthesis of bilirubin in keratinocytes. Figure 3. (A) De novo bilirubin synthesis in keratinocytes with or without succinyl acetone (SA, aninhibitor of ALA dehydratase) for 48 h. Bar indicates mean ±SEM. n= 4/group. *; p< 0.05 vs. un-treated control group. ( B) Representative images of untreated control keratinocytes (left, endogenousbilirubin) and keratinocytes treated with SA for 48 h (right). Scale = 10 µm. ( C) Quantiﬁcation ofUnaG green ﬂuorescence (bilirubin) by image analysis in nontreated control and 1 mM SA-treatedkeratinocytes for 48 h. SA treatment inhibited intracellular production of bilirubin. Bar indicatesmean±SEM. *; p= 0.001 versus control.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 5 of 16The effect of SA on intracellular bilirubin expression was further tested with the UnaG-mCherry sensor assay in living keratinocytes. SA inhibited the intracellular expressionof bilirubin (Figure 3B,C). These data indicated that ALAS is likely to be one of the majorregulatory enzymes for bilirubin production in human keratinocytes.2.3. Enhanced Bilirubin Production by H 2O2Treatment in KeratinocytesTo investigate the impact of oxidative stress on keratinocyte-derived bilirubin produc-tion, the monolayered keratinocytes were treated with H 2O2for 48 h, followed by bilirubinquantiﬁcation using HPLC-MS/MS. The noncytotoxic levels of H 2O2signiﬁcantly upregu-lated bilirubin production (Figure 4A), suggesting that oxidative stress could upregulatethe de novo synthesis of bilirubin in keratinocytes.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 17
Figure 4. (A) Impact of hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) treatment (48 h) on de novo  bilirubin synthesis in keratinocytes. Bar indicates mean ± SEM. n = 4/group. *; p < 0.05 vs. untreated control. ( B) Time-course detection of bilirubin in EpiDermTM 3D human epidermal equivalence cultures (sum of tissue and medium) with and without 30 µM hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) in medium for 72 h. Bilirubin was quantified using HPLC-MS method. Data are mean ± SEM. n = 4/group. *; p < 0.05 vs. baseline, ^;  p < 0.05 vs. without H 2O2 group. We next confirmed bilirubin production and its augmentation by H 2O2 using Epi-DermTM (MatTek Co., Ashland, MA, USA), a commerc ially available, reconstituted, three-dimensional (3D) human skin-equivalent model. No bilirubin was detected from fresh medium. Bilirubin was readily detected in untreated control skin-equivalents (Figure 4B). Upon H 2O2 treatment, bilirubin levels were signif icantly increased at both 24 h and 48 h
compared with untreated control samples, while significance was lost at 72 h (Figure 4B). This increasing trend of bilirubin level is consistent with the results in the aforementioned monolayer keratinocyte culture. We also calculated the net amounts of bilirubin produced in the 3D human skin-equivalent model (Table 1). The untreated control samples showed bilirubin levels rang-ing from 1.4 to 2.3 µg/mL, with an increasing pattern at a later time point, while H 2O2-treated groups showed significantly higher bilirubin levels, ranging from 2.8 to 4.0 µg/mL, than controls (Table 1). These results sugges ted that bilirubin was generated even in the well-differentiated 3D skin-equivalents, and its production was significantly enhanced by oxidative stress. Table 1. Time-course changes in total bilirubin (BR) concentration with and without 30 µM hydro-gen peroxide treatment in MatTek EpiDermTM 3D human skin-equivalent model. Tissue volume
was estimated as 0.0025 mL/tissue based on assumpti on of 8 mm in diameter, 50 µm in thickness. Data are mean ± SEM. n = 4/group. Treatment—Time Total BR Normalized to Estimated Tissue Volume (g/tissue-mL) p-value vs. Baseline  vs. Corresponding Control Group  Baseline 1.44 ± 0.22 - - No H 2O2—24 h 1.43 ± 0.32 0.970 - No H 2O2—48 h 1.75 ± 0.26 0.403 - No H 2O2—72 h 2.26 ± 0.27 0.056 - 30 µM H 2O2—24 h 2.80 ± 0.37 0.020 0.031  30 µM H 2O2—48 h 4.01 ± 0.79 0.021 0.035  30 µM H 2O2—72 h 3.93 ± 0.78 0.022 0.091  Figure 4. (A) Impact of hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) treatment (48 h) on de novo bilirubin synthesis inkeratinocytes. Bar indicates mean ±SEM. n= 4/group. *; p< 0.05 vs. untreated control. ( B) Time-course detection of bilirubin in EpiDerm ™3D human epidermal equivalence cultures (sum of tissueand medium) with and without 30 µM hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) in medium for 72 h. Bilirubin was
quantiﬁed using HPLC-MS method. Data are mean ±SEM. n= 4/group. *; p< 0.05 vs. baseline,ˆ;p< 0.05 vs. without H 2O2group.We next conﬁrmed bilirubin production and its augmentation by H 2O2using Epi-
ˆ;p< 0.05 vs. without H 2O2group.We next conﬁrmed bilirubin production and its augmentation by H 2O2using Epi-Derm ™(MatTek Co., Ashland, MA, USA), a commercially available, reconstituted, three-dimensional (3D) human skin-equivalent model. No bilirubin was detected from freshmedium. Bilirubin was readily detected in untreated control skin-equivalents (Figure 4B).Upon H 2O2treatment, bilirubin levels were signiﬁcantly increased at both 24 h and 48 hcompared with untreated control samples, while signiﬁcance was lost at 72 h (Figure 4B).This increasing trend of bilirubin level is consistent with the results in the aforementionedmonolayer keratinocyte culture.We also calculated the net amounts of bilirubin produced in the 3D human skin-equivalent model (Table 1). The untreated control samples showed bilirubin levels rangingfrom 1.4 to 2.3 µg/mL, with an increasing pattern at a later time point, while H 2O2-
treated groups showed signiﬁcantly higher bilirubin levels, ranging from 2.8 to 4.0 µg/mL,than controls (Table 1). These results suggested that bilirubin was generated even in thewell-differentiated 3D skin-equivalents, and its production was signiﬁcantly enhanced byoxidative stress.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 6 of 16Table 1. Time-course changes in total bilirubin (BR) concentration with and without 30 µM hydrogenperoxide treatment in MatTek EpiDerm ™3D human skin-equivalent model. Tissue volume wasestimated as 0.0025 mL/tissue based on assumption of 8 mm in diameter, 50 µm in thickness. Dataare mean±SEM. n= 4/group.Treatment—TimeTotal BR Normalized to EstimatedTissue Volume (g/tissue-mL)p-Valuevs. Baseline vs. Corresponding Control GroupBaseline 1.44 ±0.22 - -No H 2O2—24 h 1.43 ±0.32 0.970 -No H 2O2—48 h 1.75 ±0.26 0.403 -No H 2O2—72 h 2.26 ±0.27 0.056 -30µM H 2O2—24 h 2.80 ±0.37 0.020 0.03130µM H 2O2—48 h 4.01 ±0.79 0.021 0.03530µM H 2O2—72 h 3.93 ±0.78 0.022 0.0912.4. Bilirubin Has Natural Afﬁnity toward Epidermis of Human SkinBilirubin is a lipid acid and is naturally lipophilic. To determine whether bilirubin hasa higher afﬁnity for the epidermal layer and stratum corneum due to its high lipid content,
frozen human skin sections were incubated with 500 µg/mL unconjugated bilirubin. Asshown in Figure 5, bilirubin applied to thin sections of human skin showed preferentialaccumulation to the epidermis and the stratum corneum, resulting in visibly yellow staining.Considering its lower accumulation in the dermal compartment, bilirubin may be morecapable of binding to the epidermis than the dermis.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 17   2.4. Bilirubin Has Natural Affinity toward Epidermis of Human Skin Bilirubin is a lipid acid and is naturall y lipophilic. To determine whether bilirubin has a higher affinity for the epidermal laye r and stratum corneum due to its high lipid content, frozen human skin sections were in cubated with 500 µg/mL unconjugated biliru-bin. As shown in Figure 5, bilirubin applied to thin sections of human skin showed pref-erential accumulation to the epidermis and th e stratum corneum, resulting in visibly yel-
low staining. Considering its lower accumulation in the dermal compartment, bilirubin may be more capable of binding to the epidermis than the dermis.  Figure 5. Bright-field microscopy of human abdominal sk in section (8 µm) incubated with either (A) 100 µL of DMSO or ( B) 500 µg/mL bilirubin dissolved in DMSO for 1 h in dark. Arrowheads indicate visible bilirubin (yellow color) accumulation  in epidermal layer of skin section. Scale bar = 100 µm. 2.5. Assessment of Yellowness (b* Value) in Hu man Epidermal Explant Model Treated with Bio-available Concentrations of Bilirubin To assess the impact of bilirubin in the epidermis on skin appearance, epidermal hu-man skin explants were incubated with bioavailable levels of bilirubin (1.4 or 2.1 µg/mL) for 44 h in a vehicle of DPBS buffer. Afterward, skin samples were equilibrated in DPBS buffer without bilirubin for 138 h. Change s in yellowness scores from baseline ( Δb* val-
ues) were measured at 0, 22, 44, 68, and 138 h after the initiation of culture (Figure 6). Bilirubin treatment enhanced ∆b* values in a time- and dose-dependent manner com-pared with the control vehicle during the bilirubin treatment phase (Figure 6). After 44 h (recovery phase without bilirubin treatment), the ∆b* values of bilirubin-treated legs (both 1.4 and 2.1 µg/mL) gradually decreased to baseline levels between 68 and 138 h after the initiation of culture. These results further unde rpinned the notion that bilirubin effectively, but transiently, binds human skin expl ants and increases their yellowness. Figure 5. Bright-ﬁeld microscopy of human abdominal skin section (8 µm) incubated with either(A) 100 µLof DMSO or ( B) 500 µg/mL bilirubin dissolved in DMSO for 1 h in dark. Arrowheadsindicate visible bilirubin (yellow color) accumulation in epidermal layer of skin section. Scalebar = 100 µm.
bar = 100 µm.2.5. Assessment of Yellowness (b* Value) in Human Epidermal Explant Model Treated withBioavailable Concentrations of Bilirubin
bar = 100 µm.2.5. Assessment of Yellowness (b* Value) in Human Epidermal Explant Model Treated withBioavailable Concentrations of BilirubinTo assess the impact of bilirubin in the epidermis on skin appearance, epidermalhuman skin explants were incubated with bioavailable levels of bilirubin (1.4 or 2.1 µg/mL)for 44 h in a vehicle of DPBS buffer. Afterward, skin samples were equilibrated in DPBSbuffer without bilirubin for 138 h. Changes in yellowness scores from baseline ( ∆b* values)were measured at 0, 22, 44, 68, and 138 h after the initiation of culture (Figure 6). Bilirubintreatment enhanced ∆b* values in a time- and dose-dependent manner compared withthe control vehicle during the bilirubin treatment phase (Figure 6). After 44 h (recoveryphase without bilirubin treatment), the ∆b* values of bilirubin-treated legs (both 1.4 and2.1µg/mL ) gradually decreased to baseline levels between 68 and 138 h after the initiation
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 7 of 16of culture. These results further underpinned the notion that bilirubin effectively, buttransiently, binds human skin explants and increases their yellowness.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17    Figure 6. Human epidermal skin explants were cultured  with vehicle, 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin or 2.1 µg/mL of bilirubin for 44 h (treatment phase). At 44 h, the bilirubin treatments were replaced with DPBS vehicle without bilirubin and epidermal skin  samples were equilibrated till 138 h (recovery phase). Data indicate mean ± SEM. n = 6/group. *; p < 0.05 of 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample. #; p < 0.05 of 2.1 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample. ^; p < 0.05 for 2.1 µg/mL group vs. 1.4 µg/mL group. 2.6. Transcriptomic Profiling Analysis of  Keratinocytes by Bilirubin Treatment Bilirubin is well known to act as a chemical  antioxidant and is thought to offer cyto-
protection [23]. On the other hand, high levels  of bilirubin are known to induce neurotox-icity, as represented in jaundice [7]. To elucidate the functional properties of bilirubin, we treated keratinocytes with 1.4, 5, or 14 µg/mL of bilirubin and performed a transcriptome profiling assay. We found significant upregulation of gene sets related to “response to oxidative stress”, “prostagland in stimulus”, and “heme metabolic process” pathways in a dose-dependent manner, mostly at 24 h time points across all bilirubin concentrations (Figure 7). In addition, we observed significant gene upregulation in the pathways of “apoptosis” and “skin pigmentation”, with significant downregulation of genes in “innate immune response” even at the lowest bilirubin concentration (1.4 µg/mL). These results suggested that bilirubin has broader biological potential beyond oxidative stress response.  Figure 7. Key modulated biological pathways based on Gene Set Enrichment Analysis treated with
different concentrations of biliru bin on human neonatal keratinocyte s. Data are shown as log10 of GAGE p-values (negative represents inhibition , positive represents activation). n = 8/group. Color code indicates p-value range. Figure 6. Human epidermal skin explants were cultured with vehicle, 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin or2.1µg/mL of bilirubin for 44 h (treatment phase). At 44 h, the bilirubin treatments were replacedwith DPBS vehicle without bilirubin and epidermal skin samples were equilibrated till 138 h (recoveryphase). Data indicate mean ±SEM. n= 6/group. *; p< 0.05 of 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample. #; p< 0.05 of 2.1 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample.ˆ;p< 0.05 for 2.1 µg/mL group vs. 1.4 µg/mL group.2.6. Transcriptomic Proﬁling Analysis of Keratinocytes by Bilirubin TreatmentBilirubin is well known to act as a chemical antioxidant and is thought to offer cytopro-
tection [ 23]. On the other hand, high levels of bilirubin are known to induce neurotoxicity,as represented in jaundice [ 7]. To elucidate the functional properties of bilirubin, we treatedkeratinocytes with 1.4, 5, or 14 µg/mL of bilirubin and performed a transcriptome proﬁlingassay. We found signiﬁcant upregulation of gene sets related to “response to oxidativestress”, “prostaglandin stimulus”, and “heme metabolic process” pathways in a dose-dependent manner, mostly at 24 h time points across all bilirubin concentrations (Figure 7).In addition, we observed signiﬁcant gene upregulation in the pathways of “apoptosis”and “skin pigmentation”, with signiﬁcant downregulation of genes in “innate immuneresponse” even at the lowest bilirubin concentration (1.4 µg/mL). These results suggestedthat bilirubin has broader biological potential beyond oxidative stress response.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17
Figure 6. Human epidermal skin explants were cultured  with vehicle, 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin or 2.1
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17    Figure 6. Human epidermal skin explants were cultured  with vehicle, 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin or 2.1 µg/mL of bilirubin for 44 h (treatment phase). At 44 h, the bilirubin treatments were replaced with DPBS vehicle without bilirubin and epidermal skin  samples were equilibrated till 138 h (recovery phase). Data indicate mean ± SEM. n = 6/group. *; p < 0.05 of 1.4 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample. #; p < 0.05 of 2.1 µg/mL bilirubin leg vs. vehicle-treated control sample. ^; p < 0.05 for 2.1 µg/mL group vs. 1.4 µg/mL group. 2.6. Transcriptomic Profiling Analysis of  Keratinocytes by Bilirubin Treatment Bilirubin is well known to act as a chemical  antioxidant and is thought to offer cyto-protection [23]. On the other hand, high levels  of bilirubin are known to induce neurotox-icity, as represented in jaundice [7]. To elucidate the functional properties of bilirubin, we
treated keratinocytes with 1.4, 5, or 14 µg/mL of bilirubin and performed a transcriptome profiling assay. We found significant upregulation of gene sets related to “response to oxidative stress”, “prostagland in stimulus”, and “heme metabolic process” pathways in a dose-dependent manner, mostly at 24 h time points across all bilirubin concentrations (Figure 7). In addition, we observed significant gene upregulation in the pathways of “apoptosis” and “skin pigmentation”, with significant downregulation of genes in “innate immune response” even at the lowest bilirubin concentration (1.4 µg/mL). These results suggested that bilirubin has broader biological potential beyond oxidative stress response.  Figure 7. Key modulated biological pathways based on Gene Set Enrichment Analysis treated with different concentrations of biliru bin on human neonatal keratinocyte s. Data are shown as log10 of
GAGE p-values (negative represents inhibition , positive represents activation). n = 8/group. Color code indicates p-value range. Figure 7. Key modulated biological pathways based on Gene Set Enrichment Analysis treated withdifferent concentrations of bilirubin on human neonatal keratinocytes. Data are shown as log10 ofGAGE p-values (negative represents inhibition, positive represents activation). n= 8/group. Colorcode indicates p-value range.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 8 of 162.7. SDL Diminishes Bilirubin Levels in KeratinocytesIn order to mitigate skin yellowness induced by bilirubin, we screened over 100 skincare materials and identiﬁed SDL as the most potent compound to reduce bilirubin. Ina chemical in vitro assay, the addition of 0.01% SDL signiﬁcantly reduced the bilirubinlevel within 20 h (Figure 8A). Furthermore, in the keratinocyte monolayer culture model,SDL signiﬁcantly reduced H 2O2-induced bilirubin production (Figure 8B). The effect ofSDL treatment on intracellular bilirubin was also visualized and quantiﬁed in humankeratinocyte cell cultures using the UnaG-mCherry bilirubin sensor (Figure 8C,D). SDLtreatment signiﬁcantly reduced the intracellular levels of bilirubin (Figure 8C,D).Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17   2.7. SDL Diminishes Bilirubin Levels in Keratinocytes In order to mitigate skin yellowness indu ced by bilirubin, we screened over 100 skin
care materials and identified SDL as the most potent compound to reduce bilirubin. In a chemical in vitro assay, the addition of 0.01% SDL significantly reduced the bilirubin level within 20 h (Figure 8A). Furthermore, in the keratinocyte monolayer culture model, SDL significantly reduced H 2O2-induced bilirubin production (Figure 8B). The effect of SDL treatment on intracellular bilirubin was also visualized and quantified in human keratino-cyte cell cultures using the UnaG-mCherry bi lirubin sensor (Figure 8C,D). SDL treatment significantly reduced the intracellular levels of bilirubin (Figure 8C,D).  Figure 8. (A) Reduction of bilirubin concentration by incubation with 0.01% SDL for 20 h. Bar indi-cates mean ± SEM. n = 3/group. *; p < 0.05 vs. control. ( B) Inhibitory effect of 0.001% SDL on H 2O2-induced bilirubin production in ke ratinocytes at 48 h. Bilirubin co ncentrations were quantified us-
ing HPLC-MS method and were normalized to ATP le vel (an indicator of cell viability). Bar indi-cates mean ± SEM. n = 4/group. *; p < 0.05 vs. control. ^; p < 0.05 vs. 50 µM H 2O2-treated group. ( C) Visualization of bilirubin production by using Un aG-mCherry bilirubin sensor in keratinocytes in absence or presence of 0.001% SDL for 48 h. Scale = 10 µm. ( D) Calculated green fluorescence inten-sity (bilirubin) normalized to red fluorescence intensity (mCherry). Bar indicates mean ± SEM. n = 13/group. *; p < 0.01. Finally, we assessed the effects of SDL on skin-bound bilirubin.  Frozen human skin sections were incubated with bilirubin with or without SDL. The baseline fluorescence intensity of untreated skin sections was marginal (Figure 9A). The clear green fluorescence of skin-bound bilirubin was visualized, especially in the epidermal compartment (Figure 9B). Notably, SDL markedly ameliorated bili rubin-induced epidermal fluorescence (Fig-
ure 9C). These results indicated that SDL is a useful technology to reduce skin-bound bil-irubin content. Figure 8. (A) Reduction of bilirubin concentration by incubation with 0.01% SDL for 20 h. Barindicates mean±SEM. n= 3/group. *; p< 0.05 vs. control. ( B) Inhibitory effect of 0.001% SDL onH2O2-induced bilirubin production in keratinocytes at 48 h. Bilirubin concentrations were quantiﬁedusing HPLC-MS method and were normalized to ATP level (an indicator of cell viability). Barindicates mean±SEM. n= 4/group. *; p< 0.05 vs. control. ˆ; p< 0.05 vs. 50 µM H 2O2-treated group.(C) Visualization of bilirubin production by using UnaG-mCherry bilirubin sensor in keratinocytesin absence or presence of 0.001% SDL for 48 h. Scale = 10 µm. ( D) Calculated green ﬂuorescenceintensity (bilirubin) normalized to red ﬂuorescence intensity (mCherry). Bar indicates mean ±SEM.n= 13/group. *; p< 0.01.Finally, we assessed the effects of SDL on skin-bound bilirubin. Frozen human skin
sections were incubated with bilirubin with or without SDL. The baseline ﬂuorescence
n= 13/group. *; p< 0.01.Finally, we assessed the effects of SDL on skin-bound bilirubin. Frozen human skinsections were incubated with bilirubin with or without SDL. The baseline ﬂuorescenceintensity of untreated skin sections was marginal (Figure 9A). The clear green ﬂuores-cence of skin-bound bilirubin was visualized, especially in the epidermal compartment(Figure 9B ). Notably, SDL markedly ameliorated bilirubin-induced epidermal ﬂuorescence(Figure 9C). These results indicated that SDL is a useful technology to reduce skin-boundbilirubin content.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 9 of 16Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 , 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 17    Figure 9. Fluorescent images of frozen human skin sect ions. Green color in epidermis is bilirubin; blue color indicates DAPI staining. Green signals observed in dermis in nontreated control are due to autofluorescent property of elastin. White dotted line indica tes dermal–epidermal junction: ( A) nontreated control; ( B) 50 µg/mL bilirubin; ( C) 50 µg/mL bilirubin + 0.01% SDL. Scale bar = 100 µm. 3. Discussion Positioned at the interface of the body an d the external environment, the skin is a protective barrier that is constantly under atta ck by various stresses from both the external environment and the internal biological system  [24]. The skin is routinely exposed to en-vironmental damage such as UV light and pollu tion, resulting in reactive oxygen species generation. The skin is also exposed to oxidative conditions derived from internal biolog-
ical responses due to physical or mental stresse s [25,26]. To maintain homeostasis, the skin is equipped with a network of redox antioxidative systems, including antioxidative en-zymes such as catalase and superoxide dismutase, as well as chemical antioxidants such as glutathione [24,27]. It has been reported that bilirubin has cyto protective functions by acting as an effec-tive antioxidant against lipid peroxidation [23]. Our data strongly indicate that epidermal keratinocytes not only house all elements need ed for de novo synthesis of heme and bili-rubin, but the mechanism does indeed produc e bilirubin via the heme synthesis pathway (Figures 1–3). We also demonstrated that skin bilirubin synthesis is upregulated by oxi-dative stress (Figure 4). However, further st udies are warranted to elucidate whether the increased production of bilirubin is attributab le to increased enzymatic activity or the in-creased protein level of enzymes.
creased protein level of enzymes. The presented evidence is well corroborated with the documented response of HMOX1  induction and detection of bilirubin in the stratum corneum [19]. In the present study, the average bilirubin concentration ca lculated from the 3D human skin-equivalent model was 1.4 µg/mL (baseline level), which was significantly elevated to 4.01 µg/mL on average by oxidative stress (Table 1). The levels are comparable to the average serum lev-els of circulating bilirubin (5.2 µg/mL) in healthy women [28]. This evidence indicates that the human skin, specifically epidermal keratinocytes, is an active and functional source of extrahepatic bilirubin production. In addition , this study demonstrated the preferential accumulation of bilirubin in the epidermal compared to the dermal compartment. We do not know if this phenomenon is specific to the biological nature of bilirubin. Further stud-
ies are necessary to clarify this mechanism. However, there is a possibility that bilirubin produced from epidermal keratinocytes may rema in in the epidermis. This is intriguing due to the fact that the epidermis is not directly connected to the blood circulatory system and thus is less exposed to circulating bilirubin produced elsewhere in the body. Figure 9. Fluorescent images of frozen human skin sections. Green color in epidermis is biliru-bin; blue color indicates DAPI staining. Green signals observed in dermis in nontreated controlare due to autoﬂuorescent property of elastin. White dotted line indicates dermal–epidermal junc-tion: ( A) nontreated control; ( B) 50µg/mL bilirubin; ( C) 50µg/mL bilirubin + 0.01% SDL. Scalebar = 100 µm.3. DiscussionPositioned at the interface of the body and the external environment, the skin is aprotective barrier that is constantly under attack by various stresses from both the external
environment and the internal biological system [ 24]. The skin is routinely exposed toenvironmental damage such as UV light and pollution, resulting in reactive oxygen species
environment and the internal biological system [ 24]. The skin is routinely exposed toenvironmental damage such as UV light and pollution, resulting in reactive oxygen speciesgeneration. The skin is also exposed to oxidative conditions derived from internal biologicalresponses due to physical or mental stresses [ 25,26]. To maintain homeostasis, the skin isequipped with a network of redox antioxidative systems, including antioxidative enzymessuch as catalase and superoxide dismutase, as well as chemical antioxidants such asglutathione [24,27].It has been reported that bilirubin has cytoprotective functions by acting as an effectiveantioxidant against lipid peroxidation [ 23]. Our data strongly indicate that epidermalkeratinocytes not only house all elements needed for de novo synthesis of heme and biliru-bin, but the mechanism does indeed produce bilirubin via the heme synthesis pathway(Figures 1–3 ). We also demonstrated that skin bilirubin synthesis is upregulated by ox-
idative stress (Figure 4). However, further studies are warranted to elucidate whetherthe increased production of bilirubin is attributable to increased enzymatic activity or theincreased protein level of enzymes.The presented evidence is well corroborated with the documented response of HMOX1induction and detection of bilirubin in the stratum corneum [ 19]. In the present study, theaverage bilirubin concentration calculated from the 3D human skin-equivalent model was1.4µg/mL (baseline level), which was signiﬁcantly elevated to 4.01 µg/mL on averageby oxidative stress (Table 1). The levels are comparable to the average serum levels ofcirculating bilirubin (5.2 µg/mL) in healthy women [ 28]. This evidence indicates that thehuman skin, speciﬁcally epidermal keratinocytes, is an active and functional source ofextrahepatic bilirubin production. In addition, this study demonstrated the preferentialaccumulation of bilirubin in the epidermal compared to the dermal compartment. We
do not know if this phenomenon is speciﬁc to the biological nature of bilirubin. Furtherstudies are necessary to clarify this mechanism. However, there is a possibility that bilirubinproduced from epidermal keratinocytes may remain in the epidermis. This is intriguing
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 10 of 16due to the fact that the epidermis is not directly connected to the blood circulatory systemand thus is less exposed to circulating bilirubin produced elsewhere in the body.However, bilirubin has an aesthetically negative impact with its intrinsic yellowcolor. Yellow skin color is associated with poor health. Cosmetically, it is associated withnegative characteristics such as sallow or dull skin appearance. In parallel, we foundthat bilirubin had a high tendency to bind to human skin, especially to the epidermis(Figure 5). The yellowish hue of skin explants was increased by incubation with bioavailablebilirubin levels, which were detected in H 2O2-treated skin-equivalents. The increasedyellowness gradually subsided to the baseline level after eliminating bilirubin in thetreatments (Figure 6). The fact that bilirubin had high selectivity toward the epidermalcompartment may strengthen the role of bilirubin in yellowish skin tone.
Oxidative stress can be caused by many factors, including UV radiation, exposureto environmental pollutants such as cigarette smoke, or sleep disruption. Much attentionhas been paid to the impact of UVB on the skin, as well as the oxidative stress of cigarettesmoke, leading to the enhancement of yellowness around the mouth and hands of smokers.Our data suggest a possibility that oxidative stress from cigarette smoke may inducebilirubin production that partially contributes to yellowness. Sleep deprivation/disruptionis a very common concern as a byproduct of modern life demands. Sleep disturbance isreported to induce oxidative stress [ 29], increase the serum levels of bilirubin [ 30] andeven cause liver disorder [ 31]. Furthermore, there are various papers suggesting bilirubininduction by inﬂammatory cytokines [ 1–5,32]. In addition, our transcriptomic analysisshowed that keratinocytes treated with a high level of bilirubin manifest oxidative stress
responses (Figure 7), which is consistent with the literature, showing bilirubin inducesoxidative stress and causes DNA damage at high concentrations [ 33]. The combinationof published work and our data strongly suggests that increased bilirubin formation canbe an indicator of stressed skin, which correlates with the historical view that yellow skinequals unhealthy skin.SDL has been widely used as a safe emulsiﬁer or stabilizer in cosmetic, food, andpharmaceutical industries for many years. The present study demonstrated that SDL sig-niﬁcantly reduced bilirubin levels and diminished the skin-bound bilirubin concentration(Figures 8 and 9). Although further research is required to elucidate the detailed mechanismof action, preliminary transcriptome analysis in human keratinocytes indicated SDL upreg-ulates UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1), which is the key enzyme catalyzingbilirubin conjugation to sugars and results in increased water solubility of bilirubin and
enhanced elimination via bile and urine [34].In conclusion, we showed direct evidence that epidermal keratinocytes are capableof producing bilirubin and that keratinocyte-derived bilirubin synthesis is augmentedby oxidative stress. In addition, the predominant binding of bilirubin to the epidermisincreases yellowish discoloration. As the yellow component of skin tone is attributableto the sallow and/or dull appearance of facial skin, bilirubin production from epidermalkeratinocytes may directly cause facial skin discoloration. We also demonstrated thatSDL is effective in reducing bilirubin in various in vitro models. SDL could be a potentialmeasure to prevent bilirubin-mediated unhealthy yellowish/dull skin appearance afteroxidative stress.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Chemicals, Reagents, and Cell LinesCulture medium and supplements were all purchased from Thermo Fisher Scien-tiﬁc (Waltham, MA, USA), including EpiLife calcium-free phenol red-free medium (Cat.
Culture medium and supplements were all purchased from Thermo Fisher Scien-tiﬁc (Waltham, MA, USA), including EpiLife calcium-free phenol red-free medium (Cat.No.: MEPI500CA), gentamicin/amphotericin B (500X; Cat. No.: 50-0640), calcium chlo-ride (Cat. No.: 50-9703), HKGS (100X; Cat. No.: S-001-5), trypsin/EDTA solution (TE; Cat.No.: R001100), trypsin neutralizer solution (TN; Cat. No.: R002100), penicillin/streptomycin(10,000 U/mL, 100X; Cat. No.: 15140122), and DPBS (Cat. No.: 14190250). The keratinocytecell line tKC was a kind gift from Dr. Shay (University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 11 of 16TX) [ 20]. ViaStain AO/PI staining solution was purchased from Nexcelom Bioscience(Cat. No.: CS2-0106-5 mL, Lawrence, MA, USA) and AccuGene 1x PBS from Lonza (Cat.No.: 51225, Alpharetta, GA, USA). Other chemicals used for all studies, including DMSO(Cat. No.: D8418-100 mL), H 2O2(30% stock in water; Cat. No.: 216763-100mL), hemin (Cat.No.: H9039-1G), and 4,6-dioxoheptanoic acid (succinyl acetone (SA)) (Cat. No.: D1415-500 mg) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Bilirubin (Cat. No.: 17161)and bilirubin conjugate (sodium salt; Cat. No.: 17170), were purchased from CaymanChemicals (Ann Arbor, MI, USA). CellTiter-Glo®luminescent cell viability assay kit (Cat.No.: G7571) was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). SDL (combination ofsucrose laurate and sucrose dilaurate at approximately 6:4 ratio) was supplied from BASF(Ludwigshafen, Germany).4.2. tKC Culture, Treatment, and Viability Assessment
tKCs were plated in 24-well tissue culture plates using MEPI500CA media supple-mented with HKGS and gentamicin/amphotericin B at 200,000 cells/well. The cells wereincubated at 37◦C under 5% CO 2and 95% humidity for 24 h before treatment. All treat-ments were made in MEPI500CA medium that contained 1 mM added calcium chlorideand 0.1% DMSO. After treatment, the cultures were maintained at 37◦C under 5% CO 2and95% humidity for 48 h before harvesting. When harvesting, the culture supernatant wastransferred onto a fresh 24-well plate and stored on dry ice immediately and shielded fromlight. Cell layers were also stored on dry ice immediately and shielded from light. Both thecell layer plate and medium plate were subsequently frozen at −80◦C until quantifyingfor bilirubin.For viability assessment, the CellTiter-Glo®luminescent cell viability assay was usedaccording to the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, CellTiter-Glo®reagent was mixed
with an equal volume of cell culture medium and vortexed to create a homogeneous CellGLO viability working solution. After removing cell culture media, tKCs were treatedwith 300 µL of the Cell GLO viability working solution. The plate was covered withaluminum foil and agitated on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm for 10 min. The plate wasthen read with a SpectroMax microplate reader (Molecular Device, San Jose, CA, USA) forchemiluminescence intensity.4.3. Oxidative Stress Challenge to 3D Human Skin-Equivalent ModelEpiDerm ™3D human skin-equivalent cultures were purchased from MatTek cor-poration (MatTek, Ashland, MA, USA) and cultured according to the manufacturer’srecommendations. EpiDerm ™cultures contain highly differentiated human-derived epi-dermal keratinocytes. The EpiDerm ™3D cultures were immediately incubated with phenolred-free medium (Part No.: EPI-100-ASY-PRF) at 37◦C with 95% humidity and 5% CO 2for
20 h to equilibrate. A baseline group of 4 tissues and corresponding culture supernatantwere harvested on dry ice and shielded from light before transferring to −80◦C for storage.The rest of the tissues were subject to either medium treatment as control groups or 30 µMH2O2treatment as oxidatively stressed groups ( n= 4 per group). All tissues were incubatedat 37◦C with 95% humidity and 5% CO 2until the designated harvesting time points: 24 h,48 h, and 72 h.4.4. UnaG Bilirubin Quantiﬁcation Method for Cultured tKCUnaG is a Japanese Eel muscle protein. It binds bilirubin, forming a complex thatemits green ﬂuorescence, making it a good bilirubin sensor [ 35]. The UnaG-His-FLAG re-combinant protein used in this study was obtained from Riken Institute (Tokyo, Japan) [ 36].The bilirubin detection method by UnaG was reported previously [ 37]. Brieﬂy, bilirubinwas extracted from tKC cells cultured on a 24-well plate with a combination of 110 µL of
0.1% triethanolamine sourced from Univar USA Inc (Bedford Park, IL, USA) and 110 µLof 1µM UnaG stock made in PBS. To prevent bilirubin photodegradation, the plate was
0.1% triethanolamine sourced from Univar USA Inc (Bedford Park, IL, USA) and 110 µLof 1µM UnaG stock made in PBS. To prevent bilirubin photodegradation, the plate wascovered with aluminum foil. The plate was shaken by a VWR Signature ™Digital Multi-
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 12 of 16Tube Vortexer (VWR, Batavia, IL, USA) at 2000 rpm for 20 min to extract bilirubin. Abilirubin standard curve was obtained covering the range of 9.13 to 292.33 ng/mL. UnaGconcentration was 0.5 µM for all standards and samples. Fluorescence intensity propor-tional was read using a SpectroMax with ﬂuorescence ﬁlters for excitation and emissionwavelengths of 497 and 527 nm, respectively. Bilirubin concentrations were calculated bylinear regression against the bilirubin standard curve.4.5. Bilirubin Quantiﬁcation to Assess SDL Chemical Impact on Bilirubin LevelThe effect of SDL on bilirubin level was assessed with 20 h incubation in a cell-freesystem. Three replicates of each test sample were prepared on a 96-well plate (e.g., aFALCON brand 96-well tissue culture plate or equivalent) at a total volume of 250 µL/well.Positive control wells contained 25 µg/mL bilirubin in PBS buffer (AccuGENE, Cat. No.:
51225), while negative/vehicle control wells contained DMSO and PBS buffer. SDL wasdissolved in DMSO. Each test sample well contained 25 µg/mL bilirubin with SDL addedto 0.01% in PBS buffer. The plates were covered with aluminum foil and placed on top of amicroplate shaker (VWR, Cat. No.: 12620-938), followed by incubation at room temperaturefor 20 h with constant shaking at 150 rpm. Bilirubin was then quantiﬁed after incubationusing a commercially available bilirubin quantiﬁcation kit (Cat. No.: MET-5010, Cell Biolab,San Diego, CA, USA). Brieﬂy, quantitation is based on the Jendrassik–Grof method usingdiazotized sulfanilic acid to react with bilirubin to form azobilirubin, detected at an ODof 540 nm. A standard bilirubin curve is generated. Bilirubin concentrations of all testinglegs are calculated using linear regression against the bilirubin standard curve. Bilirubinreduction activity was determined by comparing bilirubin levels of treatments vs. the
bilirubin-positive control leg.4.6. Human Epidermal Explant Model Treatment with BilirubinTwelve-millimeter punch biopsies of human abdominal explant (46 years, female, skintype III) were procured from cosmetic procedures with an IRB-approved protocol (Schul-man Associates Institutional Review Board, Cincinnati, OH, USA). After fat removal, theskin was cut into 1.25 cm2squares, placed in 1 M NaCl plus 10 ×penicillin/streptomycin(Invitrogen), and incubated overnight at 37◦C. The following day, the epidermis wascarefully peeled off with forceps and stored in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) plus2×penicillin/streptomycin and stored at 4◦C before use (Bachelor et al., 2014). To as-sess bilirubin’s impact on skin tone appearance, the epidermal explants were cultured inindividual inserts that sat on top of 6-well culture plates. Tissues were simultaneouslytreated both topically (50 µL) and in the medium 6-well plates (2.3 mL per well) with one
of the 3 treatments: control vehicle (DPBS, Thermo Fisher), 1.4 µg/mL conjugated bilirubinsolution, and 2.1 µg/mL conjugated bilirubin (sodium salt, Cayman Chemicals) solution,respectively. Epidermal explant tissues were imaged with a Spectroshade imaging device(SpectroShade USA, Oxnard, CA, USA) at designated time points and b* values (yellownessscore) were quantiﬁed from the images using built-in software.4.7. Bilirubin Quantiﬁcation in Biological Samples Using LC-MS/MSBiological samples were extracted with 0.1% triethylamine (TEA) to recover synthe-sized bilirubin. Brieﬂy, 0.1% TEA was added into 3D human skin-equivalent tissue samples(120 µL per tissue) or monolayer cells in the well plate (110 µL per well of a 24-well cellculture plate), transferred to low-binding Eppendorf tubes, followed by vortexing for10 min at room temperature. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 ×gusing a benchtop
centrifuge for 10 min with the supernatants used for analysis. The standards and the sam-ples were analyzed using gradient high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem
centrifuge for 10 min with the supernatants used for analysis. The standards and the sam-ples were analyzed using gradient high-performance liquid chromatography with tandemmass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Bilirubin can be separated by a reverse-phase column(Atlantis T3 Column, 100Å, 3 µm, 2.1 mm×50 mm; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Bilirubinand the corresponding stable isotope-labeled internal standard (ISTD) were monitored
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 13 of 16by electrospray ionization (ESI) in positive mode using the selected reaction monitoringschemes below.- Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) transitions for analytes (bilirubin: 585.2 →299.2);- Their corresponding stable isotope-labeled internal standards (d4-bilirubin: 589.2→301.2 ).The Used ISTD was d4-bilirubin (Toronto Research Chemicals, North York, ON,Canada). A standard curve was constructed by plotting the signal, deﬁned here as the peakarea ratio (peak area analyte/peak area ISTD), for each standard versus the concentrationof each analyte for the corresponding standard. The concentration of bilirubin in thecalibration standards and biological samples were then calculated using the generatedregression equation.4.8. Estimation of Bilirubin Concentration Produced in EpiDerm™ 3D HumanSkin-Equivalent ModelThe diameter of each 3D human skin-equivalent model tissue is 8 mm, and the
thickness is about 50 µm. By using such dimensions, an individual 3D human skin tissuevolume was calculated as: π×(0.4 cm)2×0.005 cm = 0.002513 cm3= 0.002513 mL. Uponnormalizing the sum of bilirubin produced by each tissue, i.e., factor in bilirubin quantiﬁedfrom both tissue itself and corresponding culture supernatant/medium, the mean bilirubinconcentration per milliliter tissue volume of each group was calculated.4.9. Sample Preparation and Data Analysis for Microarray StudiesTo investigate the impact of ROS stress, tKC cells were plated out at a density of250,000 cells/well into 12-well plates. After growing for 24 h at 37◦C in a CO 2incubator,the tKCs were treated with a media control vehicle and hydrogen peroxide at 250 µM for 1 h,respectively, before harvesting 6 h later for microarray analysis. To investigate the impactof bilirubin treatment on human primary keratinocytes, a control vehicle (10% water) and
conjugated bilirubin at 1.4 µg/mL, 5 µg/mL, or 14 µg/mL, were added respectively, beforeharvesting for microarray analysis at 6 h and 24 h. Samples were collected in RNAlater®buffer, ﬂash-frozen, and stored at −80◦C prior to RNA extraction. RNA was extractedand puriﬁed using the RNeasy kit (QIAGEN, Germantown, MD, USA). Puriﬁed RNAwas converted to biotin-labeled complementary RNA copies using the HT 3′IVT Pluskit (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA), per the manufacturer’s protocol. BiotinylatedcRNA was fragmented by limited alkaline hydrolysis and then hybridized overnight toAffymetrix GeneTitan U219 array plates using the Affymetrix GeneTitan instrument andprotocol. Probe set expression values were calculated by quartile normalization and PLIERsummarization algorithms. Differentially expressed genes were analyzed using the ANOVAmodel implemented in the R limma package [ 38]. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
was performed using GAGE (Generally Applicable Gene set Enrichment for pathwayanalysis) model [39] against Gene Ontology datasets.4.10. Visualization of Bilirubin Content within Cells Using UnaG FluorescenceHaCaT keratinocytes were cultured in EpiLife medium (Thermo Fisher). At 72 hprior to imaging, cells were seeded in 35 mm quad No1.5 polymer coverslip-bottomeddishes (Ibidi) and grown to 70% conﬂuency at the time of transfection. At 48 h prior toimaging, the cells were transfected with the CMV-UnaG-mCherry construct (Figure 2B)using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher). Transfection materials were added to OptimemReduced Serum medium (Thermo Fisher) and added to cells for 4 h before the medium wasremoved and replaced with fresh media. Treatments were added to the cells at this stagefor 48 h. Immediately prior to imaging, the media was removed, and Fluorobrite medium(Gibco) was added. All live-cell imaging was performed on a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal
microscope with the Airyscan detector with either a 20X 0.8 NA Plan-Apochromat airlens or a 63X 1.4NA Plan-Apochromat oil immersion lens. The imaging environment was
microscope with the Airyscan detector with either a 20X 0.8 NA Plan-Apochromat airlens or a 63X 1.4NA Plan-Apochromat oil immersion lens. The imaging environment wasmaintained at 37◦C and 5% CO 2. UnaG was excited using a 488 nm laser and emissioncaptured by the Airyscan detector with a 495–550 nm bandpass ﬁlter. mCherry was excited
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 14 of 16using a 594 nm laser and emission captured by the Airyscan detector with a 645 nm longpass ﬁlter. Mean ﬂuorescent intensity of cells was measured using ImageJ. Individual cellswere isolated by ROI and the mean ﬂuorescence intensity of each channel measured. UnaGintensity values are expressed as a proportion of the mCherry signal to normalize andcontrol for variation in probe expression.4.11. Visualization of SDL Effect on Bilirubin Reduction in Human Skin SectionsA 10 µm amount of fresh frozen human skin sections was dried at RT for 30 min,followed by rehydration with PBS. Sections were incubated either with or without (negativecontrol) 50 µg/mL bilirubin 1 h at RT in the dark, followed by washing with PBS. Sectionswere then treated with either (1) vehicle—0.5% DMSO in PBS or (2) 0.01% SDL in vehicleovernight at RT in the dark, washed in PBS, and DAPI counterstained using NucBlue ﬁxed
cell stain Ready Probes reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). For comparison, ﬂuores-cent images were captured with a Zeiss Observer.Z1 microscope (Carl Zeiss Microimaging,Jena, Germany) at equal gamma values, pixel ranges, and exposures.4.12. Statistical AnalysisStatistical signiﬁcance for all in vitro experiments, except for the transcriptome anal-ysis, was determined by Student’s t-test unless stated otherwise. Values of p< 0.05 wereconsidered statistically signiﬁcant.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.F., T.L., A.M.B., T.J.H. and T.H.; Data curation, B.F.,P .D.C., L.L., B.J. and W.Z.; Formal analysis, B.F., P .D.C., J.C., L.L. and W.Z.; Funding acquisition, T.J.H.and T.H.; Investigation, B.F., P .D.C., J.C., T.L., B.J., A.M.B. and A.T.M.; Methodology, J.C. and L.L.;Project administration, T.H.; Resources, T.J.H. and T.H.; Software, W.Z.; Supervision, A.M.B., A.T.M.
and T.J.H.; Visualization, P .D.C. and B.J.; Writing—original draft, B.F. and T.L.; Writing—reviewand editing, A.M.B., T.J.H. and T.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version ofthe manuscript.Funding: This work has been funded by the Procter & Gamble Company.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from thecorresponding author.Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Scott Hartman, Julie Ashe, Yu Wang, Dionne Swift,Mirjana Parlov, and Rachel Adams for in vitro cell work, RNA preparation, transcriptional analysis,and providing statistics for our gene chip studies. We also thank Atsushi Miyawaki for licensingUnaG, and Masutaka Furue for the valuable substantive comments provided during the editing ofthis manuscript.Conﬂicts of Interest: Bin Fang, Junjun Chen, Lijuan Li, Timothy Laughlin, Bradley Jarrold, Wenzhu
Zhao, and Tomohiro Hakozaki are employees of the Procter & Gamble Company and contributedto the design of the study; to the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; to the writing of themanuscript, and to the decision to publish the results.References1. Everson, C.A.; Thalacker, C.D.; Hogg, N. Phagocyte migration and cellular stress induced in liver, lung, and intestine duringsleep loss and sleep recovery. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2008 ,295, R2067–R2074. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Buyukhatipoglu, H.; Kirhan, I.; Vural, M.; Taskin, A.; Sezen, Y.; Dag, O.F.; Turan, M.N.; Aksoy, N. Oxidative stress increased inhealthcare workers working 24-hour on-call shifts. Am. J. Med. Sci. 2010 ,340, 462–467. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Moller-Levet, C.S.; Archer, S.N.; Bucca, G. Effects of insufﬁcient sleep on circadian rhythmicity and expression amplitude of thehuman blood transcriptome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2013 ,110, E1132–E1141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Lopresti, A.L.; Hood, S.D.; Drummond, P .D. A review of lifestyle factors that contribute to important pathways associated with
4. Lopresti, A.L.; Hood, S.D.; Drummond, P .D. A review of lifestyle factors that contribute to important pathways associated withmajor depression: Diet, sleep and exercise. J. Affect. Disord. 2013 ,148, 12–27. [CrossRef]5. Weljie, A.M.; Meerlo, P .; Goel, N.; Sengupta, A.; Kayser, M.S.; Abel, T.; Birnbaum, M.J.; Dinges, D.F.; Sehgal, A. Oxalic acid anddiacylglycerol 36:3 are cross-species markers of sleep debt. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015 ,112, 2569–2574. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 15 of 166. Stocker, R.; Yamamoto, Y.; McDonagh, A.F.; Glazer, A.N.; Ames, B.N. Bilirubin is an antioxidant of possible physiologicalimportance. Science 1987 ,235, 1043–1046. [CrossRef]7. Schiff, L. Jaundice: Five-and-a-half decades in historic perspective. Selected aspects. Gastroenterology 1980 ,78, 831–836. [CrossRef]8. Maines, M.D.; Trakshel, G.M.; Kutty, R.K. Characterization of two constitutive forms of rat liver microsomal heme oxygenase.Only one molecular species of the enzyme is inducible. J. Biol. Chem. 1986 ,261, 411–419. [CrossRef]9. Braggins, P .E.; Trakshel, G.M.; Kutty, R.K.; Maines, M.D. Characterization of two heme oxygenase isoforms in rat spleen:Comparison with the hematin-induced and constitutive isoforms of the liver. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1986 ,141, 528–533.[CrossRef]10. Trakshel, G.M.; Kutty, R.K.; Maines, M.D. Puriﬁcation and characterization of the major constitutive form of testicular heme
oxygenase. The noninducible isoform. J. Biol. Chem. 1986 ,261, 11131–11137. [CrossRef]11. Linnenbaum, M.; Busker, M.; Jan, R.; Kraehling, J.R.; Behrends, S. Heme oxygenase isoforms differ in their subcellular trafﬁckingduring hypoxia and are differentially modulated by cytochrome P450 reductase. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e35483. [CrossRef] [PubMed]12. Tenhunen, R.; Marver, H.S.; Schmid, R. The enzymatic conversion of heme to bilirubin by microsomal heme oxygenase. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. USA 1968 ,61, 748–755. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Yoshida, T.; Kikuchi, G. Purification and properties of heme oxygenase from rat liver microsomes. J. Biol. Chem. 1979 ,254, 4487–4491 .[CrossRef]14. Ryter, S.W.; Alam, J.; Choi, A.M. Heme oxygenase-1/carbon monoxide: From basic science to therapeutic applications. Physiol. Rev.2006 ,86, 583–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Chiabrando, D.; Vinchi, F.; Fiorito, V .; Mercurio, S.; Tolosano, E. Heme in pathophysiology: A matter of scavenging, metabolism
and trafﬁcking across cell membranes. Front. Pharmacol. 2014 ,5, 61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. London, I.M.; West, R.; Shemin, D.; Rittenberg, D. On the origin of bile pigment in normal man. J. Biol. Chem. 1950 ,184, 351–358.[CrossRef]17. Gray, C.H.; Neuberger, A.; Sneath, P .H. Studies in congenital porphyria. 2. Incorporation of 15N in the stercobilin in the normaland in the porphyric. Biochem. J. 1950 ,47, 87–92. [CrossRef]18. Takeda, T.A.; Mu, A.; Tai, T.T.; Kitajima, S.; Taketani, S. Continuous de novo biosynthesis of haem and its rapid turnover tobilirubin are necessary for cytoprotection against cell damage. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 10488. [CrossRef]19. Numata, I.; Okuyama, R.; Memezawa, A.; Ito, Y.; Takeda, K.; Furuyama, K.; Shibahara, S.; Aiba, S. Functional expression ofheme oxygenase-1 in human differentiated epidermis and its regulation by cytokines. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2009 ,129, 2594–2603.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]20. Shay, J.; Wright, W.E. Use of telomerase to create bioengineered tissues. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2005 ,1057 , 479–491. [CrossRef]21. Rahman, M.N.; Vukomanovic, D.; Vlahakis, J.Z.; Szarek, W.A.; Nakatsu, K.; Jia, Z. Structural insights into human heme oxygenase-1 inhibition by potent and selective azole-based compounds. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013 ,10, 20120697. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Beru, N.; Sahr, K.; Goldwasser, E. Inhibition of heme synthesis in bone marrow cells by succinylacetone: Effect on globin synthesis.J. Cell. Biochem. 1983 ,21, 93–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Sedlak, T.W.; Saleh, M.; Higginson, D.S.; Paul, B.D.; Juluri, K.R.; Snyder, S.H. Bilirubin and glutathione have complementaryantioxidant and cytoprotective roles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009 ,106, 5171–5176. [CrossRef]24. Packer, L.; Valacchi, G. Antioxidants and the response of skin to oxidative stress: Vitamin E as a key indicator. Ski. Pharmacol.
Appl. Ski. Physiol. 2002 ,15, 282–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Packer, L.; Valacchi, G. Antioxidants and the response of skin to oxidative stress: Vitamin E as a key indicator. Ski. Pharmacol.Appl. Ski. Physiol. 2002 ,15, 282–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Wang, L.; Muxin, G.; Nishida, H.; Shirakawa, C.; Sato, S.; Konishi, T. Psychological stress-induced oxidative stress as a model ofsub-healthy condition and the effect of TCM. Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2007 ,4, 195–202. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Salim, S. Oxidative stress and psychological disorders. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2014 ,12, 140–147. [CrossRef]27. Hellemans, L.; Corstjens, H.; Neven, A.; Declercq, L.; Maes, D. Antioxidant enzyme activity in human stratum corneum showsseasonal variation with an age-dependent recovery. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2003 ,120, 434–439. [CrossRef]28. Zucker, S.D.; Horn, P .S.; Sherman, K.E. Serum bilirubin levels in the U.S. population: Gender effect and inverse correlation withcolorectal cancer. Hepatology 2004 ,40, 827–835. [CrossRef]
29. Teixeira, K.R.C.; Dos Santos, C.P .; de Medeiros, L.A.; Mendes, J.A.; Cunha, T.M.; De Angelis, K.; Penha-Silva, N.; de Oliveira, E.P . ;Crispim, C.A. Night workers have lower levels of antioxidant defenses and higher levels of oxidative stress damage whencompared to day workers. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 4455. [CrossRef]30. Chin, K.; Ohi, M.; Shimizu, K.; Nakamura, T.; Miyaoka, F.; Mishima, M.; Nakamura, T. Increase in bilirubin levels of patients withobstructive sleep apnea in the morning-a possible explanation of induced heme oxygenase-1. Sleep 2001 ,24, 218–223. [CrossRef]31. Shigiyama, F.; Kumashiro, N.; Tsuneoka, Y.; Igarashi, H.; Yoshikawa, F.; Kakehi, S.; Funato, H.; Hirose, T. Mechanisms of sleepdeprivation-induced hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance in mice. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2018 ,315, E848–E858.[CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Yamaguchi, T.; Shioji, I.; Sugimoto, A.; Yamaoka, M. Psychological stress increases bilirubin metabolites in human urine.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2002 ,293, 517–520. [CrossRef]33. Rawat, V .; Bortolussi, G.; Gazzin, S.; Tiribelli, C.; Muro, A.F. Bilirubin-induced oxidative stress leads to DNA damage in thecerebellum of hyperbilirubinemic neonatal mice and activates DNA double-strand break repair pathways in human cells.Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 2018 ,2018 , 1801243. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 ,23, 5884 16 of 1634. Sumida, K.; Kawana, M.; Kouno, E.; Itoh, T.; Takano, S.; Narawa, T.; Tukey, R.H.; Fujiwara, R. Importance of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 expression in skin and its induction by UVB in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Mol. Pharmacol. 2013 ,84, 679–686. [CrossRef]35. Kumagai, A.; Ando, R.; Miyatake, H.; Greimel, P .; Kobayashi, T.; Hirabayashi, Y.; Shimogori, T.; Miyawaki, A. A bilirubin-inducibleﬂuorescent protein from eel muscle. Cell2013 ,153, 1602–1611. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Hengen, P . Puriﬁcation of His-Tag fusion proteins from Escherichia coli. Trends Biochem. Sci. 1995 ,20, 285–286. [CrossRef]37. Iwatani, S.; Nakamura, H.; Kurokawa, D.; Yamana, K.; Nishida, K.; Fukushima, S.; Koda, T.; Nishimura, N.; Nishio, H.;Iijima, K.; et al. Fluorescent protein-based detection of unconjugated bilirubin in newborn serum. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 28489.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]38. Ritchie, M.E.; Phipson, B.; Wu, D.; Hu, Y.; Law, C.W.; Shi, W.; Smyth, G.K. limma powers differential expression analyses forRNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 ,43, e47. [CrossRef]39. Luo, W.; Friedman, M.S.; Shedden, K.; Hankenson, K.D.; Woolf, P .J. GAGE: Generally applicable gene set enrichment for pathwayanalysis. BMC Bioinform. 2009 ,10, 161. [CrossRef]
