International Journal of  Molecular SciencesReviewChallenges in Exosome Isolation and Analysis inHealth and DiseaseNils Ludwig1,2, Theresa L. Whiteside1,2,3and Torsten E. Reichert4,*1Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA;ludwign@upmc.edu (N.L.); whitesidetl@upmc.edu (T.L.W.)2UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA3Departments of Immunology and Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,PA 15213, USA4Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany*Correspondence: torsten.reichert@ukr.deReceived: 10 September 2019; Accepted: 21 September 2019; Published: 21 September 2019/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: A growing body of evidence emphasizes the important role exosomes in di ﬀerent
physiological and pathological conditions. Exosomes, virus-size extracellular vesicles (EVs), carry acomplex molecular cargo, which is actively processed in the endocytic compartment of parental cells.Exosomes carry and deliver this cargo to recipient cells, serving as an intercellular communicationsystem. The methods for recovery of exosomes from supernatants of cell lines or body ﬂuids are notuniformly established. Yet, studies of the quality and quantity of exosome cargos underlie the conceptof “liquid biopsy.” Exosomes are emerging as a potentially useful diagnostic tool and a predictor ofdisease progression, response to therapy and overall survival. Although many novel approachesto exosome isolation and analysis of their cargos have been introduced, the role of exosomes asdiagnostic or prognostic biomarkers of disease remains unconﬁrmed. This review considers existingchallenges to exosome validation as disease biomarkers. Focusing on advantages and limitations of
methods for exosome isolation and characterization, approaches are proposed to facilitate furtherprogress in the development of exosomes as biomarkers in human disease.Keywords: exosomes; extracellular vesicles (EVs); exosome isolation; biomarkers; drug delivery;tumor-derived exosomes (TEX)1. IntroductionExosomes are virus-size membranous vesicles ranging in the diameter from 30–150 nm. Theyoriginate from the endocytic compartment of the producer cell. A growing body of evidence indicatesthat exosomes play a major role in intercellular communication in physiological as well as pathologicalconditions [ 1]. The rapidly increasing number of publications emphasizes the growing interest inexplorations of biologic functions of exosomes. Compared to microvesicles (MVs), which are secretedby “budding” or “pinching o ﬀ” from the cell membrane surface, the biogenesis of exosomes is morecomplex. It involves reverse membrane invagination and processing in multivesicular bodies (MVBs),
followed by exosome release into intercellular ﬂuid when MVBs fuse with the cell membrane [ 2]. Dueto the endosomal origin, exosomes are enriched in late endosome components such as CD63, CD9and CD81 [ 3]. The complex biogenesis suggests that exosomes, whose cargo reﬂects the molecularprocessing taking place inside the parent cell, are best suited to serve as potential surrogates of thisparent cell in body ﬂuids. The ﬁdelity of exosome cargo with that of the parent cell has been conﬁrmedin several studies [ 4]. Analysis of exosome levels in body ﬂuids of patients and of exosome cargosemerges as a potential diagnostic tool of disease or predictor of disease progression, response toInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684; doi:10.3390 /ijms20194684 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 2 of 11therapy and overall survival [ 5–7]. Since exosomes can be isolated from all body ﬂuids, they areoptimal candidates for analysis as part of a non-invasive liquid biopsy [ 8]. A therapeutic applicationof exosomes has also been suggested for di ﬀerent diseases, utilizing their biological activity and therich cargo they carry to serve as potential cell-free therapy [ 9]. Exosomes have been implicated indrug resistance and in reprogramming of tissue environments in various diseases [ 10–12]. Universalexosome involvement in cellular interactions creates an urgent need for a better understanding of theircharacteristics and functions. Hence, the isolation and molecular /genetic analyses of exosomes arecurrently a priority.Studies of body ﬂuid-derived exosomes are a challenge, since the isolated exosomes are derivedfrom many di ﬀerent cell types and contain components of body ﬂuids (“contaminants’), which have
to be removed during exosome isolation. Most of what is currently known about exosomes comesfrom studies of cell lines propagated in long-term cultures. This o ﬀers an opportunity of examiningexosomes derived from a single, well-deﬁned cell type [ 13]. However, recent technological progress inexosome isolation and their analysis has not led to a universally accepted recommendation for exosomeisolation. The ﬁeld is facing problems in selecting and reproducing various isolation methodologies.Additionally, approaches to data acquisition /analysis vary widely. The recommendations formulatedin the guidelines of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) are vague and leaveextracellular vesicles (EV) isolation to investigators’ discretion [ 14]. This situation reﬂects the young ageof the fast-developing EV ﬁeld and the recommendations by ISEV are produced as a community e ﬀort
which involves the leading EV researchers. The guidelines go on to note that some major conclusionsin published literature are often insu ﬃciently supported by the reported experimental evidence. Forthese reasons, the guidelines charge the investigators to closely specify the utilized methodologiespresumably to accumulate the described data for formulating future recommendations [14].Not only exosome isolation methods, but also the nomenclature of EVs remains unclear. Therecent introduction of exomeres ( <30 nm in diameter), in addition to small and large exosomes, allwith potentially similar biogenesis, and larger EVs ( >200 nm), encompassing microvesicles, oncosomesand apoptotic bodies, emphasizes the heterogeneity of EVs [ 15]. Recognizing the existing uncertaintyand confusion in the EV ﬁeld, we highlight and summarize the challenges facing exosome researchtoday. The focus is on the methodologies for exosome isolation, the inﬂuence of cell culture parameters
on the quantity and quality of isolated exosomes and the consequences of di ﬀerent treatments of theparental cells on exosome production. The current technologies for the analysis of the exosome cargoand their limitations will be discussed and solutions for improvements will be considered.2. Inﬂuence of Exosome Isolation /Puriﬁcation Methodologies on the Composition ofExosome CargosIn the ﬁeld of EV research, no gold standard for exosome isolation exists, and new methodologiesseem to appear almost daily. Ultracentrifugation (including di ﬀerential centrifugation) remains byfar the most widely used primary isolation method for EVs, being used by more than 80% of all EVresearchers worldwide [ 16]. Although ultracentrifugation is widely used in the ﬁeld, the technique hasseveral drawbacks, including the co-isolation of non-exosomal impurities, low reproducibility, lowRNA yield, potential damage of exosomes and low-throughput of samples, which is not compatible
with clinical utilization [ 17]. Investigators who exclusively use conditioned culture media for exosome
RNA yield, potential damage of exosomes and low-throughput of samples, which is not compatiblewith clinical utilization [ 17]. Investigators who exclusively use conditioned culture media for exosomeisolation mostly use ultracentrifugation, whereas those studying complex biological ﬂuids, such asplasma, tended to use a combination of di ﬀerent methods for isolation and puriﬁcation of EVs. Amongthese methods are density gradient centrifugation at lower speeds to remove cell fragments and largeplatelet-derived vesicles, followed by ultraﬁltration and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) [ 16].Each of the multiple isolation methods available today has advantages and disadvantages and absoluteexosome purity remains an unrealistic goal that is only partially met by methods such as SEC, whichremoves considerable (but not all) quantity of “contaminating’ plasma or medium components [ 13].Recently, Lyden’s group introduced a new method for EV isolation based on asymmetric-ﬂow ﬁeld-ﬂow
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 3 of 11fractionation (AF4). Using AF4, nanoparticles are separated based on their density and hydrodynamicproperties by two perpendicular ﬂows, i.e., the forward laminar channel ﬂow and the variable crossﬂow.This method allowed for the identiﬁcation of exomeres as well as two exosome subpopulations thatdemonstrate distinct biophysical and molecular properties [ 15]. This and similar discoveries willaccelerate the successful performance of translational studies mediated by EV subsets in diagnostic,prognostic and therapeutic applications.The method used for EVs isolation from body ﬂuids is critical for the characterization of theircargo. Reports in the literature suggest that di ﬀerent isolation methods introduce variations in theconcentration, purity and size of exosomes [ 18–20]. Exosomes isolated by ultracentrifugation, ExoQuickor Total Exosome Isolation Reagent yielded mRNA that showed di ﬀerences upon subsequent RNA
sequencing analysis. Although 588 common miRNAs were found in all three exosome samples, eachsample isolated by the di ﬀerent method contained approximately 200 miRNAs, which were uniquefor each exosome preparation [ 18]. Ding et al. reported similar results showing that the exosomalmiRNA proﬁles are distinct, depending on the isolation methods used [ 21]. Additional evidence wasprovided by Rekker et al., who also concluded that the miRNA proﬁle in exosomes may be altered bythe isolation method [ 22]. Proteomic or ﬂow cytometry-based analyses of exosomes yielded similarresults, suggesting that isolated exosome fractions are often “contaminated” by co-isolated plasmaproteins and that the extent of contamination depends on the isolation method used [ 16]. Commonco-isolated soluble proteins are albumin, immunoglobulins and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), allof which are abundantly present in body ﬂuids [ 23,24]. The available data lead to the conclusion that
approaches to exosome isolation from plasma or body ﬂuids remain the most critical aspect for thecharacterization of exosome molecular or genetic cargos. Thus, it is necessary to proceed with cautionin selecting the appropriate puriﬁcation method for EVs, and to carefully discriminate between the trueexosome content versus “contaminating” plasma proteins or nucleic acids coating the exosome surface.Isolation of exosomes by direct immunocapture from cell culture supernatants or body ﬂuidsmight overcome the ”contamination” problem; however, immune capture is strictly dependent onspeciﬁc binding of the detection antibody to an antigen on the exosome surface. Therefore, the presenceof “contaminants” is likely to interfere with immune capture. We have reported that immunocaptureof exosomes after their isolation from plasma by, e.g., size exclusion chromatography (SEC), whicheliminates most, but not all, of contaminants, might reduce the interference by non-EV-associated
proteins [ 25]. The use of mass spectrometry (LC-MS /MS) for detection of exosome-associated proteinsis widely used. However, it is important to acknowledge that mass spectrometry might provideartefactual results due to contaminations of exosomes with high-abundance plasma proteins that canmask low-abundance exosome-speciﬁc components [ 26]. Various functional studies performed withplasma-derived exosomes also showed that functions of the isolated exosomes may be negativelyinﬂuenced by “contaminating”, non-vesicular materials [23].Furthermore, comparisons of di ﬀerent isolation techniques indicated that altered levels of severalproteins widely used as “markers” of exosomes, such as tetraspanins, varied among di ﬀerent isolationtechniques [ 27] and between exosomes derived from di ﬀerent tumor cells [ 13]. Exosome markersmay be di ﬀerential due to di ﬀerent EV isolation methods producing di ﬀerent purity, but also because
they may isolate di ﬀerent subpopulations of EVs. Similar results were also observed for angiogenic
they may isolate di ﬀerent subpopulations of EVs. Similar results were also observed for angiogenicfactors, which were present at signiﬁcantly di ﬀerent levels in a study comparing ultracentrifugationand SEC [ 23]. The reason for these altered levels of protein “markers” may again be due to the ratios ofEV/non-EV components in the cargo of the isolated exosomes.In aggregate, the “purity” of exosome samples is highly dependent on the vesicle isolation method,and it is likely to a ﬀect results interpretation. However, highest purity usually comes in expense of lowyield and for some biomarker studies, the purity, i.e., where the biomarker came from (EVs /co-isolatingmatrix), may not matter if the biomarker is reproducibly detected in the EV preparations. For someapplications, such as proteomic analyses, it is possible that the analyses of exosome cargo might notbe able to identify proteins present in femtomolar quantities in exosomes, especially in the presence
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 4 of 11of “contaminating” proteins. The solution may be ampliﬁcation of these proteins using monoclonalantibodies, which will detect the ‘rare’ exosome components with exquisite speciﬁcity, as we andothers have demonstrated [28].3. Culture Conditions Inﬂuence Exosome Levels and CargoThe cell culture conditions used for exosome production vary greatly among laboratories, evenwhen well-established cell lines are used. The yield and cargo of exosomes can be drastically altered byculture conditions used for producer cell lines. Finding the optimal conditions for exosome productionby a speciﬁc cell type remains a challenge, since it is always a compromise between optimal conditionsfor growth and those for exosome production and isolation. Di ﬀerent parameters of cell culture caninﬂuence the cargo composition of exosomes as illustrated below.3.1. Culture Containers
3.1. Culture ContainersComparisons of exosomes derived from cells cultured in conventional cell culture dishes versustwo-chamber bioreactors indicated that the morphology, size distribution and surface markers ofexosomes were similar. However, the yield of exosomes was more than 100 times higher in bioreactorsthan in dishes, and the metabolomic analysis revealed statistically signiﬁcant di ﬀerences [29].3.2. CellsEach cell type requires unique medium composition for optimal growth and unique seedingdensity, passage frequency and medium replacement. As alluded to already, the requirements forcell growth have to be harmonized with the requirements for the exosome isolation and optimizedfor the intended downstream applications [ 26]. A prerequisite for any EV-related study is the useof contamination-free cells. Mycoplasma or other microbes can also release EVs interfering with theresults of exosome characterization, cargo analysis or functional studies [30–32].
The passage number can impact the cargo composition and functions of exosomes, as shown formesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). Within ﬁve serial passages, the level of the exosome “marker” CD63was reduced, and the recovered exosomes were less potent in stimulating migration of endothelialcells [ 33]. Umezu et al. compared exosomes derived from bone marrow stromal cells of normal humandonors and reported that exosomes derived from older donors showed signiﬁcantly lower functionsthan those derived from younger donors [ 34]. Cells maintained in long-term cultures and undergoingnumerous passages are likely to di ﬀer in exosome production.Numbers of cells seeded to initiate cultures are very important for exosome production andtheir “purity”. It has been reported for several di ﬀerent cell lines that 36h of subconﬂuency and36h of conﬂuency during a 72h incubation period resulted in su ﬃcient exosome yields and reduced
“contaminations.” Seeding higher cell numbers decreased the levels of exosomes per cell and increasedcontamination with medium-derived proteins [ 13]. Besides regulating the sample purity, the use ofdiﬀerent cell numbers can have a direct impact on the cargo and functions of exosomes, as shownby Patel et al. [ 33]. Therefore, to guarantee the reproducibility and constancy of levels and cargo ofthe isolated exosomes, it is necessary to establish and utilize the same cell seeding protocol. Using asimilar passage of producer cells further ensures the constancy of exosome quality [13].3.3. Medium CompositionThe medium used for cell culture and exosome recovery from supernatants emerges as a crucialfactor in exosome production. All medium components inﬂuence the production and /or compositionof exosomes; this emphasizes the importance of choosing the right components and reporting themin the publications. The medium composition has to be harmonized with the intended vesicle use
and desired exosome “purity”. The medium that best supports growth of producer cells and yields
in the publications. The medium composition has to be harmonized with the intended vesicle useand desired exosome “purity”. The medium that best supports growth of producer cells and yieldsexosomes with a reproducibly stable cargo should be selected and consistently used for culture ofexosome producer cell lines.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 5 of 11The levels of glucose used in culture media play an especially important role in exosome production.Burger et al. demonstrated that high glucose levels enhanced EV production and promoted secretion ofbigger vesicles sized at 250 nm. A proteomic exosome analysis indicated that the high glucose contentsigniﬁcantly altered the molecular composition of EVs, resulting in the presence of exosome proteins,which induced activation of molecular pathways in recipient cells that di ﬀered from those induced byEVs derived from cells cultured with lower glucose levels [ 35]. Similar results were reported by Rice etal., who also measured increased exosome production under high glucose and described an alteredbioactivity of exosomes derived from high versus low glucose conditions [ 36]. On the other hand,glucose starvation also increased exosome secretion and changed the protein content. Gene Ontology
(GO) analysis demonstrated di ﬀerent biological processes associated with the protein pattern found inexosomes from conditioned medium with or without glucose starvation [37].Antibiotics are another widely used component of culture media. It was shown that ciproﬂoxacin,which is broadly used in cell cultures to control mycoplasma contamination, increases the level of DNA,which is associated with exosomes and is carried on the surface of the vesicles. Exosomes derivedfrom ciproﬂoxacin-treated cells showed a DNA-dependent binding to ﬁbronectin [38].Of major importance are medium components, which are highly enriched in proteins and containEVs, such as fetal bovine serum (FBS). Exosomes present in FBS were reported to be biologically-active,and their co-isolation might lead to interference in subsequent in vitro orin vivo studies [ 39]. Thus far,no standardized protocol for the exosome-depletion of FBS exists, and di ﬀerent research groups use
various approaches to depletion of bovine exosomes from sera. One approach is to culture cells in inserum-free medium during the exosomes-release period; however, the missing FBS can lead to extensivestarvation of the cells, can change the cellular behavior and the composition of secreted exosomes [ 26,40].Although cells cultured in serum-free media did not result in EVs with signiﬁcantly di ﬀerent biophysicalor size di ﬀerences as compared with cells cultured in serum-containing media, the quantity of isolatedEVs was greatly altered. Moreover, the levels of certain vesicular proteins (e.g., small GTPases,G-protein complexes, mRNA processing proteins and splicing factors) were found to be di ﬀerent inEVs produced under di ﬀerent culture conditions [ 41]. The use of commercial exosome-depleted FBS isanother alternative. However, the manufacturer usually does not describe the method used for exosome
depletion. Therefore, the ISEV guidelines recommend the utilization of home-generated depletionprotocols instead, provided the protocol used is described in detail [ 14]. A variety of protocols areavailable for exosome depletion of FBS; most involve extensive ultracentrifugation or ﬁltration [ 42,43].These protocols may result in a loss of growth factors present in FBS, decreasing its growth-promotingeﬀects. Since a full depletion of EVs may not be possible, the ISEV guidelines recommend the use offresh media not cultured with cells as controls in downstream exosome assays [ 14]. Speciﬁc miRNAsabundant in FBS, such as miR-122, miR-451a and miR-1246, have been previously reported to beenriched in cell culture-derived EVs, emphasizing the potentially confounding e ﬀect of the FBS onresults of highly sensitive gene expression proﬁling technologies [ 44]. In addition, not only FBS in
culture supernatants but also proteins present in serum or plasma or any body ﬂuid used as a sourceof EVs can “contaminate” exosomes leading to artefactual data in downstream applications, especiallyin mass spectrometry [26].
of EVs can “contaminate” exosomes leading to artefactual data in downstream applications, especiallyin mass spectrometry [26].Since the exosome isolation from conditioned media containing FBS can lead to the co-isolationof exogenous EVs, it was suggested that cells can be cultured without serum using platelet lysates,pituitary extracts, bile salts or synthetic factors instead [ 14]. However, growth factors might exertregulatory e ﬀects on the exosome release. For example, Zhou et al. investigated the role of EGF onexosome production [ 45]. They reported that the production was signiﬁcantly decreased in cells treatedwith EGF, but it increased after treatment of the cells with geﬁtinib (EGFR inhibitor).3.4. HypoxiaHypoxia is an important environmental factor that a ﬀects exosome production. It was shown,that the exosome secretion is elevated under hypoxic conditions [ 13,46]. Moreover, hypoxia altered
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 6 of 11the exosome cargo largely by changing the oxygenation status of the producing cells [ 4]. Thelevels of exosomal markers such as tetraspanins can be altered under hypoxic conditions as recentlydescribed [ 13]. Additionally, several exosomal miRNAs were found to be up-regulated. For example,exosomes secreted by cardiosphere-derived cells under hypoxia had increased levels of pro-angiogenicmiRNAs such as miR-126, miR-130a and miR-210 [ 47]. Kucharzewska et al. described severalpro-angiogenic proteins, which were carried at higher levels by exosomes derived from hypoxiccells. The hypoxia-derived exosomes also had higher activity in the in vitro and in vivo angiogenesisassays [4].3.5. Treatments /Perturbations of CellsIt has been reported that the formation of MVBs and the release of exosomes by producercells is dependent on the intracellular calcium concentration. Monensin, which is a Na+/H+
exchanger that induces changes in intracellular calcium, was shown to stimulate exosomes releasein a concentration-dependent manner [ 48]. In contrast, GW4869, a neutral sphingomyelinase 2inhibitor, was shown to block exosome release in vitro and in vivo [49,50]. Another factor, whichmodulates exosome release, is heparanase. The expression of this enzyme is upregulated duringtumor progression and enhanced heparanase expression or exposure of cells to exogenous heparanasestimulates exosome secretion. Interestingly, heparanase also modulates the exosome cargo composition,as seen by an enrichment of syndecan-1, VEGF and hepatocyte growth factor in exosomes and anincreased biological activity in functional studies [ 51]. Datta et al. used a high-throughput screento identify compounds which directly modulate exosome biogenesis in vitro . Testing a total of 4580pharmacologically active compounds, they identiﬁed 22 compounds that either stimulated or reduced
exosome production. The authors validated the lead compounds tipifarnib, neticonazole, climbazole,ketoconazole and triademenol as potent inhibitors and sitaﬂoxacin, forskolin, SB218795, fenoterol,nitrefazole and pentetrazol as activators of exosome production [ 52]. These ﬁndings indicate that someof the commonly used drugs could be re-utilized for targeting the exosome biogenesis and may alsohave the potential to modulate the cargo composition of exosomes.Oxidative stress has also been described as a stimulator of exosome production. Atienzar-Arocaet al. applied oxidative stress to cells by exposing them to increasing concentrations of ethanol. Thecellular response was a two-fold increase of exosome production, and the exosomes carried higherlevels of VEGFR in the membrane as well as an extra cargo of VEGFR mRNA in the lumen [53].Hyperthermia represents another factor, which alters exosome composition and levels. Exosomes
derived from heat-stressed tumor cells were enriched in chemokines, such as CCL2, CCL3, CCL4,CCL5 and CCL20 and attracted immune cells in vitro and in vivo [54].In summary, exosome production by cells and exosome molecular content appear to be regulatedby a variety of factors and conditions. Cultured cell lines represent an important resource for studiesof exosomes. However, EVs, including exosomes, show a high degree of plasticity in their cargo andthe molecular and genetic analyses of EV-associated components remain challenging.Asin vitro production of exosomes by cell lines is strictly dependent on the producer cell growthand metabolism, the utilization of pre-tested, standardized cell culture conditions is a necessaryrequirement for obtaining su ﬃcient and reproducible exosome preparations.4. Disease-Associated Alterations in Exosome Production /CargoThe levels and cargos of exosomes produced by cultured cells can be readily modulated by
environmental factors or pharmacological treatments. It is thus reasonable to expect that levels and
The levels and cargos of exosomes produced by cultured cells can be readily modulated byenvironmental factors or pharmacological treatments. It is thus reasonable to expect that levels andmolecular cargos of exosomes isolated from blood or other body ﬂuids of patients with various diseasesmight be altered having been produced by diseased cells.Indeed, numerous studies have shown that patients with di ﬀerent types of cancer have elevatedlevels of circulating exosomes in their blood [ 46]. The presence of tumor-speciﬁc proteins in the cargoof circulating exosomes conﬁrms that these exosomes are derived from tumor cells [ 55]. The protein
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 7 of 11proﬁle of tumor-derived exosomes (TEX) shows a high degree of plasticity and is likely modulatedby cancer therapeutics and /or by cargo alterations occurring during disease progression [ 6]. Similarobservations have been made for other diseases such as HIV . Levels of plasma exosomes were increasedin HIV-positive patients compared to healthy donors, and plasma-derived exosomes of HIV patientscarried proteins related to immune activation and oxidative stress [ 56]. Interestingly, the treatmentwith antiretroviral drugs increased exosomes production and altered their content [ 57]. It has alsobeen established that the onset of critical illnesses, such as acute lung injury, acute kidney injury,acute myocardial injury or sepsis, is associated with increased levels and altered molecular proﬁlesof circulating exosomes. In nearly all of these diseases, speciﬁc exosome-associated proteins or miRs
have been identiﬁed as potential disease biomarkers [ 58]. An example is provided by endothelialcell-derived exosomes, which carry high levels of atherosclerosis-promoting proteins and thus havebeen considered as diagnostic biomarkers for patients with cerebrovascular disease [59].Eﬀects of Cancer Therapeutics on EV Production, Content and FunctionA growing body of evidence suggests that novel as well as conventional cancer therapies exertprofound impact on exosome secretion and their cargo composition [ 6,60]. These studies indicatethat exosome levels as well as their cargos might be utilized to predict responses to therapy and evenoutcome. Thus, plasma exosomes have a potential to serve as predictive biomarkers in cancer. Recently,Keklikoglou et al. demonstrated that cytotoxic chemotherapy in breast cancer enhances the productionof exosomes, upregulates the levels of annexin A6 in exosomes and promotes a pre-metastatic niche
formation caused by exosomes [ 60]. Similar ﬁndings were reported by Bandari et al. who demonstratedthat chemotherapy-induced exosomes have a proteome proﬁle that is distinct from that in cells notexposed to the drug. The authors showed that exosomes secreted by cells undergoing chemotherapyhave dramatically altered functions and promote chemoresistance, tumor survival and progression [ 61].Monitoring exosomes derived from the plasma of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)indicated that the patients have high levels of TGF- β1 on exosomes at diagnosis, that these levelsdecrease after induction chemotherapy and increase during consolidation chemotherapy. The exosomelevels remained elevated in AML patients whose leukemia recurred, and they normalized in patientsin long-term remission [6].Other environmental stress conditions, including ionizing radiation, also inﬂuence exosome
secretion. Exosomes derived from irradiated cells can transfer radiation-mediated signals to othercells, transferring radiation-related e ﬀects to the recipient cells, which have not been exposed toradiation [ 62]. Exosomes derived from irradiated cells also show an altered behavior in functionalstudies: they promote survival of irradiated cells [ 63]. Mechanistically, it was shown that irradiationinduces pathways of exosome secretion regulated by TSAP6, which is transcriptionally regulated byp53. Thus, the rate of exosome secretion and exosome composition are inﬂuenced by DNA damagecaused by irradiation [ 62]. Abramowicz et al. reported that the cargo of exosomes produced byhead and neck cancer cells was altered by ionizing radiation. The exosomes produced by the treatedcells contained 472 proteins, whose abundance was signiﬁcantly a ﬀected by radiation delivered atdiﬀerent doses. Most of these proteins were upregulated and only 47 proteins were downregulated [ 64].
Low-level laser irradiation (LLLI) was described to inﬂuence angiogenesis in vitro andin vivo . Bagheriet al. showed that LLLI at high power density directly a ﬀected endothelial cells by promoting exosome
et al. showed that LLLI at high power density directly a ﬀected endothelial cells by promoting exosomerelease [ 65]. This ﬁnding indicates that the ratio of tumor cell-derived to endothelial cell-derivedexosomes in the TME and /or in the blood might be modulated by LLLI.5. ConclusionsThe process of exosome packaging and production in the endocytic compartment of the producercell is characterized by substantial plasticity, which is mainly modulated by stress-related environmentalfactors. The analysis of the exosome cargo emerges as a promising diagnostic /prognostic tool and isof great current interest, because exosomes mimic the content of parental cells in their environment.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 8 of 11However, no “gold standard” for exosome isolation exists, and the exosome nomenclature remainsundeﬁned. Validation of promising ﬁndings reported for exosomes by numerous investigators is notpossible until a uniformly deﬁned methodology for their isolation and characterization is in place. Thisis a major challenge facing the ﬁeld, and while it is being addressed by introduction and evaluationof novel technologies, the results of studies with EVs, including exosomes, remain open to criticism.It is to be expected that the existing limitations in studies of exosomes will soon be resolved andwill conﬁrm the roles exosomes play as messengers of intercellular signaling and as biomarkers ofimpending disease states.Funding: This research was funded by the Leopoldina Fellowship LPDS 2017-12 from the German NationalAcademy of Sciences Leopoldina.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References
References1. Whiteside, T.L. Tumor-Derived Exosomes and Their Role in Cancer Progression. Adv. Clin. Chem. 2016 ,74,103–141. [PubMed]2. Abels, E.R.; Breakeﬁeld, X.O. Introduction to Extracellular Vesicles: Biogenesis, RNA Cargo Selection,Content, Release, and Uptake. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 2016 ,36, 301–312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Akers, J.; Gonda, D.; Kim, R.; Carter, B.; Chen, C. Biogenesis of extracellular vesicles (EV): exosomes,microvesicles, retrovirus-like vesicles, and apoptotic bodies. J Neurooncol 2013 ,113, 1–11. [CrossRef][PubMed]4. Kucharzewska, P .; Christianson, H.C.; Welch, J.E.; Svensson, K.J.; Fredlund, E.; Ringn ér, M.; Mörgelin, M.;Bourseau-Guilmain, E.; Bengzon, J.; Belting, M. Exosomes reﬂect the hypoxic status of glioma cells andmediate hypoxia-dependent activation of vascular cells during tumor development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA 2013 ,110, 7312–7317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
USA 2013 ,110, 7312–7317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Whiteside, T.L. The potential of tumor-derived exosomes for noninvasive cancer monitoring. Expert Rev.Mol. Diagn. 2016 ,15, 1293–1310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Hong, C.-S.; Muller, L.; Whiteside, T.L.; Boyiadzis, M. Plasma exosomes as markers of therapeutic responsein patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Front. Immunol. 2014 ,5, 160. [CrossRef]7. Muller, L.; Muller-Haegele, S.; Mitsuhashi, M.; Gooding, W.; Okada, H.; Whiteside, T.L. Exosomes isolatedfrom plasma of glioma patients enrolled in a vaccination trial reﬂect antitumor immune activity and mightpredict survival. Oncoimmunology 2015 ,4, e1008347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Cui, S.; Cheng, Z.; Qin, W.; Jiang, L. Exosomes as a liquid biopsy for lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2018 ,116,46–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]9. Merino-Gonz ález, C.; Zuñiga, F.A.; Escudero, C.; Ormazabal, V .; Reyes, C.; Nova-Lamperti, E.; Salom ón, C.;
Aguayo, C. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles promote angiogenesis: Potencial clinicalapplication. Front. Physiol. 2016 ,7, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]10. McBride, J.D.; Menocal-Rodriguez, L.; Candanedo, A.; Guzman, W.; Garcia-Contreras, M.; Badiavas, E. VanBone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived CD63 +exosomes transport Wnt3a exteriorly and enhancedermal ﬁbroblast proliferation, migration and angiogenesis in vitro .Stem Cells Dev. 2017 ,26, 1384–1398.[CrossRef] [PubMed]11. Razzo, B.M.; Ludwig, N.; Hong, C.; Sharma, P .; Fabian, K.P .; Fecek, R.J.; Storkus, W.J.; Whiteside, T.L.Tumor-derived exosomes promote carcinogenesis of murine oral squamous cell carcinoma. Carcinogenesis2019 , 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]12. Azmi, A.S.; Bao, B.; Sarkar, F.H.; Asfar, S. Azmi1, Bin Bao, and F.H.S. Exosomes in Cancer Development,Metastasis and Drug Resistance: A Comprehensive Review. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2014 ,32, 1–33.
13. Ludwig, N.; Razzo, B.M.; Yerneni, S.S.; Whiteside, T.L. Optimization of cell culture conditions for exosomeisolation using mini-size exclusion chromatography (mini-SEC). Exp. Cell Res. 2019 ,378, 149–157. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 9 of 1114. Théry, C.; Witwer, K.W.; Aikawa, E.; Alcaraz, M.J.; Anderson, J.D.; Andriantsitohaina, R.; Antoniou, A.;Arab, T.; Archer, F.; Atkin-Smith, G.K.; et al. Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018(MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles and update of theMISEV2014 guidelines. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1535750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Zhang, H.; Freitas, D.; Kim, H.; Fabijanic, K.; Li, Z.; Chen, H.; Mark, M.; Molina, H.; Martin, A.; Bojmar, L.; et al.Identiﬁcation of distinct nanoparticles and subsets of extracellular vesicles by asymmetric-ﬂow ﬁeld-ﬂowfractionation. Nat. Cell Biol. 2018 ,20, 332–343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Gardiner, C.; Di Vizio, D.; Sahoo, S.; Th éry, C.; Witwer, K.W.; Wauben, M.; Hill, A.F. Techniques used for theisolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles: Results of a worldwide survey. J. Extracell. Vesicles
2016 ,5, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Konoshenko, M.Y.; Lekchnov, E.A.; Vlassov, A.V .; Laktionov, P .P . Isolation of Extracellular Vesicles: GeneralMethodologies and Latest Trends. Biomed. Res. Int. 2018 . [CrossRef]18. Tang, Y.T.; Huang, Y.Y.; Zheng, L.; Qin, S.H.; Xu, X.P .; An, T.X.; Xu, Y.; Wu, Y.S.; Hu, X.M.; Ping, B.H.; et al.Comparison of isolation methods of exosomes and exosomal RNA from cell culture medium and serum. Int.J. Mol. Med. 2017 ,40, 834–844. [CrossRef]19. Lobb, R.J.; Becker, M.; Wen, S.W.; Wong, C.S.F.; Wiegmans, A.P .; Leimgruber, A.; Möller, A. Optimizedexosome isolation protocol for cell culture supernatant and human plasma. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 1–11.[CrossRef]20. Stranska, R.; Gysbrechts, L.; Wouters, J.; Vermeersch, P .; Bloch, K.; Dierickx, D.; Andrei, G.; Snoeck, R.Comparison of membrane a ﬃnity-based method with size-exclusion chromatography for isolation of
exosome-like vesicles from human plasma. J. Transl. Med. 2018 ,16, 1–9. [CrossRef]21. Ding, M.; Wang, C.; Lu, X.; Zhang, C.; Zhou, Z.; Chen, X.; Zhang, C.Y.; Zen, K.; Zhang, C. Comparison ofcommercial exosome isolation kits for circulating exosomal microRNA proﬁling. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2018 ,410, 3805–3814. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Rekker, K.; Saare, M.; Roost, A.M.; Kubo, A.L.; Zarovni, N.; Chiesi, A.; Salumets, A.; Peters, M. Comparisonof serum exosome isolation methods for microRNA proﬁling. Clin. Biochem. 2014 ,47, 135–138. [CrossRef][PubMed]23. Takov, K.; Yellon, D.M.; Davidson, S.M. Comparison of small extracellular vesicles isolated from plasma byultracentrifugation or size-exclusion chromatography: Yield, purity and functional potential. J. Extracell.Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Mincheva-Nilsson, L.; Baranov, V .; Nagaeva, O.; Dehlin, E. Isolation and characterization of exosomes from
cultures of tissue explants and cell lines. Curr. Protoc. Immunol. 2016 ,2016 , 14–42.25. Hong, C.S.; Muller, L.; Boyiadzis, M.; Whiteside, T.L. Isolation and characterization of CD34 +blast-derivedexosomes in acute myeloid leukemia. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, 2–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Abramowicz, A.; Marczak, L.; Wojakowska, A.; Zapotoczny Id, S.; Whiteside, T.L.; Widlak, P .; Pietrowskaid, M.Harmonization of exosome isolation from culture supernatants for optimized proteomics analysis. PLoSONE 2018 , 1–15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Serrano-Pertierra, E.; Oliveira-Rodr íguez, M.; Rivas, M.; Oliva, P .; Villafani, J.; Navarro, A.; Blanco-L ópez, M.;Cernuda-Moroll ón, E. Characterization of Plasma-Derived Extracellular Vesicles Isolated by Di ﬀerentMethods: A Comparison Study. Bioengineering 2019 ,6, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Sharma, P .; Ludwig, S.; Muller, L.; Hong, C.S.; Kirkwood, J.M.; Ferrone, S.; Whiteside, T.L.
Immunoa ﬃnity-based isolation of melanoma cell-derived exosomes from plasma of patients with melanoma.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1435138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Immunoa ﬃnity-based isolation of melanoma cell-derived exosomes from plasma of patients with melanoma.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7, 1435138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Palviainen, M.; Saari, H.; Kärkkäinen, O.; Pekkinen, J.; Auriola, S.; Yliperttula, M.; Puhka, M.; Hanhineva, K.;Siljander, P .R.-M. Metabolic signature of extracellular vesicles depends on the cell culture conditions.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2019 ,8, 1596669. [CrossRef] [PubMed]30. Quah, B.J.C.; O’Neill, H.C. Mycoplasma contaminants present in exosome preparations induce polyclonal Bcell responses. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2007 ,82, 1070–1082. [CrossRef] [PubMed]31. Yang, C.; Chalasani, G.; Ng, Y.H.; Robbins, P .D. Exosomes released from mycoplasma infected tumor cellsactivate inhibitory B cells. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 10 of 1132. Chernov, V .M.; Mouzykantov, A.A.; Baranova, N.B.; Medvedeva, E.S.; Grygorieva, T.Y.; Trushin, M.V .;Vishnyakov, I.E.; Sabantsev, A.V .; Borchsenius, S.N.; Chernova, O.A. Extracellular membrane vesiclessecreted by mycoplasma Acholeplasma laidlawii PG8 are enriched in virulence proteins. J. Proteomics 2014 ,110, 117–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Patel, D.B.; Gray, K.M.; Santharam, Y.; Lamichhane, T.N.; Stroka, K.M.; Jay, S.M. Impact of cell cultureparameters on production and vascularization bioactivity of mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellularvesicles. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2017 ,2, 170–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Umezu, T.; Imanishi, S.; Azuma, K.; Kobayashi, C.; Yoshizawa, S.; Ohyashiki, K.; Ohyashiki, J.H. Replenishingexosomes from older bone marrow stromal cells with miR-340 inhibits myeloma-related angiogenesis. BloodAdv. 2017 ,1, 812–823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Adv. 2017 ,1, 812–823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Burger, D.; Turner, M.; Xiao, F.; Munkonda, M.N.; Akbari, S.; Burns, K.D. High glucose increases the formationand pro-oxidative activity of endothelial microparticles. Diabetologia 2017 ,60, 1791–1800. [CrossRef][PubMed]36. Rice, G.E.; Scholz-Romero, K.; Sweeney, E.; Peiris, H.; Kobayashi, M.; Duncombe, G.; Mitchell, M.D.;Salomon, C. The e ﬀect of glucose on the release and bioactivity of exosomes from ﬁrst trimester trophoblastcells. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015 ,100, E1280–E1288. [CrossRef]37. Garcia, N.A.; Ontoria-Oviedo, I.; Gonz ález-King, H.; Diez-Juan, A.; Sep úlveda, P . Glucose starvation incardiomyocytes enhances exosome secretion and promotes angiogenesis in endothelial cells. PLoS ONE2015 ,10, 1–23. [CrossRef]38. Németh, A.; Orgovan, N.; S ódar, B.W.; Osteikoetxea, X.; P álóczi, K.; Szab ó-Taylor, K.; Vukman, K.V .; Kittel, Á.;
Turiák, L.; Wiener, Z.; et al. Antibiotic-induced release of small extracellular vesicles (exosomes) withsurface-associated DNA. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 1–16. [CrossRef]39. Beninson, L.A.; Fleshner, M. Exosomes in fetal bovine serum dampen primary macrophage IL-1 βresponseto lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge. Immunol. Lett. 2015 ,163, 187–192. [CrossRef]40. Eitan, E.; Zhang, S.; Witwer, K.W.; Mattson, M.P . Extracellular vesicle-depleted fetal bovine and human serahave reduced capacity to support cell growth. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 1–10. [CrossRef]41. Li, J.; Lee, Y.; Johansson, H.J.; Mäger, I.; Vader, P .; Nordin, J.Z.; Wiklander, O.P .B.; Lehtiö, J.; Wood, M.J.A.; ElAndaloussi, S. Serum-free culture alters the quantity and protein composition of neuroblastoma-derivedextracellular vesicles. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2015 ,4, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Kornilov, R.; Puhka, M.; Mannerström, B.; Hiidenmaa, H.; Peltoniemi, H.; Siljander, P .;
Seppänen-Kaijansinkko, R.; Kaur, S. E ﬃcient ultraﬁltration-based protocol to deplete extracellular vesiclesfrom fetal bovine serum. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 ,7. [CrossRef]43. Thierry, C.; Amigorena, S.; Raposo, G.; Clayton, A. Isolation and Characterization of Exosomes from CellCulture Supernatants. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 2006 ,3, 1–29.44. Wei, Z.; Batagov, A.O.; Carter, D.R.F.; Krichevsky, A.M. Fetal Bovine Serum RNA Interferes with the CellCulture derived Extracellular RNA. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Zhou, X.; Zhang, W.; Yao, Q.; Zhang, H.; Dong, G.; Zhang, M.; Liu, Y.; Chen, J.-K.; Dong, Z. Exosomeproduction and its regulation of EGFR during wound healing in renal tubular cells. Am. J. Physiol. Physiol.2017 ,312, F963–F970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Ludwig, N.; Yerneni, S.S.; Razzo, B.M.; Whiteside, T.L. Exosomes from HNSCC Promote Angiogenesisthrough Reprogramming of Endothelial Cells. Mol. Cancer Res. 2018 ,16, 1798–1808. [CrossRef]
47. Namazi, H.; Mohit, E.; Namazi, I.; Rajabi, S.; Samadian, A.; Hajizadeh-Sa ﬀar, E.; Aghdami, N.; Baharvand, H.Exosomes secreted by hypoxic cardiosphere-derived cells enhance tube formation and increase pro-angiogenic
Exosomes secreted by hypoxic cardiosphere-derived cells enhance tube formation and increase pro-angiogenicmiRNA. J. Cell. Biochem. 2018 ,119, 4150–4160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Savina, A.; Furl án, M.; Vidal, M.; Colombo, M.I. Exosome release is regulated by a calcium-dependentmechanism in K562 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2003 ,278, 20083–20090. [CrossRef]49. Guo, B.B.; Bellingham, S.A.; Hill, A.F. Stimulating the release of exosomes increases the intercellular transferof prions. J. Biol. Chem. 2016 ,291, 5128–5137. [CrossRef]50. Matsumoto, A.; Takahashi, Y.; Nishikawa, M.; Sano, K.; Morishita, M.; Charoenviriyakul, C.; Saji, H.;Takakura, Y. Accelerated growth of B16BL6 tumor in mice through e ﬃcient uptake of their own exosomes byB16BL6 cells. Cancer Sci. 2017 ,108, 1803–1810. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 4684 11 of 1151. Thompson, C.A.; Purushothaman, A.; Ramani, V .C.; Vlodavsky, I.; Sanderson, R.D. Heparanase regulatessecretion, composition, and function of tumor cell-derived exosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 2013 ,288, 10093–10099.[CrossRef]52. Datta, A.; Kim, H.; McGee, L.; Johnson, A.E.; Talwar, S.; Marugan, J.; Southall, N.; Hu, X.; Lal, M.;Mondal, D.; et al. High-Throughput screening identiﬁed selective inhibitors of exosome biogenesis andsecretion: A drug repurposing strategy for advanced cancer. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Atienzar-Aroca, S.; Flores-Bellver, M.; Serrano-Heras, G.; Martinez-Gil, N.; Barcia, J.M.; Aparicio, S.;Perez-Cremades, D.; Garcia-Verdugo, J.M.; Diaz-Llopis, M.; Romero, F.J.; et al. Oxidative stress in retinalpigment epithelium cells increases exosome secretion and promotes angiogenesis in endothelial cells. J. Cell.Mol. Med. 2016 ,20, 1457–1466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Chen, T.; Guo, J.; Yang, M.; Zhu, X.; Cao, X. Chemokine-Containing Exosomes Are Released from Heat-StressedTumor Cells via Lipid Raft-Dependent Pathway and Act as E ﬃcient Tumor Vaccine. J. Immunol. 2011 ,186,2219–2228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Skog, J.; Wurdinger, T.; Van Rijn, S.; Meijer, D.; Gainche, L.; Sena-esteves, M.; Curry, W.T., Jr.; Carter, R.S.;Krichevsky, A.M.; Breakeﬁeld, X.O. Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and protein that promotetumor growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers. Nat. Cell Biol. 2012 ,10, 1470–1476. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Chettimada, S.; Lorenz, D.R.; Misra, V .; Dillon, S.T.; Reeves, R.K.; Manickam, C.; Morgello, S.; Kirk, G.D.;Mehta, S.H.; Gabuzda, D. Exosome markers associated with immune activation and oxidative stress in HIVpatients on antiretroviral therapy. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Demarino, C.; Pleet, M.L.; Cowen, M.; Barclay, R.A.; Akpamagbo, Y.; Erickson, J.; Ndembe, N.; Charurat, M.;
Jumare, J.; Bwala, S.; et al. Antiretroviral Drugs Alter the Content of Extracellular Vesicles from HIV-1-InfectedCells. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]58. Terrasini, N.; Lionetti, V . Exosomes in critical illness. Crit. Care Med. 2017 ,45, 1054–1060. [CrossRef]59. Goetzl, E.J.; Schwartz, J.B.; Mustapic, M.; Lobach, I.V .; Daneman, R.; Abner, E.L.; Jicha, G.A. Altered cargoproteins of human plasma endothelial cell–derived exosomes in atherosclerotic cerebrovascular disease.FASEB J. 2017 ,31, 3689–3694. [CrossRef]60. Keklikoglou, I.; Cianciaruso, C.; Güç, E.; Squadrito, M.L.; Spring, L.M.; Tazzyman, S.; Lambein, L.;Poissonnier, A.; Ferraro, G.B.; Baer, C.; et al. Chemotherapy elicits pro-metastatic extracellular vesicles inbreast cancer models. Nat. Cell Biol. 2019 ,21, 190–202. [CrossRef]61. Bandari, S.K.; Purushothaman, A.; Ramani, V .C.; Brinkley, G.J.; Chandrashekar, D.S.; Varambally, S.;
Mobley, J.A.; Zhang, Y.; Brown, E.E.; Vlodavsky, I.; et al. Chemotherapy induces secretion of exosomesloaded with heparanase that degrades extracellular matrix and impacts tumor and host cell behavior. MatrixBiol. 2017 , 1–15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]62. Jelonek, K.; Widlak, P .; Pietrowska, M. The Inﬂuence of Ionizing Radiation on Exosome Composition,Secretion and Intercellular Communication. Protein Pept. Lett. 2016 ,23, 656–663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Mutschelknaus, L.; Azimzadeh, O.; Heider, T.; Winkler, K.; Vetter, M.; Kell, R.; Tapio, S.; Merl-Pham, J.;Huber, S.M.; Edalat, L.; et al. Radiation alters the cargo of exosomes released from squamous head and neckcancer cells to promote migration of recipient cells. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Abramowicz, A.; Wojakowska, A.; Marczak, L.; Lysek-Gladysinska, M.; Smolarz, M.; Story, M.D.; Polanska, J.;Widlak, P .; Pietrowska, M. Ionizing radiation a ﬀects the composition of the proteome of extracellular vesicles
released by head-and-neck cancer cells in vitro. J. Radiat. Res. 2019 , 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
released by head-and-neck cancer cells in vitro. J. Radiat. Res. 2019 , 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Bagheri, H.S.; Mousavi, M.; Rezabakhsh, A.; Rezaie, J.; Rasta, S.H.; Nourazarian, A.; Avci, Ç.B.; Tajalli, H.;Talebi, M.; Oryan, A.; et al. Low-level laser irradiation at a high power intensity increased human endothelialcell exosome secretion via Wnt signaling. Lasers Med. Sci. 2018 ,33, 1131–1145. [CrossRef]©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
