Journal ofClinical MedicineReviewInclusion Biogenesis, Methods of Isolation andClinical Application of Human Cellular ExosomesMax Tschuschke1, Ievgeniia Kocherova1, Artur Bryja1, Paul Mozdziak2,Ana Angelova Volponi3, Krzysztof Janowicz1,4, Rafał Sibiak5, Hanna Piotrowska-Kempisty6,Dariusz I˙ zycki7, Dorota Bukowska8, Paweł Antosik9, Jamil A. Shibli10,Marta Dyszkiewicz-Konwi ´ nska1,11and Bartosz Kempisty1,12,13,14,*1Department of Anatomy, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 60-781 Pozna ´ n, Poland;maxtsch@wp.pl (M.T.); ikocherova@ump.edu.pl (I.K.); abryja@ump.edu.pl (A.B.);krzysztof.janowicz.16@abdn.ac.uk (K.J.); m.dyszkiewicz@ump.edu.pl (M.D.-K.)2Physiology Graduate Program, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA;pemozdzi@ncsu.edu3Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, Faculty for Dentistry, Oral and Craniofacial Sciences,King’s College University of London, London SE1 9RT, UK; ana.angelova@kcl.ac.uk
4The School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK5Division of Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Gynecologic Oncology, PoznanUniversity of Medical Sciences, 60-535 Poznan, Poland; 75094@student.ump.edu.pl6Department of Toxicology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 61-131 Pozna ´ n, Poland;hpiotrow@ump.edu.pl7Department of Cancer Immunology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 61-866 Pozna ´ n, Poland;dmizy@ump.edu.pl8Department of Diagnostics and Clinical Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, 87-100 Toru ´ n,Poland; dbukowska@umk.pl9Department of Veterinary Surgery, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, 87-100 Toru ´ n, Poland;pantosik@umk.pl10Department of Periodontology and Oral Implantology, Dental Research Division, University of Guarulhos,Guarulhos 07030-010, Brazil; jashibli@yahoo.com
Guarulhos 07030-010, Brazil; jashibli@yahoo.com11Department of Biomaterials and Experimental Dentistry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,61-701 Poznan, Poland12Department of Histology and Embryology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 60-781 Pozna ´ n, Poland13Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital and Masaryk University,601 77 Brno, Czech Republic14Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toru ´ n, 87-100 Toru ´ n, Poland*Correspondence: bkempisty@ump.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-6185-464-18; Fax: +48-6185-464-40Received: 22 December 2019; Accepted: 30 January 2020; Published: 6 February 2020/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: Exosomes are a heterogenous subpopulation of extracellular vesicles 30–150 nm in range
and of endosome-derived origin. We explored the exosome formation through di ﬀerent systems,including the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) and ESCRT-independentsystem, looking at the mechanisms of release. Di ﬀerent isolation techniques and speciﬁcities ofexosomes from di ﬀerent tissues and cells are also discussed. Despite more than 30 years of researchthat followed their deﬁnition and indicated their important role in cellular physiology, the exosomebiology is still in its infancy with rapidly growing interest. The reasons for the rapid increase ininterest with respect to exosome biology is because they provide means of intercellular communicationand transmission of macromolecules between cells, with a potential role in the development ofdiseases. Moreover, they have been investigated as prognostic biomarkers, with a potential for furtherdevelopment as diagnostic tools for neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. The interest grows
further with the fact that exosomes were reported as useful vectors for drugs.J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436; doi:10.3390 /jcm9020436 www.mdpi.com /journal /jcm
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 2 of 19Keywords: exosome; neurodegenerative disease; cancer; biomarker; clinical application1. IntroductionIn order to maintain homeostasis, cells continuously interact with their environment throughthe secretion of di ﬀerent types of extracellular vesicles. Extracellular vesicles (EVs), comprising ofa heterogenous group of membrane-derived vesicles of varying origin, size, and features, have acrucial role in cellular exchange. Despite the fact that the term has been broadly used for variousforms of EVs [ 1], basic criteria for their deﬁnition have been determined [ 2]. The main division andseparation of nanovesicles are based on the process of biogenesis, size of the vesicles, and cargos [ 3].The largest are apoptotic bodies produced by cells during apoptosis, 1–5 µm in diameter, and generatedby budding directly from the plasma membrane (PM), followed by release into extracellular space [ 4,5].
Microvesicles (MV) are 150–1000 nm vesicles that have a similar method of formation as the apoptoticbodies [ 6]. The smallest and most recently discovered subpopulation of nanovesicles are exosomes,cellular mediators with a diameter of 30 to 150 nm [ 7]. Exosomes are formed di ﬀerently thanmicrovesicles and apoptotic bodies (Figure 1), through the invagination of endosomal membrane,resulting in multivesicular body (MVBs) formation, which later fuses with PM and releases exosomesinto the extracellular space [ 8]. Even though characteristics of microvesicles, apoptotic bodies andexosomes are well understood, the size ranges are only rough estimates. Exosomes are produced bya majority of mammalian cells, such as: B lymphocytes, cytotoxic cells, platelets, oligodendrocytes,dendritic cells, mast cells, adipocytes, neurons, glial cells, endothelial cells and epithelial cells [ 5,9].Exosomes’ release takes place both in physiological and morbid conditions, with these nanovesicles
present in various body ﬂuids [ 10]. For the ﬁrst time, exosomes were observed in 1983, by twoindependent groups of researchers [ 11,12]. They described the externalization of transferrin receptorsduring the maturation of a sheep’s reticulocytes via small vesicles of 50 nm in size. The term “exosome”,deﬁning those structures, was used four years later [ 13]. At the beginning, exosomes were consideredonly as cellular disposal of obsolete proteins and other molecules [ 14]. However, subsequent studiesconﬁrmed their functions in continuous intercellular communication. In 1996, Raposo et al. reportedtheir involvement in antigen presentation and adaptive immune response. It was shown that proteinsbound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II dimers placed on exosomes, which wereproduced and secreted by Epstein-Barr-virus-transformed B lymphocytes, induced stimulation ofspeciﬁc T cells [15]. In 1998, another group of researchers described exosomes’ secretion by dendritic
cells promoting antitumor response [16]. Since then, numerous publications described the importantrole of exosomes in cell-to-cell communication, carrying various molecular cargo [ 17]. The currentversion of ExoCarta online database hosts 41,860 proteins, >7540 RNA, and 1116 lipids that can befound in exosomes [ 18]. Other exosomes dedicated databases with less entries include Exosome RNA,Vesiclepedia, Urinary Exosome Protein Database, exoRBase, and EVpedia. This variety of moleculesproves a signiﬁcant role of nanovesicles in numerous physiological processes, such as lactation, cellproliferation and immune response [ 19–21], but also in pathological states like cardiovascular diseases,neurodegenerative process, cancer development and progression, inﬂammation, or even asthma.
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 3 of 19J. Clin. Med. 2020 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 19   Figure 1. Biogenesis of three types of extracellular vesicles including exosomes, apoptotic bodies and microvesicles. All nanovesicles are released into the extracellular space, however their synthesis is dependent on the state of cell, e.g., apoptotic bo dies are only produced during programmed cell death, while exosomes and microvesicles are secret ed during cell cycle and normal state of cell. 2. Cellular Origins and Chemical Properties of Exosomes Exosome biogenesis is inseparably connected with  the endocytic pathway (Figure 2), such that invagination of plasma membrane during endocyt osis results in early endosome formation (EE). Maturation of EEs into late endosomes (LE) occurs via inward budding of early endosome membranes. Within lumen LE develops as the mult ivesicular body (MVB) containing intraluminal
vesicles (ILVs) [22]. Most of the time, MVBs are directed to lysosomes containing hydrolase, resulting in degradation of their cargo [23]. Otherwise, MVBs migrate to the cell surface to fuse with PM and release ILVs into the extracellular space, that in  turn become an exosome upon cellular exit [24]. Transport of MVBs is directed through accessory proteins: tumor susceptibility gene 101 protein (TSG101), programmed cell death 6-interacting protein Alix, heat shock cognate protein 70 (HSC70), heat shock protein 90 β (HSP90 β), cluster of differentiation proteins 9 (CD9), CD81, CD63, and involves either the presence of ESCRT protein family, known as exosomal marker family proteins crucial in the ESCRT-dependent formation or alternatively sphingomyelinase enzyme in the ESCRT-independent formation [25]. Tetraspanin enriched microdomeins (TEM) assisted by CD81 play major role in sorting of bioactive protei ns, genetic materials and lipids into the exosomes [26]. Zhang et al.
recently described the establishment of exosome based intracellular communication being possible due to microRNAs, which are highly abundant as exosomal cargo mainly demonstrate their function in human plasma derived exosomal species.  Figure 1. Biogenesis of three types of extracellular vesicles including exosomes, apoptotic bodies andmicrovesicles. All nanovesicles are released into the extracellular space, however their synthesis isdependent on the state of cell, e.g., apoptotic bodies are only produced during programmed cell death,while exosomes and microvesicles are secreted during cell cycle and normal state of cell.2. Cellular Origins and Chemical Properties of ExosomesExosome biogenesis is inseparably connected with the endocytic pathway (Figure 2), suchthat invagination of plasma membrane during endocytosis results in early endosome formation(EE). Maturation of EEs into late endosomes (LE) occurs via inward budding of early endosome
membranes. Within lumen LE develops as the multivesicular body (MVB) containing intraluminalvesicles (ILVs) [ 22]. Most of the time, MVBs are directed to lysosomes containing hydrolase, resultingin degradation of their cargo [ 23]. Otherwise, MVBs migrate to the cell surface to fuse with PMand release ILVs into the extracellular space, that in turn become an exosome upon cellular exit [ 24].Transport of MVBs is directed through accessory proteins: tumor susceptibility gene 101 protein(TSG101), programmed cell death 6-interacting protein Alix, heat shock cognate protein 70 (HSC70),heat shock protein 90 β(HSP90 β), cluster of di ﬀerentiation proteins 9 (CD9), CD81, CD63, and involveseither the presence of ESCRT protein family, known as exosomal marker family proteins crucial in theESCRT-dependent formation or alternatively sphingomyelinase enzyme in the ESCRT-independentformation [ 25]. Tetraspanin enriched microdomeins (TEM) assisted by CD81 play major role in sorting
of bioactive proteins, genetic materials and lipids into the exosomes [ 26]. Zhang et al. recently described
of bioactive proteins, genetic materials and lipids into the exosomes [ 26]. Zhang et al. recently describedthe establishment of exosome based intracellular communication being possible due to microRNAs,which are highly abundant as exosomal cargo mainly demonstrate their function in human plasmaderived exosomal species.
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 4 of 19J. Clin. Med. 2020 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 19   Figure 2. Endocytic pathways in the process of exos ome biogenesis. Different steps of exosome biogenesis are demonstrated including early endo some formation, late endosome formation and multivesicular body (MVB) formation, respectively. MVB is then either transported into the lysosome for lysosomal exocytosis or fused with the endoso mal membrane followed by  exosomes release into the extracellular space. Two main organelles are shown including Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum due to their interaction with early endosomes as soon as they are formed from endocytic vesicles. 2.1. ESCRT-Dependent Formation Numerous pathways and molecules are involved in formation of MVBs and ILVs. The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) is the most known ubiquitin-dependent mechanism responsible for sorting ubiquitinated proteins into ILVs [27]. This mechanism was
presented in Figure 3. ESCRT consists of four complexes numbered in order of their action: ESCRT-0 (previously called vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 27/heat shock element 1 complex VPS27/HSE1), ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II, and ESCRT-III. These complexes cooperate with specific molecules, such as: VPS4 proteins (VPS4A, VPS4B, lyst-interacting protein 5 (LIP5)) and Bro1 complexes (Alix, his-domain protein-tyrosine phosphatase (HDPTP), BRO1 domain and CAAX motif containing protein (BROX)) [22]. ESCRT-0 is activa ted by phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate PI(3)P and ubiquitinated molecules present on the outs ide of endosomal membrane. The whole process initiates by recognising and engaging ubiquiti nated transmembrane proteins, promoting their concentration on the late endosomal membrane. ESCRT-0 also recruits ESCRT-I through the interaction between hepatocyte growth factor regula ted tyrosine kinase substrate prosaposin (HRS
PSAP) domains and ESCRT-I subunit TSG101 [28]. ESCRT-I complex is essential for sorting cargo in the MVB and deforming the membrane , resulting in bud formation. ESCRT-II also participates in cargo sorting, additionally regulating ESCRT-III complex formation [29]. Progida et al. suggested ESCRT-II interaction with RILP protein, which also binds with dynein–dynactin motor complex, involved in endosome motility [30]. ESCRT-III is  responsible for the sorting and concentration of MVB cargo, as well as driving vesicle scission. It al so participates in ESCRT recycling via recruitment of the AAA-type VPS4 ATP-ase [31]. Figure 2. Endocytic pathways in the process of exosome biogenesis. Di ﬀerent steps of exosomebiogenesis are demonstrated including early endosome formation, late endosome formation andmultivesicular body (MVB) formation, respectively. MVB is then either transported into the lysosome
for lysosomal exocytosis or fused with the endosomal membrane followed by exosomes releaseinto the extracellular space. Two main organelles are shown including Golgi apparatus andendoplasmic reticulum due to their interaction with early endosomes as soon as they are formed fromendocytic vesicles.2.1. ESCRT-Dependent FormationNumerous pathways and molecules are involved in formation of MVBs and ILVs. The endosomalsorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) is the most known ubiquitin-dependent mechanismresponsible for sorting ubiquitinated proteins into ILVs [ 27]. This mechanism was presented inFigure 3. ESCRT consists of four complexes numbered in order of their action: ESCRT-0 (previouslycalled vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 27 /heat shock element 1 complex VPS27 /HSE1),ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II, and ESCRT-III. These complexes cooperate with speciﬁc molecules, such as: VPS4
proteins (VPS4A, VPS4B, lyst-interacting protein 5 (LIP5)) and Bro1 complexes (Alix, his-domainprotein-tyrosine phosphatase (HDPTP), BRO1 domain and CAAX motif containing protein (BROX)) [ 22].
proteins (VPS4A, VPS4B, lyst-interacting protein 5 (LIP5)) and Bro1 complexes (Alix, his-domainprotein-tyrosine phosphatase (HDPTP), BRO1 domain and CAAX motif containing protein (BROX)) [ 22].ESCRT-0 is activated by phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate PI(3)P and ubiquitinated molecules presenton the outside of endosomal membrane. The whole process initiates by recognising and engagingubiquitinated transmembrane proteins, promoting their concentration on the late endosomal membrane.ESCRT-0 also recruits ESCRT-I through the interaction between hepatocyte growth factor regulatedtyrosine kinase substrate prosaposin (HRS PSAP) domains and ESCRT-I subunit TSG101 [ 28]. ESCRT-Icomplex is essential for sorting cargo in the MVB and deforming the membrane, resulting in budformation. ESCRT-II also participates in cargo sorting, additionally regulating ESCRT-III complexformation [ 29]. Progida et al. suggested ESCRT-II interaction with RILP protein, which also binds with
dynein–dynactin motor complex, involved in endosome motility [ 30]. ESCRT-III is responsible forthe sorting and concentration of MVB cargo, as well as driving vesicle scission. It also participates inESCRT recycling via recruitment of the AAA-type VPS4 ATP-ase [31].
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 5 of 19J. Clin. Med. 2020 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 19   Figure 3. The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-dependent mechanism of sorting of ubiquitinated cargo into the multives icular precursor of exosomes. The process involves accumulation and ubiquitination of transmembran e proteins on to the late endosomal membrane, followed by recruitment of phosphatidylinositol  3-phosphate (PI(3)P), ESCRT complex (ESCRT-0, ESCRT-1, ESCRT0-2, ESCRT-3), RAB-interacting lyso somal protein (RILP), dynein-dynactin complex, AAA-type vacuolar protein sorting-associated pr otein 4 (VPS4) ATP-ase, respectively. Following steps of the ESCRT-dependent sorting are presente d including the input, output and changes in conformation of particular proteins due to their ac tivation, stimulation and reuse. Importantly, upon change in conformation of ESCRT-0 PI(3)P protei n binds and allows ESCRT-0 dependent activation
of ESCRT-1. Active ESCRT-1 signal s back to ESCRT-2 that works in association with RILP protein-dynein-dynactin complex. Once both ESCRT-1 and ESCRT-2 are localized on to the late endosomal membrane, ESCRT-3 is recruited at both sites to fa cilitate pinching in the membrane. AAA-type VPS4 ATP-ase comes at last to pinch off the endosomal vesicle and release it in association with ubiquitinated cargo. 2.2. ESCRT-Independent Pathways The ESCRT pathway is considered to be the mos t important mechanism of exosome formation. However, MBV and ILV formation also occur in a ubiquitin-independent way. Heparan sulphate proteoglycans promote exosome biogenesis through syntenin, a cytosolic adaptive protein. Syntenin binds syndecan with Alix, which interacts with several ESCRT (TSG101 and charged multivesicular body protein 4 (CHMP4)) proteins. It serves as an  intermediate between ES CRT-I and ESCRT-III, and
is involved in the budding and scission processes [7 ]. Moreover, recent articl es indicate the presence Figure 3. The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-dependent mechanismof sorting of ubiquitinated cargo into the multivesicular precursor of exosomes. The process involvesaccumulation and ubiquitination of transmembrane proteins on to the late endosomal membrane,followed by recruitment of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI(3)P), ESCRT complex (ESCRT-0,ESCRT-1, ESCRT0-2, ESCRT-3), RAB-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP), dynein-dynactin complex,AAA-type vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4 (VPS4) ATP-ase, respectively. Following stepsof the ESCRT-dependent sorting are presented including the input, output and changes in conformationof particular proteins due to their activation, stimulation and reuse. Importantly, upon change inconformation of ESCRT-0 PI(3)P protein binds and allows ESCRT-0 dependent activation of ESCRT-1.
Active ESCRT-1 signals back to ESCRT-2 that works in association with RILP protein-dynein-dynactincomplex. Once both ESCRT-1 and ESCRT-2 are localized on to the late endosomal membrane, ESCRT-3is recruited at both sites to facilitate pinching in the membrane. AAA-type VPS4 ATP-ase comes at lastto pinch o ﬀthe endosomal vesicle and release it in association with ubiquitinated cargo.2.2. ESCRT-Independent PathwaysThe ESCRT pathway is considered to be the most important mechanism of exosome formation.However, MBV and ILV formation also occur in a ubiquitin-independent way. Heparan sulphateproteoglycans promote exosome biogenesis through syntenin, a cytosolic adaptive protein. Synteninbinds syndecan with Alix, which interacts with several ESCRT (TSG101 and charged multivesicularbody protein 4 (CHMP4)) proteins. It serves as an intermediate between ESCRT-I and ESCRT-III, andis involved in the budding and scission processes [ 7]. Moreover, recent articles indicate the presence of
an ESCRT-independent pathway for exosome formation (Figure 4). ESCRT-independent formation
is involved in the budding and scission processes [ 7]. Moreover, recent articles indicate the presence ofan ESCRT-independent pathway for exosome formation (Figure 4). ESCRT-independent formationwas initially described in oligodendroglial cells that secreted exosomes containing proteolipid protein(PLP) [ 32]. The secretion of exosomes happened only after depletion of neutral sphingomyelinases(nSMase), enzymes hydrolysing sphingomyelin to ceramide, being indicative as a crucial role ofceramide in PLP sorting into ILVs. Interestingly, exosome secretion was not decreased, despite ESCRTinhibition. Recently, four-transmembrane domain proteins belonging to the tetraspanin family havebeen considered to be implicated in other pathways of cargo selection and exosome formation, in neither
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 6 of 19ESCRT-dependent nor ceramide-dependent manner [ 33]. Human melanoma cells secrete exosomescontaining melanosome proteins, following a CD63-dependent mechanism [ 34]. In human embryonickidney 293 cells (HEK293), the expression of CD82 and CD9 promote the discharge of β-catenin throughexosomes, whereas a study employing rat pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells describes a role for Tspan8in the recruitment of particular mRNA and transmembrane proteins into exosomes [ 35,36]. In 2013,Perez-Hernandez et al. described Tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEM) full of CD81 particles,which is considered to be another ESCRT-independent manner of protein sorting into ILVs [ 37]. Thereare far more molecules and cellular structures creating various pathways of exosome formation, suchas lipid raft domains [ 38], ﬂotllin-2 [ 39], phospholipase D2 (PLD2) and GTPase ADP ribosylation factor
6 (ARF6) [ 40,41], chaperone HSC70 [ 42] and membrane protein of lysosomes and late endosomes calledlipopolysaccharide induced TNF factor (SIMPLE) [ 43]. In conclusion, there are many pathways ofexosome formation and it is still unclear whether the sorting and sequestering of particular moleculesinvolve di ﬀerent mechanisms, and consequently proteins, or if there are various MVB subpopulationswithin singular cells.J. Clin. Med. 2020 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 19  of an ESCRT-independent pathway for exosome formation (Figure 4). ESCRT-independent formation was initially described in oligodendroglial cells that secreted exosomes containing proteolipid protein (PLP) [32]. The secretion of exosomes happened only after depletion of neutral sphingomyelinases (nSMase), enzymes hydrolysing sphingomyelin to ceramide, being indicative as a crucial role of ceramide in PLP sorting into  ILVs. Interestingly, exosome secretion was not
decreased, despite ESCRT inhibition. Recently, four-transmembrane domain proteins belonging to the tetraspanin family have been considered to be  implicated in other pathways of cargo selection and exosome formation, in neither ESCRT-dependent nor ceramide-dependent manner [33]. Human melanoma cells secrete exosomes containing melanosome proteins, following a CD63-dependent mechanism [34]. In human embryonic kidney 293 cells (HEK293), the expression of CD82 and CD9 promote the discharge of β-catenin through exosomes, whereas a study employing rat pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells describes a role for Tspan8  in the recruitment of particular mRNA and transmembrane proteins into exosomes [35,36 ]. In 2013, Perez-Hernandez et al. described
Tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEM) full of CD81 particles, which is considered to be another ESCRT-independent manner of protein sorting into ILVs [37]. There are far more molecules and cellular structures creating various pathways of exosome formation, such as lipid raft domains [38], flotllin-2 [39], phospholipase D2 (PLD2) and GTPa se ADP ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) [40,41], chaperone HSC70 [42] and membrane protei n of lysosomes and late endosomes called lipopolysaccharide induced TNF factor (SIMPLE) [43]. In conclusion, there are many pathways of exosome formation and it is still unclear whether th e sorting and sequestering of particular molecules involve different mechanisms, and consequently proteins, or if there are various MVB subpopulations within singular cells.  Figure 4. Three independent of each othe r processes of ESCRT-independent formation are proferred, including ceramide dependent manner, cluster of differentiation 63 (CD-63) dependent mechanism
and ESCRT-independent formation in human em bryonic kidney cells (HEK293). The ceramide dependent manner of ESCRT-indepe ndent formation relies on hydrolysis of spingomyelin to ceramide associated by the presence of neut ral sphingomyelinases (n sMase). CD-63 dependent Figure 4. Three independent of each other processes of ESCRT-independent formation are proferred,
ceramide associated by the presence of neut ral sphingomyelinases (n sMase). CD-63 dependent Figure 4. Three independent of each other processes of ESCRT-independent formation are proferred,including ceramide dependent manner, cluster of di ﬀerentiation 63 (CD-63) dependent mechanismand ESCRT-independent formation in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293). The ceramidedependent manner of ESCRT-independent formation relies on hydrolysis of spingomyelin to ceramideassociated by the presence of neutral sphingomyelinases (nsMase). CD-63 dependent mechanism ofESCRT-independent mechanism is associated with release of exosomal cargo containing melanosomeproteins from the exosomes secreted by human melanoma cells. ESCRT independent exosomalnanovesicle formation in HEK293 relies on discharge of β-catenin through the membrane of exosomessecreted by CD82 +CD9+HEK293 cell.2.3. SecretionJust as multiple pathways occur during MVB biogenesis, numerous mechanisms and particles
are considered to be involved in exosome secretion. After formation, MVB can either fuse with alysosome to degrade their cargo or fuse with the plasma membrane, resulting in exosome release.Although di ﬀerent MVB fates are known, the mechanism distinguishing both paths remains notfully understood. A recent study by Villarroya-Beltri suggests that ISGylation, a posttranslationalubiquitin-like modiﬁcation of TSG101 (one of the ESCRT-I complex components) induces its aggregation
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 7 of 19and degradation, promoting exosome release by stimulation of fusion of MVB with lysosome. Thisresults in increased exosome release indicating posttranslational modiﬁcations of the cargo proteinsas a regulatory mechanism of MVB fate determination. Continuous transport of MVB to plasmamembrane is performed via their interaction with actin, cortactin, microtubule skeleton and RABproteins, along with their e ﬀectors [ 44]. Hoshino et al. suggested the role of actin cytoskeleton inexosome release in cancer cells. Actin-rich invadopodia seem to have remarkable inﬂuence on thesecretion of exosomes [ 45]. MVB fusion with plasma membrane is facilitated and controlled by thelargest family of more than 60 small GTPases-RAB proteins, which participate in all of the processesconcerning vesicle transport within cells. The details of their action remain unknown, althoughinvolvement of speciﬁc proteins, namely RAB2B, RAB4, RAB5A, RAB7, RAB9A, RAB11, RAB27A,
RAB27B, RAB35, is already conﬁrmed in endosome motility and exosome secretion. Generally, releaseof exosomes requires various RAB proteins. After MVB docking with plasma membrane, SNARE(soluble NSF-attachment protein receptor) complexes facilitate the fusion of plasma membrane andMVB employing the SNAP protein. Until now, two proteins of the SNARE family facilitate exosomerelease: VAMP7 is crucial for the secretion of acetylcholinesterase-containing vesicles from K562erythroleukemia cells, while YKT6 is necessary for WNT3A release from HEK293 cells. Apart fromRAB and SNARE family, there are other e ﬀectors considered to be involved in exosome secretion, suchas diacyl glycerol kinase α(DGK α), V0 subunit of vacuolar ATPase (V0-ATPase) and small GTPases ofthe Rho /Rac/cdc42 family [22,46,47].2.4. CargoExosomes are 30–150 nm in size, double-layered vesicles with density ﬂuctuation from 1.10 to
1.20 g /mL [ 48]. Exosomes have cup-shaped or saucer-like morphology, observable under transmissionelectron microscopy [ 49]. The cup-shape of EVs is observed after negative staining or other non-cryoEM processing, i.e., it has been interpreted as an artefact of this processing as the cup-shape isnot visible by cryo-EM [ 50]. Regarding biochemical properties, exosomes represent a heterogenousfamily of vesicles marked by di ﬀerent compositions and carrying diverse cargo [ 51]. The diversityof exosome secreting cells results in a di ﬀerent protein composition of each exosome subpopulation,although, due to endosomal origins, analogous molecules are commonly found in a majority of thesesubpopulations [ 25]. The common group comprises proteins crucial for MVB biogenesis (Alix, TSG101,clathrin), molecules involved in fusion and exosome release (RAB and other families of small GTPases,
ﬂotollins, annexins, ARF6), adhesion proteins (integrins), tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, CD81), heat-shockproteins (HSP70, HSP90), cytoskeletal proteins (actin, tubulin) and metabolic enzymes (e.g., aldolase1, GAPDH, PKM2). The presence of other proteins, such as MHC II depends on speciﬁc exosomereleasing cells [52].Even though the EVs always have a lipid encapsulation, lipidomics is not the most often usedmethod in EV analysis, and there are few studies regarding proteomic analysis, highlighting aswith proteins, di ﬀerent cells release exosomes of diverse lipid composition [ 53]. The exosomemembrane does not exactly reﬂect plasma membrane of the maternal cell (e.g., enrichmentof exosome membrane in sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipids, as well as lower amount ofphosphatidylinositol in comparison to releasing cell) [ 28]. However, similarly to PM, the exosomemembrane is double-layered with an asymmetric distribution of particular lipid classes in inner
and outer portions [ 54]. Exosomes are enriched in sphingolipids, especially sphingomyelin,cholesterol, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylethanolamine, ceramide,
and outer portions [ 54]. Exosomes are enriched in sphingolipids, especially sphingomyelin,cholesterol, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylethanolamine, ceramide,and glycerophospholipids [ 55]. Curiously, there is an absence of lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA),which is crucial for ILV formation and is found inside those structures. As a plasma membrane, theexosome membrane contains lipid rafts, detergent-resistant domains containing speciﬁc components(e.g., glycolipids, Src tyrosine kinases or glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI-anchored proteins) [ 56].Lipid rafts are involved in exosome formation and the secretion of speciﬁc molecules into theextracellular space [38].
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 8 of 19Apart from proteins and lipids, exosomes carry a signiﬁcant amount of RNA cargo, includingmRNA, miRNA, and other non-coding RNAs, such as lncRNA [ 57]. In 2013, Valadi et al. described1300 mRNA and 120 miRNA particles that are transported to target cells via exosomes, which mayregulate their gene expression and protein translation [ 46]. This horizontal transport of functionalRNA between cells has been observed in vitro as well as in vivo [58–63]. Exosomal RNA di ﬀers frommaternal cell RNA content, which proves the existence of speciﬁc mechanisms and proteins controllingRNA sorting into exosomes [ 64]. Even though the nature of this process remains unknown, RNAbinding proteins (RBP), such as Mex-3 RNA Binding Family Member C (MEX3C) and heterogeneousnuclear ribonucleoprotein A2 /B1 (hnRNPA2B1) are some of the molecules suggested to be involved in
the sorting of miRNA [ 65]. Next to RNA, several studies have described the existence of exosomal DNA(exoDNA) which, in contrary to exoRNA, probably undergoes a random sorting process. Thereby,exoDNA reﬂects the complete genomic DNA of the parental cell [ 66]. Other studies conﬁrm theseresults suggesting that exosomes carry fetal cfDNA, that can be used as a biomarker for pregnancycomplications [67]. On the contrary, study by Jeppesen et al. contradicts feature of exosome as activevehicles for DNA release, suggesting that DNA is more likely released through endosomal mechanismsand autophagy [68].3. Methods of Isolation and Speciﬁcity of Exosomes Isolated from Selected Tissue and Cell TypesExtracellular vesicles, including exosomes, have been isolated from ﬂuids, e.g., plasma, saliva,human breast milk, semen, amniotic ﬂuid, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, bronchoalveolar lavage, bile, urine,
synovial ﬂuid, aqueous humour, tear ﬂuid, nasal secretions, and pleural e ﬀusions [ 2,69]. However,samples derived from bioﬂuids contain an exosome mix of di ﬀerent cellular origins. To analyseexosomes from particular tissues or cells, it is best to collect conditioned media from cultured cells [ 70].Currently, there is intensive research going on, looking at di ﬀerent aspects of the exosomes andfocusing on their isolation. Various methods of isolation, puriﬁcation, and further characterizationare being developed concurrently, however the isolation methods do not only isolate exosomes ornanovesicles but also other precipitates and contaminants. Several methods of exosome isolation havebeen proposed and developed: ultracentrifugation, ultraﬁltration, size exclusion chromatography(SEC), polymer precipitation, immunoa ﬃnity chromatography and techniques based on microﬂuids.Each method and approach have advantages, as well as disadvantages, and is used depending on the
size of exosomes and their origins.3.1. UltracentrifugationDiﬀerential ultracentrifugation is the most commonly used technique of exosome isolation frombioﬂuids and cell cultures [ 71]. It consists of three centrifugation steps with increasing centrifugalforces. First, low-speed centrifugation (300 ×g) is performed to remove cells and large cell debris fromthe cell culture ﬂuid. The second round of centrifugation (10,000–20,000 ×g) is applied to removelarge cellular debris, organelles and MVs. The last round of centrifugation is performed at highestspeed (100,000–150,000 ×g) in order to separate exosomes from the supernatant. To produce exosomepreparations of higher purity, a sucrose or iodoxinol density-gradient medium used to separateexosomes from other nonvesicles according to molar concentration and thus the density of particularphases. Ultracentrifugation is quite expensive, time-consuming, and a large amount of untreated
samples is used, with the possibility of damaging the exosomes during the procedure [21,72].3.2. Size-Based Isolation of ExosomesThis term comprises ultraﬁltration and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). These methods are
3.2. Size-Based Isolation of ExosomesThis term comprises ultraﬁltration and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). These methods arebased on a passage through physical barriers dependent on the size of particles. Ultraﬁltration usesnanomembranes or membranes with di ﬀerent cut-o ﬀmolecular weights (MWCO) [ 73]. SEC employscolumns containing heterogenous pours. These methods do not require special equipment and donot pose a danger of damaging exosomes during the procedure. When it comes to disadvantages,
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 9 of 19the SEC method is relatively time-consuming. Additionally, molecules of the same size rangecannot be separated from exosomes. In /out-put volumes are also an important limitation in SEC.Ultracentrifugation and SEC are of limited accuracy, therefore they are commonly combined with otherisolation methods including ultraﬁltration [74].3.3. Polymer PrecipitationThis method has been routinely used for isolating viruses [ 75] and macromolecules for over50 years. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) or other hydrophobic polymers precipitate exosomes throughchanging solubility and dispensability of the samples. Typically, PEG precipitation solution is combinedwith exosome containing bioﬂuid and incubated at 4◦C overnight, with the obtained precipitationseparated via low-speed centrifugation or ﬁltration. Many companies o ﬀer isolation kits, such asExoQuick or Pure-Exo. However, these methods co-precipitate contaminants, such as proteins and
lipoproteins [76,77].3.4. Immunoa ﬃnity ChromatographyIn this method, antibodies are attached to magnetic beads or other matrices through covalentbonding. The whole process depends on binding reaction between antibodies and speciﬁcsurface-associated proteins expressed by exosomes, such as Alix, TSG101 or tetraspanins, resulting inimmobilization of exosomes on magnetic beads. This method allows to isolate speciﬁc subpopulationsof these nanovesicles, containing only antibody-recognised proteins, resulting in high purity isolate.Additionally, it can be applied for quantitative and qualitative analysis of exosomes. However, this is arelatively expensive method, abd ius not suitable for the isolation of large amounts of EVs [77,78].3.5. Microﬂuidistics-Based TechniquesThis method of separation is based on the physical and biochemical properties of particularexosome subtypes. Isolation techniques based on microﬂuidistics developed may be divided into three
categories: immunoa ﬃnity, sieving, and exosome separation using porous structures. Microﬂuid-basedisolation techniques are in the early stages of development. However, due to their advantages, suchas low reagent volumes, very high purity of isolated products and short processing time, they willbe widely used in diagnostics. The main drawback for their clinical application is a problem withthe fast and e ﬃcient production of su ﬃcient exosome quantities. For exosome isolation and analysis,microﬂuidistics can further be combined with immunoa ﬃnity and sieving [79].3.6. Exosomes of Di ﬀerent Tissue and Cellular Origins3.6.1. LiverExosomes play an important role in communication between hepatocytes and non-parenchymalcells in liver tissue. Using a polymer precipitation technique, Nojima et al. isolated hepatocyte-derivedexosomes containing sphingosine kinase 2 (SK2), a protein involved in liver repair and regeneration
after injury. Exosomes derived from non-parenchymal cells did not induce those reactions, suggestingSK2 to be a speciﬁc cargo of hepatocyte-derived exosomes [80,81].3.6.2. HeartExosomes are considered to be involved in cardiac protection and repair [ 82,83]. Exosomes fromcardiomyocytes were ﬁrst isolated in 2007 from rat primary cell culture, using ultracentrifugation anddiﬀerential centrifugation techniques [ 84]. Since then, a large number of studies described heart-derivedexosomal cargo in physiological and pathological conditions [ 85]. In one of them, the researchersmeasured the level of four cardiac-speciﬁc miRNAs (miR-1, miR-208a, miR-133a, miR-499) in ratmodels of the cardiac ﬁbrosis process and conﬁrmed miR-208a participation in ﬁbroblast proliferationand di ﬀerentiation [86].
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 10 of 193.6.3. BrainFunctions of exosomes in the central nervous system (CNS) are described in Section 3.2. The EVisolation protocol of exosomes present in the CNS extracellular space comprises the gentle dissociationof brain tissue, to avoid excessive cellular lysis, and application of low-speed centrifugation, ﬁltration,and ultraﬁltration, in that order [ 87,88]. Particular subpopulations of exosomes, containing uniquecargo, are secreted by neural cells. Neuron-derived nanovesicles contain a speciﬁc protein, anti-neuralcell adhesion molecule L1 (L1CAM) [ 89]. Oligodendrocytes-derived exosomes carry proteolipidprotein (PLP), one of the major component of myelin [ 90]. Whereas microglia release vesicles enrichedin CD13, surface-associated peptidase [91].3.6.4. BoneExosomes play a crucial role in bone homeostasis. Exosomes are secreted by almost every bone
cell, such as bone mesenchymal stem cells, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, osteoclast precursor cells, osteocytes,bone marrow stromal cells and bone narrow adipocytes, thereby participating in osteogenesis, boneremodelling and resorption [ 92]. The isolation technique most commonly used to separate bone-derivedexosomes is ultracentrifugation, whereas the analysis of bone-derived exosomal markers reveals speciﬁcmolecules, such as osteoclast-derived miR-214-3p, reducing bone formation [93].3.6.5. Adipose TissueExosome release has been described in adipocytes and adipose stromal cells (ADSCs),playing an important role in sustaining homeostasis, through participating in numerous processes:adipogenesis, angiogenesis, nerve regeneration, inﬂammation, regulation of energy metabolism andimmunomodulation. Adipocyte-derived exosomes contain molecules such as adiponectin, resistin,tumour necrosis factor α(TNF- α), retinol binding protein 4 (RBP-4), macrophage-colony-stimulating
factor (MCSF), fatty acid synthase (FASN), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and acetyl-CoAcarboxylase (ACC) [94].4. Clinical Signiﬁcance of ExosomesRecently, the potential application of exosomes as diagnostic targets has gained attention. Howto take the advantages of exosomes in clinical applications is one of the important directions forexosome study. Their properties, such as the fact that exosome content changes signiﬁcantly duringmorbid conditions in comparison to physiological state, has been used as a signiﬁcant starting pointin looking at exosomes as a potential diagnostic tool. Moreover, due to their common presence inbioﬂuids, they are easily accessible in a non-invasive manner. Exosomes secreted by various cellsexpress speciﬁc surface molecules, which can be used to determine their cellular origins. Additionally,these nanovesicles are stable and can be stored long-termm, as their content, used for analyses, is
membrane-enclosed and protected from degradation [ 95]. For instance, loading a bioactive proteinin exosomes avoids the immunogenicity and cleavage by proteases. Tang et al. recently engineeredexosomal Tat to speciﬁcally reactivate latent human immunodeﬁciency virus 1 (HIV-1) [ 96]. Further,CD4+exosomes released from CD4 +T cells seem to hinder spread of HIV virus by competing withviral particles in terms of binding to other molecules and therefore restrict viral replication by forexample delivering active molecules [ 97]. Currently, it is clear that exosomes also are vehicles forHIV particles in acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) infected persons, contributing to theoverall pathogenic e ﬀect. Even though the e ﬀect is still persistent, it is now possible to target themechanisms involved in sorting of the viral particles into exosomes [ 98]. Alternatively, other studieshave shown that exosomes carrying HIV-1 protein Nef (exNef) as their cargo are prone to be engulfed
by macrophages, causing the release of the exNef into the cellular space [99].
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 11 of 194.1. Exosomes as a Diagnostic Tool-Diagnostics in CNS DiseasesIn 2006, Faure et al. provided the ﬁrst direct evidence of exosome secretion by neurons.Subsequently, numerous studies conﬁrmed release of these nanovesicles by glial cells, such asastrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglial cells, and neural stem cells. Exosomes are an important modeof communication between neurons and glia in the CNS, making them crucial for the physiologicalfunction of neurons through the participation in and modulation of numerous processes, includingneuronal maturation and repair, as well as the activity and plasticity of synapses [ 100]. Exosomesecretion by neurons and neuroglia is a reﬂection of their current state as they also readily cross theblood–brain barrier [ 101]. These properties mark exosomes as potential future diagnostic tool forneurodegenerative diseases. Currently, diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases is based on clinical
symptoms, leaving limited therapeutic possibilities due to the high advancement of the disease atthe moment of detection. However, in 2006, Rajendran et al. described the presence of the A βprotein (a toxic protein accumulated in brain parenchyma typical for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) inexosomes released by human embryonal carcinoma cell line NT2a, as well as the presence of anexosome-associated Alix protein in the amyloid plaque of three AD patients [ 102]. In 2011, an elevatedlevel of phosphorylated tau protein (AT270) was found in neutrally derived exosomes extracted fromthe cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) of early AD patients [ 103]. In 2015, Goetzl et al. found out that increasedlevel of cathepsin D, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) and ubiquitinylated proteins,as well as lowered content of HSP70 in exosomes is related to pre-clinical phase of AD [ 104]. Multiplesclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington’s disease and prion
protein-associated diseases are all neurodegenerative illnesses in which exosomes and their contentmay serve as e ﬀective, pre-clinical diagnosis [ 105–110]. Acquired brain injuries could also be diagnosedbased upon exosomes. Traumatic brain injury (TBI), spinal cord injury (SCI) and ischemic stroke lackspeciﬁc biomarkers allowing for fast detection of their nature, extent and a ﬀected region. Exosomescarrying information on their cellular origins may provide these information, becoming potential novelbiomarkers [111]. Exosomes are also a promising diagnostic tool in status epilepticus [112].4.2. Exosomes and CancerExosomes are considered to be involved in numerous mechanisms promoting cancer development,such as pre-metastasis niche formation [ 113], angiogenesis [ 114], migration and invasion [ 115], immuneresponse modulation [ 116], metastasis [ 117], and drug resistance. Moreover, increased exosome
secretion is a key adaptation to hypoxia, facilitating angiogenesis and metastasis in new nicheconditions [ 118]. Small extracellular vesicle loading systems employing exosomes and exosome mimicsknown as small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are being developed as a novel delivery strategy inchemotherapy-based cancer therapies dependent on loading external cargo composed of a tumourinhibiting agent and modifying exosomal surface proteins [ 119]. Recently designed artiﬁcial chimericexosomes demonstrated a better antitumor therapeutic answer with elevated tumour accumulationwhen comparing with conventional liposomes [ 120]. Main challenges of exosome based systemsinclude cancer-speciﬁc methods for loading the cargos into the vesicle and manipulation of the surfaceproteins so that the half-life of the vesicles is prolonged, making them a long lived therapeutic targetto be explored in the near future. Additionally, recent research concerning the native content of the
exosomal cargo might also signiﬁcantly contribute to the understanding of exosomal proteomics,
to be explored in the near future. Additionally, recent research concerning the native content of theexosomal cargo might also signiﬁcantly contribute to the understanding of exosomal proteomics,creating further possibilities for exploring alternative therapeutically relevant agents. As described,exosomes are deeply involved in cancer progression. Thus, the disruption of communication viatumour-derived exosomes is a potential therapeutic treatment strategy that can be achieved through theinhibition of exosome formation, release, or uptake by recipient cells. For example, the application ofsphingomyelinase inhibitors, which participate in intracellular ceramide-dependent exosome synthesis,leads to decreased production of these nanoparticles [ 3]. The small GTPase family of RAB proteins isinvolved in exosome release and could be yet another potential group of treatment targets. RAB27A
blockade was found to result in tumour growth inhibition [ 6]. Exosome secretion is also dependent on
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 12 of 19intracellular calcium levels, with its increase resulting in increased EV release. Application of dimethylamiloride, an inhibitor of voltage-gated Ca2 +channels, results in myeloid-derived suppressor cell(MDSC) inhibition due to the decreased production of tumour-derived exosomes (TDEs), resulting inthe reduced immunosuppressive function of these cells [121].4.2.1. Exosomes as Tumour BiomarkersSolid biopsy is the most common tumour diagnosis tool used in clinical practice. However, thismethod is highly invasive, often unpleasant, and traumatic to a great number of patients. Additionally,biopsies are an impractical for conducting screening and prognostic assays. Hence, clinicians anddiagnosticians have found better means of diagnosis, including the Food and Drug Administration(FDA) approved prostate intelliscore test, EV-based tests available for clinical use. Recently, far less
invasive liquid biopsies are gaining more and more interest, with blood-derived or urine-derivedexosomes indicated as novel potential diagnostic and prognostic markers for many types of cancer.Yoshioka et al. developed a new method for diagnosis of colorectal cancer, called “ExoScreen”.This method is highly sensitive, quick, and easy in terms of execution. Tumour-derived exosomes aretrapped by two antibodies, one speciﬁc to CD9, a tetraspanin protein widely present on the exosomemembrane, and one speciﬁc against CD147, a protein speciﬁc for colorectal-derived exosomes. Bindingeﬀectiveness can then be e ﬀectively detected with the use of immunoblotting [ 122]. Another interestingstudy identiﬁes glypican-1 (GPC1) as a biomarker of early state pancreatic cancer [ 123]. Several typesof exosomes and their cargo (especially miRNA) are also used as preclinical biomarkers in many types
of cancer, such as lung cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, melanoma,breast cancer, prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, glioblastoma, and nasopharyngeal carcinoma [72,124].4.2.2. Exosomes as a Drug Delivery SystemCurrently, drugs and genes are most commonly administered with the use of liposomes andpolymeric nanoparticles. Liposomes are synthetic, sphere-shaped phospholipid nanovesicles composedof at least one lipid bilayer that encloses an aqueous space [ 125]. Nanoparticles are synthetic orsemi-synthetic colloidal polymers of 10–1000 nm in diameter [ 126]. Besides the fact that thesevesicles have been commonly used as a promising administration route for many anti-cancer drugs,anti-fungal drugs, and analgesics, limitations in their usage include the short half-life of liposomesin the circulatory system, varying biocompatibility, and long-term toxicity. Exosomes seem to be
a potent drug delivery system with an array of desirable features being composed of membranesrather than synthetic polymers, which represent improved tolerance by host organism. Exosomalvesicles have promising long circulating half-life, very low or no toxicity, intrinsic capability to targetspeciﬁc tissues or even cells (very important in CNS diseases), low immunogenicity and tend to haveinnate homing capacity [ 127]. Exosomes may also be genetically engineered to pass through biologicalobstacles, such as the blood-brain barrier, penetrate into tissues, as well as carry numerous types ofdrug molecules and genes, such as proteins, lipids, RNAs and DNAs, e ﬀectively protecting themfrom degradation [ 128]. One of the ﬁrst studies describing the usage of exosomes as a drug deliverysystem was conducted in 2010. Curcumin, an anti-inﬂammatory, antineoplastic and antioxidant drug,was administered to mice with lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock. It was found that curcumin
carried by exosomes was more soluble and bioavailable with higher clinical activity [ 129]. Since then,numerous studies on animal models and cell cultures have been performed, such as: exosome mediated
numerous studies on animal models and cell cultures have been performed, such as: exosome mediatedcatalase administration to in vitro cultured neurons and mice su ﬀering from PD [ 130], doxorubicinadministration to human H1299 and A549 lung cancer cells [ 131], or delivery of miRNA (miR-122) tohuman liver hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cell line, as well as HepG2 cell bearing mice in vivo [132].Due to the success of these studies, exosomes have recently been approved as drug carriers in clinicaltrials, facilitating the treatment of melanoma, non-small-cell lung carcinoma, colorectal cancer, cancerof the head and neck, as well as ulcers and type I diabetes mellitus [ 70,72]. Critical challenges inthe context of exosomes as potential drug delivery vehicles for cancer therapies include ine ﬀective
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 13 of 19exosome separation techniques and a lack of puriﬁcation techniques required following the successfulisolation of exosomes [ 119]. Other challenges encompass the limited availability of highly sensitiveexosomal biomarkers, non-large-scale production and low drug loading e ﬃciency [120].5. ConclusionsIn summary, exosomes are the smallest group of nanovesicles, serving as a method of intracellularcommunication. Interest in exosomes has grown tremendously in the past two decades due to theirmultiple functions in both physiological and pathological processes. Exosomes not only allow cells tosend out signals, but also to transport proteins. Exosomes can either be formed in the ESCRT dependentor ESCRT—independent pathways. Currently, the most e ﬀective methods for the isolation of exosomesof statistically relevant purity include ultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography, polyethylene
glycol precipitation, immunoa ﬃnity chromatography, and microﬂuidistics. Exosomal cargo varyaccording to the organ they are derived from. There is a rapidly growing interest in employingexosomes as diagnostic tools for cancer and tumour therapies as well as vectors for drug delivery.There are still more questions than answers in the subject of their biogenesis, cargo sorting and releasemechanisms. Moreover, the isolation of clinical grade exosomes is time-consuming, requiring thedevelopment of new, more e ﬃcient technologies. The understanding of exosome biology is improving,creating a new area for diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic applications to be discovered in thenear future.Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation, M.T., I.K., A.B., K.J.; writing—review and editing,P .M., A.A.V ., R.S., H.P .-K., D.I., D.B., P .A., J.A.S., M.D.-K.; visualization, A.B.; supervision, B.K. All authors haveread and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Gould, S.J.; Raposo, G. As we wait: Coping with an imperfect nomenclature for extracellular vesicles.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2013 ,2, 3–5. [CrossRef]2. Lötvall, J.; Hill, A.F.; Hochberg, F.; Buz ás, E.I.; Di Vizio, D.; Gardiner, C.; Gho, Y.S.; Kurochkin, I.V .;Mathivanan, S.; Quesenberry, P .; et al. Minimal experimental requirements for deﬁnition of extracellularvesicles and their functions: A position statement from the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles.J. Extracell. Vesicles 2014 ,3, 1–6. [CrossRef]3. Shin, S.; Han, D.; Park, M.C.; Mun, J.Y.; Choi, J.; Chun, H.; Kim, S.; Hong, J.W. Separation of extracellularnanovesicles and apoptotic bodies from cancer cell culture broth using tunable microﬂuidic systems. Sci. Rep.2017 ,7. [CrossRef]
2017 ,7. [CrossRef]4. Dignat-George, F.; Boulanger, C.M. The many faces of endothelial microparticles. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc.Biol. 2011 ,31, 27–33. [CrossRef]5. Sturk, A.; Nieuwland, R.; van der Pol, E.; Boing, A.N.; Harrison, P . Classiﬁcation, functions, and clinicalrelevance of extracellular vesicles. Pharmacol. Rev. 2012 ,64, 676–705.6. Bobrie, A.; Colombo, M.; Krumeich, S.; Raposo, G.; Th éry, C. Diverse subpopulations of vesicles secretedby di ﬀerent intracellular mechanisms are present in exosome preparations obtained by di ﬀerentialultracentrifugation. J. Extracell. Vesicles. 2012 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]7. Baietti, M.F.; Zhang, Z.; Mortier, E.; Melchior, A.; Degeest, G.; Geeraerts, A.; Ivarsson, Y.; Depoortere, F.;Coomans, C.; Vermeiren, E.; et al. Syndecan-syntenin-ALIX regulates the biogenesis of exosomes. Nat. CellBiol. 2012 ,14, 677–685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Biol. 2012 ,14, 677–685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Bebelman, M.P .; Smit, M.J.; Pegtel, D.M.; Baglio, S.R. Biogenesis and function of extracellular vesicles incancer. Pharmacol. Ther.. 2018 ,188, 1–11. [CrossRef]9. Théry, C.; Zitvogel, L.; Amigorena, S. Exosomes: Composition, biogenesis and function. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
cancer. Pharmacol. Ther.. 2018 ,188, 1–11. [CrossRef]9. Théry, C.; Zitvogel, L.; Amigorena, S. Exosomes: Composition, biogenesis and function. Nat. Rev. Immunol.2002 ,2, 569–579. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 14 of 1910. Keller, S.; Ridinger, J.; Rupp, A.K.; Janssen, J.W.G.; Altevogt, P . Body ﬂuid derived exosomes as a noveltemplate for clinical diagnostics. J. Transl. Med. 2011 ,9, 1–9. [CrossRef]11. Pan, B.T.; Johnstone, R.M. Fate of the transferrin receptor during maturation of sheep reticulocytes in vitro :Selective externalization of the receptor. Cell1983 ,33, 967–978. [CrossRef]12. Harding, C.; Stahl, P . Transferrin recycling in reticulocytes: pH and iron are important determinants of ligandbinding and processing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1983 ,113, 650–658. [CrossRef]13. Johnstone, R.M.; Adam, M.; Hammond, J.R.; Orr, L.; Turbide, C. Vesicle formation during reticulocytematuration. Association of plasma membrane activities with released vesicles (exosomes). J. Biol. Chem.1987 ,262, 9412–9420. [PubMed]14. Johnstone, R.M. Maturation of reticulocytes: Formation of exosomes as a mechanism for shedding membrane
proteins. The Jeanne Manery-Fisher Memorial Lecture 1991. Biochem. Cell Biol. 1992 ,70, 179–190. [CrossRef][PubMed]15. Raposo, G.; Nijman, H.W.; Stoorvogel, W.; Liejendekker, R.; Harding, C.V .; Melief, C.J.G.H. B Lymphocytessecrete antigen-Presentingvesicles. J. Exp. Med. 1996 ,183, 1161–1172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Zitvogel, L.; Regnault, A.; Lozier, A.; Wolfers, J.; Flament, C.; Tenza, D.; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P .; Raposo, G.;Amigorena, S. Eradication of established murine tumors using a novel cell-free vaccine: Dendritic cell-derivedexosomes. Nat. Med. 1998 ,4, 594–600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Tkach, M.; Th éry, C. Communication by extracellular vesicles: Where we are and where we need to go. Cell2016 ,164, 1226–1232. [CrossRef]18. Keerthikumar, S.; Chisanga, D.; Ariyaratne, D.; Al Sa ﬀar, H.; Anand, S.; Zhao, K.; Samuel, M.; Pathan, M.;Jois, M.; Chilamkurti, N.; et al. ExoCarta: A web-based compendium of exosomal cargo. J. Mol. Biol. 2015 ,428, 688–692. [CrossRef]
428, 688–692. [CrossRef]19. Gu, Y.; Li, M.; Wang, T.; Liang, Y.; Zhong, Z.; Wang, X.; Zhou, Q.; Chen, L.; Lang, Q.; He, Z.; et al.Lactation-Related microRNA expression proﬁles of porcine breast milk exosomes. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e43691.[CrossRef]20. Simhadri, V .R.; Reiners, K.S.; Hansen, H.P .; Topolar, D.; Simhadri, V .L.; Nohroudi, K.; Kufer, T.A.; Engert, A.;Pogge von Strandmann, E. Dendritic cells release HLA-B-associated transcript-3 positive exosomes toregulate natural killer function. PLoS ONE 2008 ,3, e3377. [CrossRef]21. Zhang, M.; Jin, K.; Gao, L.; Zhang, Z.; Li, F.; Zhou, F.; Zhang, L. Methods and technologies for exosomeIsolation and characterization. Small Methods 2018 ,2. [CrossRef]22. Hanson, P .I.; Cashikar, A. Multivesicular body morphogenesis. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2011 ,28, 337–362.[CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Futter, C.E.; Pearse, A.; Hewlett, L.J.; Hopkins, C.R. Multivesicular endosomes containing internalized
EGF-EGF receptor complexes mature and then fuse directly with lysosomes. J. Cell Biol. 1996 ,132, 1011–1023.[CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Bebelman, M.; Bun, P .; Huveneers, S.; van Niel, G.; Pegtel, D.M.; Verweij, F.J. Real-Time imaging ofmultivesicular body-plasma membrane fusion to quantify exosome release from single cells. Nat. Protoc.2019 ,15, 102–121. [CrossRef]25. Doyle, L.M.; Wang, M.Z. Overview of extracellular vesicles, their origin, composition, purpose, and methodsfor exosome isolation and analysis. Cells 2019 ,8, 727. [CrossRef]26. Zhang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Liu, H.; Tang, W.H. Exosomes: Biogenesis, biologic function and clinical potential.Cell Biosci. 2019 ,9. [CrossRef]27. Henne, W.M.; Buchkovich, N.J.; Emr, S.D. The ESCRT pathway. Dev. Cell 2011 ,21, 77–91. [CrossRef]28. Hessvik, N.P .; Llorente, A. Current knowledge on exosome biogenesis and release. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 2018 ,75, 193–208. [CrossRef]
75, 193–208. [CrossRef]29. Babst, M.; Katzmann, D.J.; Snyder, W.B.; Wendland, B.; Emr, S.D. Endosome-Associated complex, ESCRT-II,
75, 193–208. [CrossRef]29. Babst, M.; Katzmann, D.J.; Snyder, W.B.; Wendland, B.; Emr, S.D. Endosome-Associated complex, ESCRT-II,recruits transport machinery for protein sorting at the multivesicular body. Dev. Cell 2002 ,3, 283–289.[CrossRef]30. Progida, C.; Malerod, L.; Stu ﬀers, S.; Brech, A.; Bucci, C.; Stenmark, H. RILP is required for the propermorphology and function of late endosomes. J. Cell Sci. 2007 ,120, 3729–3737. [CrossRef]31. Colombo, M.; Raposo, G.; Th éry, C. Biogenesis, secretion, and intercellular interactions of exosomes andother extracellular vesicles. Annu Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2014 ,30, 255–289. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 15 of 1932. Trajkovic, K.; Hsu, C.; Chiantia, S.; Rajendran, L.; Wenzel, D.; Wieland, F.; Schwille, P .; Brügger, B.; Simons, M.Ceramide triggers budding of exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes. Science 2008 ,319, 1244–1247.[CrossRef]33. Rana, S.; Zöller, M. Exosome target cell selection and the importance of exosomal tetraspanins: A hypothesis.Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2011 ,39, 559–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. van Niel, G.; Charrin, S.; Simoes, S.; Romao, M.; Rochin, L.; Saftig, P .; Marks, M.S.; Rubinstein, E.;Raposo, G. The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and-dependent endosomal sorting duringmelanogenesis. Dev. Cell 2011 ,21, 708–721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Chairoungdua, A.; Smith, D.L.; Pochard, P .; Hull, M.; Caplan, M.J. Exosome release of β-catenin: A novelmechanism that antagonizes Wnt signaling. J. Cell Biol. 2010 ,190, 1079–1091. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Nazarenko, I.; Rana, S.; Baumann, A.; McAlear, J.; Hellwig, A.; Trendelenburg, M.; Lochnit, G.; Preissner, K.T.;Zöller, M. Cell surface tetraspanin Tspan8 contributes to molecular pathways of exosome-induced endothelialcell activation. Cancer Res. 2010 ,70, 1668–1678. [CrossRef]37. Perez-Hernandez, D.; Guti érrez-V ázquez, C.; Jorge, I.; L ópez-Mart ín, S.; Ursa, A.; S ánchez-Madrid, F.;Vázquez, J.; Y áñez-M ó, M. The intracellular interactome of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains reveals theirfunction as sorting machineries toward exosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 2013 ,288, 11649–11661. [CrossRef]38. De Gassart, A.; Geminard, C.; Fevrier, B.; Vidal, M. Lipid raft–associated protein sorting in exosomes. Blood2015 ,102, 4336–4345. [CrossRef]39. Strauss, K.; Goebel, C.; Runz, H.; Möbius, W.; Weiss, S.; Feussner, I.; Simons, M.; Schneider, A. Exosomesecretion ameliorates lysosomal storage of cholesterol in Niemann-Pick type C disease. J. Biol. Chem. 2010 ,
285, 26279–26288. [CrossRef]40. Laulagnier, K.; Grand, D.; Dujardin, A.; Hamdi, S.; Vincent-Schneider, H.; Lankar, D.; Salles, J.-P .; Bonnero, C.;Perreta, B.; Recorda, M. PLD2 is enriched on exosomes and its activity is correlated to the release of exosomes.FEBS Lett. 2004 ,572, 11–14. [CrossRef]41. Ghossoub, R.; Lembo, F.; Rubio, A.; Gaillard, C.B.; Bouchet, J.; Vitale, N.; Slav ík, J.; Machala, M.;Zimmermann, P . Syntenin-ALIX exosome biogenesis and budding into multivesicular bodies are controlledby ARF6 and PLD2. Nat. Commun. 2014 ,5, 3477. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Sahu, R.; Kaushik, S.; Clement, C.C.; Cannizzo, E.S.; Scharf, B.; Follenzi, A.; Potolicchio, I.; Nieves, E.;Cuervo, A.M.; Santambrogio, L. Microautophagy of cytosolic proteins by late endosomes. Dev. Cell 2011 ,20,131–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Zhu, H.; Yu, R.Y.L.; Li, W.; Brancho, D.; Chow, C.-W.; Guariglia, S.; Peinado, H.; Lyden, D.; Salzer, J.;
Bennett, C. Mutation of SIMPLE in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1C alters production of exosomes. Mol. Biol. Cell2013 ,24, 1619–1637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Villarroya-Beltri, C.; Baixauli, F.; Mittelbrunn, M.; Fern ández-Delgado, I.; Torralba, D.; Moreno-Gonzalo, O.;Baldanta, S.; Enrich, C.; Guerra, S.; S ánchez-Madrid, F. ISGylation controls exosome secretion by promotinglysosomal degradation of MVB proteins. Nat. Commun. 2016 ,7, 13588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Hoshino, D.; Kirkbride, K.C.; Costello, K.; Clark, E.S.; Sinha, S.; Grega-Larson, N.; Tyska, M.J.; Weaver, A.M.Exosome secretion is enhanced by invadopodia and drives invasive behavior. Cell Rep. 2013 ,5, 1159–1168.[CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Villarroya-Beltri, C.; Guti érrez-V ázquez, C.; S ánchez-Cabo, F.; P érez-Hern ández, D.; V ázquez, J.;Martin-Cofreces, N.; Mart ínez, D.J.; Pascual-Montano, A.; Mittelbrunn, M.; S ánchez-Madrid, F. Sumoylated
hnRNPA2B1 controls the sorting of miRNAs into exosomes through binding to speciﬁc motifs. Nat. Commun.2013 ,4, 2980. [CrossRef]47. Mathieu, M.; Martin-Jaular, L.; Lavieu, G.; Th éry, C. Speciﬁcities of secretion and uptake of exosomes and
2013 ,4, 2980. [CrossRef]47. Mathieu, M.; Martin-Jaular, L.; Lavieu, G.; Th éry, C. Speciﬁcities of secretion and uptake of exosomes andother extracellular vesicles for cell-to-cell communication. Nat. Cell Biol. 2019 ,21, 9–17. [CrossRef]48. Lane, R.E.; Korbie, D.; Anderson, W.; Vaidyanathan, R.; Trau, M. Analysis of exosome puriﬁcation methodsusing a model liposome system and tunable-resistive pulse sensing. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,5, 7639. [CrossRef]49. Jung, M.K.; Mun, J.Y. Sample preparation and imaging of exosomes by transmission electron microscopy.J. Vis. Exp. 2018 ,2018 . [CrossRef]50. Rikkert, L.G.; Nieuwland, R.; Terstappen, L.W.M.M.; Coumans, F.A.W. Quality of extracellular vesicleimages by transmission electron microscopy is operator and protocol dependent. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2019 ,8.[CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 16 of 1951. Willms, E.; Cabañas, C.; Mäger, I.; Wood, M.J.A.; Vader, P . Extracellular vesicle heterogeneity: Subpopulations,isolation techniques, and diverse functions in cancer progression. Front. Immunol. 2018 ,9, 738. [CrossRef][PubMed]52. Kalra, H.; Drummen, G.P .C.; Mathivanan, S. Focus on extracellular vesicles: Introducing the next small bigthing. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Williams, C.; Palviainen, M.; Reichardt, N.C.; Siljander, P .R.M.; Falc ón-Pérez, J.M. Metabolomics applied tothe study of extracellular vesicles. Metabolites 2019 ,9, 276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Skotland, T.; Hessvik, N.P .; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Exosomal lipid composition and the role of ether lipidsand phosphoinositides in exosome biology. J. Lipid Res. 2019 ,60, 9–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Skotland, T.; Sandvig, K.; Llorente, A. Lipids in exosomes: Current knowledge and the way forward.
Prog. Lipid Res. 2017 ,66, 30–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Moreau, D.; Vacca, F.; Vossio, S.; Scott, C.; Colaco, A.; Paz Montoya, J.; Ferguson, C.; Damme, M.; Moniatte, M.;Parton, R.G.; et al. Drug-Induced increase in lysobisphosphatidic acid reduces the cholesterol overload inNiemann-Pick type C cells and mice. EMBO Rep. 2019 ,20, e47055. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Turchinovich, A.; Drapkina, O.; Tonevitsky, A. Transcriptome of extracellular vesicles: State-of-the-art.Front. Immunol. 2019 ,10, 202. [CrossRef]58. Valadi, H.; Ekström, K.; Bossios, A.; Sjöstrand, M.; Lee, J.J.; Lötvall, J.O. Exosome-Mediated transfer ofmRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 2007 ,9,654–659. [CrossRef]59. Luo, S.-S.; Ishibashi, O.; Ishikawa, G.; Ishikawa, T.; Katayama, A.; Mishima, T.; Takizawa, T.; Shigihara, T.;Goto, T.; Izumi, A. Human villous trophoblasts express and secrete placenta-speciﬁc MicroRNAs into
maternal circulation via exosomes1. Biol. Reprod. 2009 ,81, 717–729. [CrossRef]60. Gibbings, D.J.; Ciaudo, C.; Erhardt, M.; Voinnet, O. Multivesicular bodies associate with components ofmiRNA e ﬀector complexes and modulate miRNA activity. Nat. Cell Biol. 2009 ,11, 1143–1149. [CrossRef]61. Lässer, C.; Seyed Alikhani, V .; Ekström, K.; Eldh, M.; Torregrosa Paredes, P .; Bossios; Sjöstrand, M.;Gabrielsson, S.; Lötvall, J.; Valadi, H. Human saliva, plasma and breast milk exosomes contain RNA: Uptakeby macrophages. J. Transl. Med. 2011 ,14, 9.62. Alvarez-Erviti, L.; Seow, Y.; Yin, H.; Betts, C.; Lakhal, S.; Wood, M.J.A. Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brainby systemic injection of targeted exosomes. Nat. Biotechnol. 2011 ,29, 341–345. [CrossRef]63. Fatima, F.; Nawaz, M. Vesiculated long non-coding RNAs: O ﬀshore packages deciphering trans-regulationbetween cells, cancer progression and resistance to therapies. Non Coding RNA 2017 ,3, 10. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]64. Rahbarghazi, R.; Jabbari, N.; Sani, N.A.; Asghari, R.; Salimi, L.; Kalashani, S.A.; Feghhi, M.; Etemadi, T.;Akbariazar, E.; Mahmoudi, M.; et al. Tumor-Derived extracellular vesicles: Reliable tools for cancer diagnosisand clinical applications. Cell Commun. Signal 2019 ,17, 73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]65. Statello, L.; Maugeri, M.; Garre, E.; Nawaz, M.; Wahlgren, J.; Papadimitriou, A.; Lundqvist, C.; Lindfors, L.;Collén, A.; Sunnerhagen, P .; et al. Identiﬁcation of RNA-binding proteins in exosomes capable of interactingwith di ﬀerent types of RNA: RBP-facilitated transport of RNAs into exosomes. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13, e0195969.[CrossRef] [PubMed]66. Thakur, B.K.; Zhang, H.; Becker, A.; Matei, I.; Huang, Y.; Costa-Silva, B.; Zheng, Y.; Hoshino, A.; Brazier, H.;Xiang, J.; et al. Double-Stranded DNA in exosomes: A novel biomarker in cancer detection. Cell Res. 2014 ,24, 766–769. [CrossRef]
24, 766–769. [CrossRef]67. Koneˇ cn á, B.; T óthová, L.; Repisk á. Exosomes-associated dna—New marker in pregnancy complications?Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 2890. [CrossRef]
24, 766–769. [CrossRef]67. Koneˇ cn á, B.; T óthová, L.; Repisk á. Exosomes-associated dna—New marker in pregnancy complications?Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 2890. [CrossRef]68. Jeppesen, D.K.; Fenix, A.M.; Franklin, J.L.; Higginbotham, J.N.; Zhang, Q.; Zimmerman, L.J.; Liebler, D.C.;Ping, J.; Liu, Q.; Evans, R.; et al. Reassessment of exosome composition. Cell2019 ,177, 428–445. [CrossRef]69. Klingeborn, M.; Dismuke, W.M.; Bowes Rickman, C.; Stamer, W.D. Roles of exosomes in the normal anddiseased eye. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2017 ,59, 158–177. [CrossRef]70. Batrakova, E.V .; Kim, M.S. Using exosomes, naturally-equipped nanocarriers, for drug delivery. J. ControlRelease 2015 ,219, 396–405. [CrossRef]71. Théry, C.; Amigorena, S.; Raposo, G.; Clayton, A. Isolation and characterization of exosomes from cell culturesupernatants and biological ﬂuids. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 2006 ,3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 17 of 1972. Yang, X.; Sun, C.; Wang, L.; Guo, X. New insight into isolation, identiﬁcation techniques and medicalapplications of exosomes. J. Control Release 2019 ,308, 119–129. [CrossRef]73. Cheruvanky, A.; Zhou, H.; Pisitkun, T.; Kopp, J.B.; Knepper, M.A.; Yuen, P .S.T.; Star, R.A. Rapid isolation ofurinary exosomal biomarkers using a nanomembrane ultraﬁltration concentrator. Am. J. Physiol. Physiol.2007 ,292, F1657–F1661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]74. Zeringer, E.; Barta, T.; Li, M.; Vlassov, A.V . Strategies for isolation of exosomes. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc.2015 ,2015 , 319–323. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Lewis, G.D.; Metcalf, T.G. Polyethylene glycol precipitation for recovery of pathogenic viruses, includinghepatitis A virus and human rotavirus, from oyster, water, and sediment samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.1988 ,54, 1983–1988. [CrossRef]76. Yakimchuk, K. Exosomes: Isolation methods and speciﬁc markers. Mater. Methods 2015 ,5. [CrossRef]
77. Li, P .; Kaslan, M.; Lee, S.H.; Yao, J.; Gao, Z. Progress in exosome isolation techniques. Theranostics 2017 ,7,789–804. [CrossRef]78. Moser, A.C.; Hage, D.S. Immunoa ﬃnity chromatography: An introduction to applications and recentdevelopments. Bioanalysis 2010 ,2, 769–790. [CrossRef]79. Liga, A.; Vliegenthart, A.D.B.; Oosthuyzen, W.; Dear, J.W.; Kersaudy-Kerhoas, M. Exosome isolation:A microﬂuidic road-map. Lab Chip 2015 ,15, 2388–2394. [CrossRef]80. Nojima, H.; Freeman, C.M.; Schuster, R.M.; Japtok, L.; Kleuser, B.; Edwards, M.J.; Gulbins, E.; Lentsch, A.B.Hepatocyte exosomes mediate liver repair and regeneration via sphingosine-1-phosphate. J. Hepatol. 2016 ,64, 60–68. [CrossRef]81. Sung, S.; Kim, J.; Jung, Y. Liver-Derived exosomes and their implications in liver. Pathobiology 2018 ,19, 3715.[CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Adamiak, M.; Sahoo, S. Exosomes in myocardial repair: Advances and challenges in the development of
next-generation therapeutics. Mol. Ther. 2018 ,26, 1635–1643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]83. Davidson, S.M.; Yellon, D.M. Molecular aspects of medicine exosomes and cardioprotection e A criticalanalysis. Mol. Asp. Med. 2018 ,60, 104–114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Gupta, S.; Knowlton, A.A. HSP60 tra ﬃcking in adult cardiac myocytes: Role of the exosomal pathway. Am. J.Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 2007 ,292, H3052–H3056. [CrossRef]85. Liang, Y.; Sahoo, S. Exosomes explosion for cardiac resuscitation. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2015 ,66, 612–615.[CrossRef]86. Yang, J.; Yu, X.; Xue, F.; Li, Y.; Liu, W.; Zhang, S. Exosomes derived from cardiomyocytes promote cardiacﬁbrosis via myocyte-ﬁbroblast cross-talk. Am. J. Transl. Res. 2018 ,10, 4350–4366.87. Vella, L.J.; Scicluna, B.J.; Cheng, L.; Bawden, E.G.; Masters, C.L.; Ang, C.S.; Willamson, N.; McLean, C.;Barnham, K.J.; Hill, A.F. A rigorous method to enrich for exosomes from brain tissue. J. Extracell. Vesicles2017 ,6. [CrossRef]
2017 ,6. [CrossRef]88. Pérez-Gonz ález, R.; Gauthier, S.A.; Kumar, A.; Saito, M.; Saito, M.; Levy, E. A Method for isolation ofextracellular vesicles and characterization of exosomes from brain extracellular space. Methods Mol. Biol.2017 ,1545 , 139–151.89. Kapogiannis, D.; Boxer, A.; Schwartz, J.B.; Abner, E.L.; Biragyn, A.; Masharani, U.; Frassetto, L.; Petersen, R.C.;Miller, B.L.; Goetzl, E.J. Dysfunctionally phosphorylated type 1 insulin receptor substrate in neural-derivedblood exosomes of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 2015 ,29, 589–596. [CrossRef]90. Krämer-Albers, E.M.; Bretz, N.; Tenzer, S.; Winterstein, C.; Möbius, W.; Berger, H.; Nave, K.A.; Schild, H.;Trotter, J. Oligodendrocytes secrete exosomes containing major myelin and stress-protective proteins: Trophicsupport for axons? Proteom. Clin. Appl. 2007 ,1, 1446–1461. [CrossRef]91. Potolicchio, I.; Carven, G.J.; Xu, X.; Stipp, C.; Riese, R.J.; Stern, L.J.; Santambrogio, L. Proteomic analysis
of microglia-derived exosomes: Metabolic role of the aminopeptidase CD13 in neuropeptide catabolism.
of microglia-derived exosomes: Metabolic role of the aminopeptidase CD13 in neuropeptide catabolism.J. Immunol. 2005 ,175, 2237–2243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]92. Gao, M.; Gao, W.; Papadimitriou, J.M.; Zhang, C.; Gao, J.; Zheng, M. Exosomes—The enigmatic regulators ofbone homeostasis. Bone Res. 2018 ,6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]93. Li, D.; Liu, J.; Guo, B.; Liang, C.; Dang, L.; Lu, C.; He, X.; Cheung, H.; Xu, L.; Lu, C.; et al. Osteoclast-Derivedexosomal miR-214-3p inhibits osteoblastic bone formation. Nat. Commun. 2016 ,7, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]94. Zhang, Y.; Yu, M.; Tian, W. Physiological and pathological impact of exosomes of adipose tissue. Cell Prolif.2016 ,49, 3–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 18 of 1995. Boukouris, S.; Mathivanan, S. Exosomes in bodily ﬂuids are a highly stable resource of disease biomarkers.Proteom. Clin. Appl. 2015 ,9, 358–367. [CrossRef]96. Tang, X.; Lu, H.; Dooner, M.; Chapman, S.; Quesenberry, P .J.; Ramratnam, B. Exosomal Tat protein activateslatent HIV-1 in primary, resting CD4 +T lymphocytes. JCI Insight 2018 ,3. [CrossRef]97. Dias, M.V .S.; Costa, C.S.; Da Silva, L.L.P . The ambiguous roles of extracellular vesicles in HIV replication andpathogenesis. Front. Microbiol. 2018 ,9, 2411. [CrossRef]98. Patters, B.J.; Kumar, S. The role of exosomal transport of viral agents in persistent HIV pathogenesis.Retrovirology 2018 ,15, 79. [CrossRef]99. Mukhamedova, N.; Hoang, A.; Dragoljevic, D.; Dubrovsky, L.; Pushkarsky, T.; Low, H.; Ditiatkovski, M.;Fu, Y.; Ohkawa, R.; Meikle, P .J.; et al. Exosomes containing HIV protein Nef reorganize lipid rafts potentiating
inﬂammatory response in bystander cells. PLOS Pathog. 2019 ,15, e1007907. [CrossRef]100. Saeedi, S.; Israel, S.; Nagy, C.; Turecki, G. The emerging role of exosomes in mental disorders. Transl. Psychiatry2019 ,9, 122. [CrossRef]101. Zagrean, A.M.; Hermann, D.M.; Opris, I.; Zagrean, L.; Popa-Wagner, A. Multicellular crosstalk betweenexosomes and the neurovascular unit after cerebral ischemia. therapeutic implications. Front. Neurosci. 2018 ,12, 811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]102. Rajendran, L.; Honsho, M.; Zahn, T.R.; Keller, P .; Geiger, K.D.; Verkade, P .; Simons, K. Sciences of the USA11172–11177. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006 ,103, 11172–11177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]103. Saman, S.; Kim, W.H.; Raya, M.; Visnick, Y.; Miro, S.; Saman, S.; Jackson, B.; Mckee, A.; Alvarez, V .E.;Lee, N.C.Y.; et al. Exosome-Associated tau is secreted in tauopathy models and is selectively phosphorylated
in cerebrospinal ﬂuid in early Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem. 2012 ,287, 3842–3849. [CrossRef] [PubMed]104. Goetzl, E.J.; Boxer, A.; Schwartz, J.B.; Abner, E.L.; Petersen, R.C.; Miller, B.L.; Kapogiannis, D. Alteredlysosomal proteins in neural-derived plasma exosomes in preclinical Alzheimer disease. Neurology 2015 ,85,40–47. [CrossRef]105. Kanninen, K.M.; Bister, N.; Koistinaho, J.; Malm, T. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Exosomes as new diagnostictools in CNS diseases. BBA Mol. Basis Dis. 2016 ,1862 , 403–410. [CrossRef]106. Benussi, L.; Ciani, M.; Tonoli, E.; Morbin, M.; Palamara, L.; Albani, D.; Fusco, F.; Forloni, G.; Glionna, M.;Baco, M.; et al. Loss of exosomes in progranulin-associated frontotemporal dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 2016 ,40, 41–49. [CrossRef]107. Fraser, K.B.; Rawlins, A.B.; Clark, R.G.; Alcalay, R.N.; Standaert, D.G.; Liu, N.; Parkinson’s Disease Biomarker
Program Consortium; West, A.B. Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in urinary exosomes is elevated in idiopathic Parkinson’sdisease. Mov. Disord. 2016 ,31, 1543–1550. [CrossRef]108. Westergard, T.; Jensen, B.K.; Wen, X.; Cai, J.; Kropf, E.; Iacovitti, L.; Pasinelli, P .; Trotti, D. Cell-to-Celltransmission of dipeptide repeat proteins linked to C9orf72-ALS /FTD. Cell Rep. 2016 ,17, 645–652. [CrossRef]109. Zhang, W.; Ou, X.; Wu, X. Proteomics proﬁling of plasma exosomes in epithelial ovarian cancer: A potentialrole in the coagulation cascade, diagnosis and prognosis. Int. J. Oncol. 2019 ,54, 1719–1733. [CrossRef]110. Hartmann, A.; Muth, C.; Dabrowski, O.; Krasemann, S.; Glatzel, M. Exosomes and the prion protein: Morethan one truth. Front. Neurosci. 2017 ,11, 194. [CrossRef]111. Kenney, K.; Motamedi, V .; Puccio, A.; Diaz-Arrastia, R.; Edwards, K.; Gill, J. Exosomes in acquired neurologicaldisorders: New insights into pathophysiology and treatment. Mol. Neurobiol. 2018 ,55, 9280–9293.
112. Karttunen, J.; Heiskanen, M.; Lipponen, A.; Poulsen, D.; Pitkänen, A. Extracellular vesicles as diagnosticsand therapeutics for structural epilepsies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
and therapeutics for structural epilepsies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]113. Costa-Silva, B.; Aiello, N.M.; Ocean, A.J.; Singh, S.; Zhang, H.; Thakur, B.K.; Becker, A.; Hoshino, A.;Mark, M.T.; Molina, H.; et al. Pancreatic cancer exosomes initiate pre-metastatic niche formation in the liver.Nat. Cell Biol. 2015 ,17, 816–826. [CrossRef] [PubMed]114. Skog, J.; Wurdinger, T.; Rijn SVan Meijer, D.; Gainche, L.; Sena-esteves, M.; Curry, W.T., Jr.; Carter, R.S.;Krichevsky, A.M.; Breakeﬁeld, O.X. Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and protein that promotepromote tumor growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers Johan. Nat. Cell Biol. 2012 ,10, 1470–1476.[CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Luga, V .; Zhang, L.; Viloria-Petit, A.M.; Ogunjimi, A.A.; Inanlou, M.R.; Chiu, E.; Buchanan, M.; Hosein, A.N.;Basik, M.; Wrana, J.L. Exosomes mediate stromal mobilization of autocrine Wnt-PCP signaling in breastcancer cell migration. Cell2012 ,151, 1542–1556. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2020 ,9, 436 19 of 19116. Kurywchak, P .; Tavormina, J.; Kalluri, R. The emerging roles of exosomes in the modulation of immuneresponses in cancer. Genome Med. 2018 ,10, 23. [CrossRef]117. O’Driscoll, L. Expanding on exosomes and ectosomes in cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 2015 ,372, 2359–2362.[CrossRef]118. Mao, Y.; Wang, Y.; Dong, L.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C.; Zhang, Q.; Yang, S.; Cao, L.; Zhang, X.; et al.Hypoxic exosomes facilitate angiogenesis and metastasis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma throughaltering the phenotype and transcriptome of endothelial cells. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 2019 ,38, 389.[CrossRef]119. Zhang, Y.-F.; Shi, J.-B.; Li, C. Small extracellular vesicle loading systems in cancer therapy: Current statusand the way forward. Cytotherapy 2019 ,21, 1122–1136. [CrossRef]120. Zhang, K.L.; Wang, Y.J.; Sun, J.; Zhou, J.; Xing, C.; Huang, G.; Li, J.; Yang, H. Artiﬁcial chimeric exosomes for
anti-phagocytosis and targeted cancer therapy. Chem. Sci. 2019 ,10, 1555–1561. [CrossRef]121. Chalmin, F.; Ladoire, S.; Mignot, G.; Vincent, J.; Bruchard, M.; Remy-Martin, J.-P .; Boireau, W.; Rouleau, A.;Simon, B.; Lanneau, D.; et al. Membrane-associated Hsp72 from tumor-derived exosomes mediatesSTAT3-dependent immunosuppressive function of mouse and human myeloid-derived suppressor cells.J. Clin. Investig. 2010 ,120, 457–471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]122. Yoshioka, Y.; Kosaka, N.; Konishi, Y.; Ohta, H.; Okamoto, H.; Sonoda, H.; Nonaka, R.; Yamamoto, H.; Ishii, H.;Mori, M.; et al. Ultra-sensitive liquid biopsy of circulating extracellular vesicles using ExoScreen. Nat.Commun. 2014 ,5, 3591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]123. Melo, S.A.; Luecke, L.B.; Kahlert, C.; Fernandez, A.F.; Seth, T.; Kaye, J.; LeBleu, V .S.; Mittendorf, E.A.; Weitz, J.;Rahbari, N.; et al. Glypican-1 identieﬁes cancer exosomes and facilitates early detection of cancer. Nature2015 ,523, 177–182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2015 ,523, 177–182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]124. Xu, R.; Rai, A.; Chen, M.; Suwakulsiri, W.; Greening, D.W.; Simpson, R.J. Extracellular vesicles incancer—Implications for future improvements in cancer care. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2018 ,15, 617–638.[CrossRef] [PubMed]125. Sercombe, L.; Veerati, T.; Moheimani, F.; Wu, S.Y.; Sood, A.K.; Hua, S. Advances and challenges of liposomeassisted drug delivery. Front. Pharmacol. 2015 ,6, 1–13. [CrossRef]126. Agrawal, U.; Sharma, R.; Gupta, M.; Vyas, S.P . Is nanotechnology a boon for oral drug delivery? Drug Discov.Today 2014 ,19, 1530–1546. [CrossRef]127. Chai, R.; Wee, R.; Yeo, Y.; Hian, K.; Kiang, S. Exosomes for drug deliver—A novel application for themesenchymal stem cell. Biotechnol. Adv. 2013 ,31, 543–551.128. Ha, D.; Yang, N.; Nadithe, V . Exosomes as therapeutic drug carriers and delivery vehicles across biologicalmembranes: Current perspectives and future challenges. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 2016 ,6, 287–296. [CrossRef]
129. Sun, D.; Zhuang, X.; Xiang, X.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, S.; Liu, C.; Barnes, S.; Grizzle, W.; Miller, D.; Zhang, H.A novel nanoparticle drug delivery system: The anti-inﬂammatory activity of curcumin is enhanced whenencapsulated in exosomes. Mol. Ther. 2010 ,18, 1606–1614. [CrossRef]130. Haney, M.J.; Klyachko, N.L.; Zhao, Y.; Gupta, R.; Plotnikova, E.G.; He, Z.; Patel, T.; Piroyan, A.; Sokolsky, M.;Kabanov, A.V .; et al. Exosomes as drug delivery vehicles for Parkinson’s disease therapy. J. Control Release2015 ,207, 18–30. [CrossRef]131. Srivastava, A.; Amreddy, N.; Babu, A.; Panneerselvam, J.; Mehta, M.; Muralidharan, R.; Chen, A.; Zhao, Y.D.;Razaq, M.; Riedinger, N.; et al. Nanosomes carrying doxorubicin exhibit potent anticancer activity againsthuman lung cancer cells. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 38541.132. Lou, G.; Song, X.; Yang, F.; Wu, S.; Wang, J.; Chen, Z.; Liu, Y. Exosomes derived from miR-122-modiﬁed
adipose tissue-derived MSCs increase chemosensitivity of hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Hematol. Oncol. 2015 ,8, 122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
adipose tissue-derived MSCs increase chemosensitivity of hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Hematol. Oncol. 2015 ,8, 122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
