Citation: Honda, M.; Kageyama, H.;Zhang, Y.; Hibino, T.; Goto, M. OralSupplementation with Z-Isomer-RichAstaxanthin Inhibits UltravioletLight-Induced Skin Damage inGuinea Pigs. Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414.https://doi.org/10.3390/md20070414Academic Editor: Marialuisa MennaReceived: 1 June 2022Accepted: 23 June 2022Published: 24 June 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).marine drugs ArticleOral Supplementation with Z-Isomer-Rich Astaxanthin InhibitsUltraviolet Light-Induced Skin Damage in Guinea PigsMasaki Honda1,*, Hakuto Kageyama1,2, Yelin Zhang1,3, Takashi Hibino1,2and Motonobu Goto4
1Faculty of Science & Technology, Meijo University, 1-501 Shiogamaguchi, Tempaku-ku,Nagoya 468-8502, Japan; kageyama@meijo-u.ac.jp (H.K.); ryelinz956@gmail.com (Y.Z.);hibino@meijo-u.ac.jp (T.H.)2Graduate School of Environmental and Human Sciences, Meijo University, Nagoya 468-8502, Japan3Department of Materials Process Engineering, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan4Institute of Innovation for Future Society , Nagoya University , Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan;goto.motonobu@material.nagoya-u.ac.jp*Correspondence: honda@meijo-u.ac.jp; Tel.: +81-52-838-2284Abstract: The effect of oral supplementation with astaxanthin of different Z-isomer ratios on ultravio-let (UV) light-induced skin damage in guinea pigs was investigated. Astaxanthin with a high Z-isomercontent was prepared from the all- E-isomer via thermal isomerization. Intact (all- E)-astaxanthin andthe prepared Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin were suspended in soybean oil and fed to guinea pigs for
three weeks. The UV-light irradiation was applied to the dorsal skin on the seventh day after the startof the test diet supplementation, and skin parameters, such as elasticity, transepidermal water loss(TEWL), and pigmentation (melanin and erythema values), were evaluated. The accumulation ofastaxanthin in the dorsal skin was almost the same after consumption of the all- E-isomer-rich astaxan-thin diet (E-AST-D; total Z-isomer ratio = 3.2%) and the Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin diet (Z-AST-D; totalZ-isomer ratio = 84.4%); however, the total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin was higher in thecase of the Z-AST-D supplementation. Both diets inhibited UV light-induced skin-damaging effects,such as the reduction in elasticity and the increase in TEWL level. Between E-AST-D and Z-AST-D,Z-AST-D showed better skin-protective ability against UV-light exposure than E-AST-D, which might
be because of the greater UV-light-shielding ability of astaxanthin Z-isomers than the all- E-isomer.Furthermore, supplementation with Z-AST-D resulted in a greater reduction in skin pigmentationcaused by astaxanthin accumulation compared to that of E-AST-D. This study indicates that dietaryastaxanthin accumulates in the skin and appears to prevent UV light-induced skin damage, and theZ-isomers are more potent oral sunscreen agents than the all- E-isomer.Keywords: Astaxanthin; geometrical isomer; UV-light irradiation; skin damage; elasticity; transepidermalwater loss; melanin synthesis; guinea pigs1. IntroductionAstaxanthin (C 40H52O4), which is found in various microorganisms (e.g., Haematococcuspluvialis and Paracoccus carotinifaciens ) and seafoods (e.g., salmon and shrimp), is a dark-redpigment belonging to the xanthophyll subclass of carotenoids [ 1–3]. This carotenoid haspotent antioxidant activity, 100-fold higher, for example, than that of α-tocopherol and
10-fold higher than that of other carotenoids, such as β-carotene and lutein [ 4,5]. Several
potent antioxidant activity, 100-fold higher, for example, than that of α-tocopherol and10-fold higher than that of other carotenoids, such as β-carotene and lutein [ 4,5]. Severalstudies have demonstrated that the daily intake of astaxanthin has excellent effects onhuman health and beauty [ 6–10]. In particular, astaxanthin has been reported to preventultraviolet (UV) light-induced skin damage and exhibits multiple biological activitiesthat preserve skin health [ 7–10]. For example, Li et al. (2020) reported that astaxanthinsupplementation reduced UV light-induced thickening and capillary regression in theskin of hairless mice [ 8]. Moreover, Ito et al. (2018) investigated the effects of dietaryastaxanthin on UV light-induced skin deterioration in healthy Japanese participants andMar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414. https://doi.org/10.3390/md20070414 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/marinedrugs
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 2 of 12demonstrated that astaxanthin supplementation led to an increased minimal erythema doseand reduced the loss of skin moisture in the irradiated area compared with the placebo [ 9].Thus, astaxanthin has a profound effect on skin health. However, the bioavailabilityof carotenoids, including astaxanthin, is generally very low [ 11,12]; therefore, to obtainmaximum beneﬁts, it is essential to improve their bioavailability after oral intake.In recent years, several studies have reported that the “ Z-isomerization” of carotenoidsis very effective in improving their bioavailability (incidentally, most natural and syntheticcarotenoids exist in the all- E-conﬁguration) [ 12–15]. For example, an oral supplementa-tion trial in rats fed with all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin (total Z-isomer ratio = 0.5%) orZ-isomer-rich astaxanthin (total Z-isomer ratio = 80.8%) demonstrated that supplementa-
tion with Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin resulted in 36.8-and 12.2-fold increases in astaxanthinconcentrations in the plasma and skin, respectively, compared to all- E-isomer-rich astax-anthin [ 15]. This study also showed that when rats were fed Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin,the total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin was signiﬁcantly increased compared tothat of rats fed all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin; that is, the total Z-isomer ratios in the skinwere approximately 50 and 10%, respectively [ 15]. Several studies have demonstratedthat astaxanthin Z-isomers have greater antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory activity lev-els than those of the all- E-isomer [ 16,17]. Therefore, there is a possibility that the intakeof astaxanthin Z-isomers is preferable to that of the all- E-isomer for skin health. To ourknowledge, no previous study has investigated the effects of oral supplementation withZ-isomer-rich astaxanthin on skin health and UV light-induced skin deterioration. As
previous studies have used H. pluvialis as a source of astaxanthin [ 7–10], it is predictedthat most astaxanthin was in the all- E-conﬁguration [ 18]. This study aimed to evaluatethe protective effects of astaxanthin with different Z-isomer ratios on UV light-inducedskin deterioration. Speciﬁcally, the effects of oral supplementation with all- E-isomer-rich orZ-isomer-rich astaxanthin on UV light-induced changes in skin elasticity, transepidermalwater loss (TEWL), and pigmentation were studied in guinea pigs. In addition, subjectiveskin conditions and epidermal thickness were analyzed using a visual analog scale.2. Results2.1. Proﬁle of the Astaxanthin DietsThe HPLC chromatograms of an (all- E)-astaxanthin-rich diet (E-AST-D) and a ( Z)-astaxanthin-rich diet (Z-AST-D) are shown in Figure 1a. The total Z-isomer ratios ofE-AST-D and Z-AST-D were 3.2 and 84.4%, respectively. The predominant astaxanthin
Z-isomers in Z-AST-D were the 9 Z- and 13 Z-isomers, representing 18.5% and 38.4%, respec-tively, of the total astaxanthin content. Moreover, the 15 Z-isomer and three unidentiﬁedZ-isomers (possibly the di- Z-isomers [ 19–22]) were also present. The absorption spectra ofastaxanthin isomers are shown in Figure 1b. In comparison with the spectrum of (all- E)-astaxanthin, the spectra of the Z-isomers shifted towards shorter wavelengths (Table S1).For the 9 Z, 13Z-, and 15 Z-isomers, in addition to the absorption spectrum characteristic ofastaxanthin, a maximum absorption wavelength was observed around 366 nm, which is inthe UV-A region (Figure 1b and Table S1).2.2. Astaxanthin Concentration and Isomer Ratio in the Plasma and Dorsal SkinThe effects of oral supplementation with astaxanthin of different Z-isomer ratios(E-AST-D and Z-AST-D) on astaxanthin concentration and isomer ratios in the plasma
and dorsal skin of guinea pigs after the 13-day UV-light irradiation were evaluated(Figures 2 and S1) . Non-UV-irradiated areas of the dorsal skin were also examined. In
and dorsal skin of guinea pigs after the 13-day UV-light irradiation were evaluated(Figures 2 and S1) . Non-UV-irradiated areas of the dorsal skin were also examined. Inthe placebo group (supplemented with medium soybean oil), astaxanthin was not detectedin the plasma and dorsal skin, whereas in those fed E-AST-D and Z-AST-D, astaxanthinisomers were detected. The supplementation with Z-AST-D resulted in 26.5 times higherplasma astaxanthin concentration than that of E-AST-D.
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 3 of 12Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 13   were detected . The supplementation with Z-AST -D resulted in 26.5 times higher plasma astaxanthin concent ration than that of E-AST -D.  Figure 1. (a) Normal -phase HPLC chromatograms of an (all-E)-astaxanthin -rich diet (E -AST -D; total Z-isomer ratio = 3.2%) and a (Z)-astaxanthin -rich diet (Z -AST -D; total Z-isomer ratio = 84.4%) and (b) absorption spectra of peaks a –c and (all -E)-, (9Z)-, (13Z)-, and (15 Z)-astaxanthin. Peaks a –c were tentatively identified as astaxanthin Z-isomers [19 –22].  Figure 2. The e ffects of supplementation with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D on astaxanthin concentrations in (a) plasma and ( b) dorsal skin with or without UV -light irradiation and total Z-isomers ratios of astaxanthin in ( c) plasma and ( d) dorsal skin with or without UV -light irradiation.  Error bars
Figure 1. (a) Normal-phase HPLC chromatograms of an (all- E)-astaxanthin-rich diet (E-AST-D; totalZ-isomer ratio = 3.2%) and a ( Z)-astaxanthin-rich diet (Z-AST-D; total Z-isomer ratio = 84.4%) and(b) absorption spectra of peaks a–c and (all- E)-, (9 Z)-, (13 Z)-, and (15 Z)-astaxanthin. Peaks a–c weretentatively identiﬁed as astaxanthin Z-isomers [19–22].Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 13   were detected . The supplementation with Z-AST -D resulted in 26.5 times higher plasma astaxanthin concent ration than that of E-AST -D.  Figure 1. (a) Normal -phase HPLC chromatograms of an (all-E)-astaxanthin -rich diet (E -AST -D; total Z-isomer ratio = 3.2%) and a (Z)-astaxanthin -rich diet (Z -AST -D; total Z-isomer ratio = 84.4%) and (b) absorption spectra of peaks a –c and (all -E)-, (9Z)-, (13Z)-, and (15 Z)-astaxanthin. Peaks a –c were tentatively identified as astaxanthin Z-isomers [19 –22].
Figure 2. The e ffects of supplementation with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D on astaxanthin concentrations in (a) plasma and ( b) dorsal skin with or without UV -light irradiation and total Z-isomers ratios of astaxanthin in ( c) plasma and ( d) dorsal skin with or without UV -light irradiation.  Error bars Figure 2. The effects of supplementation with E-AST-D and Z-AST-D on astaxanthin concentrationsin (a) plasma and ( b) dorsal skin with or without UV-light irradiation and total Z-isomers ratiosof astaxanthin in ( c) plasma and ( d) dorsal skin with or without UV-light irradiation. Error barsrepresent the standard error of the mean ( n= 3–9). Asterisks (*) indicate statistically signiﬁcantdifferences in each group (** p< 0.01, Student’s t-test).
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 4 of 12On the other hand, the astaxanthin concentration in the skin remained approximatelyconstant regardless of the astaxanthin isomer ratio in the diet and whether it was withor without UV-light irradiation, e.g., the astaxanthin concentrations in the UV-irradiatedskin after E-AST-D and Z-AST-D supplementation were 4.0 ±0.3 and 3.7 ±0.5 nmol/g,respectively. Astaxanthin in the plasma was rich in the Z-isomers, even after E-AST-Dsupplementation (total Z-isomer ratio = 65.7%). The total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthinin the skin of guinea pigs fed with Z-AST-D was higher than that of guinea pigs fed withE-AST-D (approximately 20% and 5%, respectively). The total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthinin the skin was lower than that in the plasma.2.3. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation on Skin ElasticityThe effect of astaxanthin supplementation on the elasticity of UV-irradiated dorsal
skin is shown in Figure 3. The UV-light irradiation signiﬁcantly decreased skin elasticity inthe placebo diet group. Speciﬁcally, the elasticity value was 0.24 before irradiation, whichdecreased to ≤0.21 after the irradiation. In contrast, in the astaxanthin supplementationgroups, the reduction in skin elasticity was signiﬁcantly inhibited, and a stronger inhibitoryeffect was observed in the Z-AST-D group than in the E-AST-D group. In the E-AST-Dgroup, the elasticity value was 0.26 before irradiation and decreased slightly to 0.25 afterthe 13-day irradiation, whereas in the Z-AST-D group, the elasticity value was 0.24 beforethe irradiation and increased to 0.26 after the 13-day irradiation.Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 13   represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 3–9). Asterisks (*) i ndicate statistically significant dif-ferences in each group (**  p < 0.01, Student’s t-test).
On the other hand, the astaxanthin concentration in the skin remained approximately constant regardless of the astaxanthin isomer ratio in the diet and whether it was with or without UV -light irradiation, e.g., the astaxanthin concentrations in the UV -irradiated skin after E -AST -D and Z -AST -D supplementation were 4.0 ± 0.3 and 3.7 ± 0.5 nmol/g, respectively. Astaxanthin in the plasma  was rich in the Z-isomers, even after E -AST -D supplementation (total Z-isomer ratio = 65.7%). The total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin of guinea pigs fed with Z-AST -D was higher than that of guinea pigs fed  with E-AST -D (approximately 20% and 5 %, respectively). The total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin was lower than that in the plasma.  2.3. Effect of A staxanthin Supplementation  on Skin Elasticity  The effect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the elasticity of UV-irradiated dorsal
skin is shown in Figure 3. The UV-light irradiation significantly decreased skin elasticity in the placebo diet group. Specifically, the elasticity value was 0.24 before irradiation, which decreased to ≤0.21 after the irradiation. In contrast, in t he astaxanthi n supplemen-tation  groups, the reduction in skin elasticity was significantly inhibited, and a stronger inhibitory effect was observed in the Z -AST -D group than in the E -AST -D group. In the E-AST -D group, the elasticity value was 0.26 before irradiation and  decreased slightly to 0.25 after the 13 -day irradiation, whereas in the Z -AST -D group, the elasticity value was 0.24 before the irradiation and increased to 0.26 after the 13 -day irradiation.   Figure 3. The e ffect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the el asticity  of UV -irradiated dorsal skin.  Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9). Asterisks (*) indicate statistically signif-
icant differences from the placebo group (*  p < 0.05 and **  p < 0.01, Student ’s t-test) . 2.4. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation  on TEWL  The effect of dietary astaxanthin on the TEWL of UV -light -irradiated dorsal skin in
2.4. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation  on TEWL  The effect of dietary astaxanthin on the TEWL of UV -light -irradiated dorsal skin in guinea pigs is shown in Figure 4. An increase in the TEWL was observed from the seven th day after the start of irradiation the rapy . Compared  to the placebo, astaxanthin supple-mentation was more effective in preventing the increase in the TEWL. However, no sig-nificant difference in the TEWL was observed between the E -AST -D and Z -AST -D sup-plementation groups. For example, the TEWL values of the placebo, E-AST -D, and Z -AST -D groups after the 13 -day irradiation were 12.7, 10.4, and 10.4 g/m2/h, respectively ( the values  before irradiation  were 6.8, 6.4, and 6.7  g/m2/h, respectively).  Figure 3. The effect of astaxanthin supplementation on the elasticity of UV-irradiated dorsal skin.Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n= 9). Asterisks (*) indicate statistically signiﬁcant
differences from the placebo group (* p< 0.05 and ** p< 0.01, Student’s t-test).2.4. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation on TEWLThe effect of dietary astaxanthin on the TEWL of UV-light-irradiated dorsal skinin guinea pigs is shown in Figure 4. An increase in the TEWL was observed from theseventh day after the start of irradiation therapy. Compared to the placebo, astaxanthinsupplementation was more effective in preventing the increase in the TEWL. However,no signiﬁcant difference in the TEWL was observed between the E-AST-D and Z-AST-Dsupplementation groups. For example, the TEWL values of the placebo, E-AST-D, andZ-AST-D groups after the 13-day irradiation were 12.7, 10.4, and 10.4 g/m2/h, respectively(the values before irradiation were 6.8, 6.4, and 6.7 g/m2/h, respectively).
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 5 of 12Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13    Figure 4. The e ffect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the TEWL of UV -irradiated dorsal skin.  Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant differences from the placebo group (*  p < 0.05, Student ’s t-test).  2.5. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation  on Skin Pigmentation  The effect of oral supplementation  with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D on the pigmentation of UV-irradiated dorsal skin was investigated. The skin pigmentation was evaluated based on melanin and  erythema values (Figure 5). The melanin value increased with the UV-light exposure , and when E-AST -D and Z -AST -D were administered, the increase s in melanin values at th e seven th and ninth days after the start of the irradiation w ere slightly inhibited (Figure 5a).  No significant difference in melanin inhibition was observed be-
tween the E-AST -D and Z -AST -D groups . Incidentally, the melanin value did not increase during th e test period in the skin area that was not exposed to UV light (Figure 6a ,b). Supplementation with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D resulted in an increase in the erythema value (Figure 5b).  This increase was significant from the third day after the start of UV -light irradiation , and the degree of increase was greater in the E -AST -D group than in the Z-AST -D group. Erythema values did not increase in the placebo group.  When E -AST -D and Z -AST -D were administered, the erythema value also increased in the skin area that was not irradiated with the UV light, and the degree of increase was higher in the E -AST -D group (Figure 6a ,c).  Figure 5. The effect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the pigment ation of UV -irradiated dorsal skin.  (a) Melanin and ( b) erythema values were measured as the skin pigmentation indicator.  Error
bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant differences from the placebo group (*  p < 0.05 and **  p < 0.01, Student ’s t-test) . Figure 4. The effect of astaxanthin supplementation on the TEWL of UV-irradiated dorsal skin. Errorbars represent the standard error of the mean ( n= 9). Asterisks (*) indicate statistically signiﬁcantdifferences from the placebo group (* p< 0.05, Student’s t-test).2.5. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation on Skin PigmentationThe effect of oral supplementation with E-AST-D and Z-AST-D on the pigmentationof UV-irradiated dorsal skin was investigated. The skin pigmentation was evaluated basedon melanin and erythema values (Figure 5). The melanin value increased with the UV-lightexposure, and when E-AST-D and Z-AST-D were administered, the increases in melaninvalues at the seventh and ninth days after the start of the irradiation were slightly inhibited
(Figure 5a). No signiﬁcant difference in melanin inhibition was observed between theE-AST-D and Z-AST-D groups. Incidentally, the melanin value did not increase during thetest period in the skin area that was not exposed to UV light (Figure 6a,b). Supplementationwith E-AST-D and Z-AST-D resulted in an increase in the erythema value (Figure 5b).This increase was signiﬁcant from the third day after the start of UV-light irradiation,and the degree of increase was greater in the E-AST-D group than in the Z-AST-D group.Erythema values did not increase in the placebo group. When E-AST-D and Z-AST-D wereadministered, the erythema value also increased in the skin area that was not irradiatedwith the UV light, and the degree of increase was higher in the E-AST-D group (Figure 6a,c).Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13    Figure 4. The e ffect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the TEWL of UV -irradiated dorsal skin.  Error
bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant
bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant differences from the placebo group (*  p < 0.05, Student ’s t-test).  2.5. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation  on Skin Pigmentation  The effect of oral supplementation  with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D on the pigmentation of UV-irradiated dorsal skin was investigated. The skin pigmentation was evaluated based on melanin and  erythema values (Figure 5). The melanin value increased with the UV-light exposure , and when E-AST -D and Z -AST -D were administered, the increase s in melanin values at th e seven th and ninth days after the start of the irradiation w ere slightly inhibited (Figure 5a).  No significant difference in melanin inhibition was observed be-tween the E-AST -D and Z -AST -D groups . Incidentally, the melanin value did not increase during th e test period in the skin area that was not exposed to UV light (Figure 6a ,b).
Supplementation with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D resulted in an increase in the erythema value (Figure 5b).  This increase was significant from the third day after the start of UV -light irradiation , and the degree of increase was greater in the E -AST -D group than in the Z-AST -D group. Erythema values did not increase in the placebo group.  When E -AST -D and Z -AST -D were administered, the erythema value also increased in the skin area that was not irradiated with the UV light, and the degree of increase was higher in the E -AST -D group (Figure 6a ,c).  Figure 5. The effect of astaxanthin supplementation  on the pigment ation of UV -irradiated dorsal skin.  (a) Melanin and ( b) erythema values were measured as the skin pigmentation indicator.  Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 9).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant differences from the placebo group (*  p < 0.05 and **  p < 0.01, Student ’s t-test) .
Figure 5. The effect of astaxanthin supplementation on the pigmentation of UV-irradiated dorsalskin. ( a) Melanin and ( b) erythema values were measured as the skin pigmentation indicator. Errorbars represent the standard error of the mean ( n= 9). Asterisks (*) indicate statistically signiﬁcantdifferences from the placebo group (* p< 0.05 and ** p< 0.01, Student’s t-test).
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 6 of 12Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 13    Figure 6. (a) Typical photographs of the 7-day UV-irradiated dorsal skin with UV -irradiated and non-UV-irradiated areas and changes in (b) melanin and ( c) erythema values of non -UV-irradiated dorsal skin area.  Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 3).  Asterisks (*) indicate statistically significa nt differences from the placebo group (* p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01, Student ’s t-test).  2.6. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation  on Skin Conditions  Subjective skin conditions were assessed on the 13 -day UV-irradiated dorsal skin samples stained  with hematoxylin  and eosin (Figure 7a). In the placebo group, increases in melanin granules and sunburn cells and atrophy were observed in the epidermal layer, while inflammatory cell infiltration and hemorrhage were observed in the dermal layer.
In the E -AST -D group, the aforementioned skin conditions were almost similar to those in the placebo group, whereas in the Z -AST -D group, sunburn cells and hemorrhage were not observed. Astaxanthin supplementation showed an inhibitory effect on epidermal thickening caus ed by UV -light exposure , and this effect was stronger in the Z -AST -D sup-plementation  group than in the E -AST -D supplementation group —that is, the average  epidermal thicknesses of UV-irradiated dorsal skin  samples in the placebo, E-AST -D, and Z-AST -D groups  were 44.4, 41.7, and 36.9 μm, respectively (Figure 7b).  Figure 6. (a) Typical photographs of the 7-day UV-irradiated dorsal skin with UV-irradiated andnon-UV-irradiated areas and changes in ( b) melanin and ( c) erythema values of non-UV-irradiateddorsal skin area. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n= 3). Asterisks (*) indicate
statistically signiﬁcant differences from the placebo group (* p< 0.05 and ** p< 0.01, Student’s t-test).2.6. Effect of Astaxanthin Supplementation on Skin ConditionsSubjective skin conditions were assessed on the 13-day UV-irradiated dorsal skinsamples stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Figure 7a). In the placebo group, increasesin melanin granules and sunburn cells and atrophy were observed in the epidermal layer,while inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration and hemorrhage were observed in the dermal layer. Inthe E-AST-D group, the aforementioned skin conditions were almost similar to those inthe placebo group, whereas in the Z-AST-D group, sunburn cells and hemorrhage werenot observed. Astaxanthin supplementation showed an inhibitory effect on epidermalthickening caused by UV-light exposure, and this effect was stronger in the Z-AST-Dsupplementation group than in the E-AST-D supplementation group—that is, the average
epidermal thicknesses of UV-irradiated dorsal skin samples in the placebo, E-AST-D, andZ-AST-D groups were 44.4, 41.7, and 36.9 µm, respectively (Figure 7b).
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 7 of 12Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 13    Figure 7. (a) Typical photographs of the 13-day UV-irradiated dorsal skin stained with hematoxylin and eosin and ( b) epidermal thickness of the dorsal skin after the 13 -day irradiation therapy (Figure S2). Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n = 3). 3. Discussion  Supplementation with Z -AST -D led to a higher increase in the blood astaxanthin lev-els of guinea pigs  compared to supplementation with E -AST -D. Thus, the astaxan thin Z-isomers demonstrated higher bioavailabilty than the all -E-isomer, similar to that observed in our recent study using rats and hens [15,23]. In contrast, the astaxanthin level in the dorsal skin remained approximately constant regardless of the astax anthin isomer ratio.  This result differs from that of our previous study using rats [15]. When rats were fed Z-
isomer -rich astaxanthin, the astaxanthin concentration in the skin was 12.2 times higher than that of rats fed all -E-isomer -rich astaxanthin. The  difference in astaxanthin accumu-lation in the skin between  guinea pigs  and rats may be due to differences in animal spe-cies. Several studies have demonstrated that the absorption characteristics of astaxanthin isomers in living bodies differ among species  (e.g., rats, hens, salmon, and halibut) [15,23,24] . Alternatively, the dose of astaxanthin administered in this study (10 mg of astaxan-thin/kg body weight) was so high that the accumulation in the guinea pig skin may have reached the upper limit. Future studies with lower doses will be needed to prove this. On the other hand, when guinea pigs were fed Z -AST -D, the total Z-isomer ratio in the skin was higher than that with E-AST -D supplementation. However, the ratio in the skin was
significantly lowe r compared to that in troduced through  the diet; that is, the total Z-iso-mer ratios of Z -AST -D and skin astaxanthin were 84.4  and 21.9%, respectively.  This trend has also been confirmed in tests using rats, suggesting that there is a mechanism for main-taini ng a certain ratio of carotenoid Z-isomers in the body [15,25].  Supplementation with E -AST -D and Z -AST -D inhibited the reduction in elasticity and the increase in the TEWL by UV -light irradiation. It also tended to inhibit melanin synthesis and skin thicke ning. Although many studies have reported similar results re-garding the protective effects of astaxanthin supplementation on the skin, they used H. pluvialis -derived astaxanthin (mainly the all -E-isomer) [7 –10,18]. In this study, we evalu-ated the protectiv e effect of Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin against UV  light -induced skin dam-age for the first time and observed that the Z-isomers have a  notable effect on that , as with
the all -E-isomer. The results of the skin elasticity evaluation and the tissue examinations , including epidermal thicknesses,  indicate that astaxanthin Z-isomers potentially have a greater skin -protective effect from UV-light exposure  than the all -E-isomer. When guinea pigs were fed E -AST -D and Z -AST -D, the concentration of astaxanth in accumulated in the skin was almost the same (Figure 2b), but the total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the Figure 7. (a) Typical photographs of the 13-day UV-irradiated dorsal skin stained with hema-toxylin and eosin and ( b) epidermal thickness of the dorsal skin after the 13-day irradiation therapy(Figure S2). Error bars represent the standard error of the mean ( n= 3).3. DiscussionSupplementation with Z-AST-D led to a higher increase in the blood astaxanthinlevels of guinea pigs compared to supplementation with E-AST-D. Thus, the astaxanthinZ-isomers demonstrated higher bioavailabilty than the all- E-isomer, similar to that ob-
served in our recent study using rats and hens [ 15,23]. In contrast, the astaxanthin level
Z-isomers demonstrated higher bioavailabilty than the all- E-isomer, similar to that ob-served in our recent study using rats and hens [ 15,23]. In contrast, the astaxanthin levelin the dorsal skin remained approximately constant regardless of the astaxanthin isomerratio. This result differs from that of our previous study using rats [ 15]. When rats werefedZ-isomer-rich astaxanthin, the astaxanthin concentration in the skin was 12.2 timeshigher than that of rats fed all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin. The difference in astaxanthinaccumulation in the skin between guinea pigs and rats may be due to differences in an-imal species. Several studies have demonstrated that the absorption characteristics ofastaxanthin isomers in living bodies differ among species (e.g., rats, hens, salmon, andhalibut) [15,23,24].Alternatively, the dose of astaxanthin administered in this study (10 mg of astaxan-thin/kg body weight) was so high that the accumulation in the guinea pig skin may have
reached the upper limit. Future studies with lower doses will be needed to prove this.On the other hand, when guinea pigs were fed Z-AST-D, the total Z-isomer ratio in theskin was higher than that with E-AST-D supplementation. However, the ratio in the skinwas signiﬁcantly lower compared to that introduced through the diet; that is, the totalZ-isomer ratios of Z-AST-D and skin astaxanthin were 84.4 and 21.9%, respectively. Thistrend has also been conﬁrmed in tests using rats, suggesting that there is a mechanism formaintaining a certain ratio of carotenoid Z-isomers in the body [15,25].Supplementation with E-AST-D and Z-AST-D inhibited the reduction in elasticity andthe increase in the TEWL by UV-light irradiation. It also tended to inhibit melanin synthesisand skin thickening. Although many studies have reported similar results regarding theprotective effects of astaxanthin supplementation on the skin, they used H. pluvialis -derived
astaxanthin (mainly the all- E-isomer) [ 7–10,18]. In this study, we evaluated the protectiveeffect of Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin against UV light-induced skin damage for the ﬁrst timeand observed that the Z-isomers have a notable effect on that, as with the all- E-isomer. Theresults of the skin elasticity evaluation and the tissue examinations, including epidermalthicknesses, indicate that astaxanthin Z-isomers potentially have a greater skin-protectiveeffect from UV-light exposure than the all- E-isomer. When guinea pigs were fed E-AST-D
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 8 of 12and Z-AST-D, the concentration of astaxanthin accumulated in the skin was almost thesame (Figure 2b), but the total Z-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin was higher inthe case of Z-AST-D supplementation (Figure 2d). Astaxanthin Z-isomers have shorterwavelengths than the all- E-isomer and have a characteristic maximum absorption spec-trum at 366 nm (Figure 1b) . Thus, it is considered that astaxanthin Z-isomers absorb UVlight more efﬁciently, which might effectively inhibit UV light-induced skin damage. Infact, we conﬁrmed that the UV-light-shielding ability of Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin (to-talZ-isomer ratio = 89.8% ) was higher than that of all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin (totalZ-isomer ratio = 1.8%), that is, the UV-A shielding rates of all- E- and Z-isomer-rich astax-anthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were 40.5 and 73.4%, respectively, and their UV-Bshielding rates were 48.2 and 60.6%, respectively (Figure 8). Moreover, several studies
have demonstrated that astaxanthin Z-isomers exhibit more potent antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory activities than the all- E-isomer [ 16,17], which might have contributed to thesuperior skin-protective effect of Z-AST-D.Mar. Drugs 2022 , 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 13   skin was higher in the case of Z -AST -D supplementation (Figure 2d). Astaxanthin Z-iso-mers have shorter wavelengths than the all -E-isomer and have  a characteristic maximum absorption spectrum at 366 nm (Figure 1b).  Thus, it is considered that astaxanthin Z-iso-mers absorb UV light more efficiently, which might effectively inhibit UV  light -induced skin damage. In fact, we confirmed that the UV -light -shielding  ability of Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin (total Z-isomer ratio = 89.8%) was higher than that of all -E-isomer -rich astaxanthin (total Z-isomer ratio = 1.8%), that is, the UV -A shielding rates of all -E- and Z-
isomer -rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were 40.5 and 73.4%, respectively, and the ir UV-B shielding rates were 48.2 and 60.6%, respectively (Figure 8). Moreover, several studies have demonstrated that astaxanthin Z-isomers exhibit more potent  anti-oxidant and anti -inflammatory acti vities than the all -E-isomer [16,17], which might have contributed to the superior skin -protective effect of Z -AST -D.  Figure 8. Transmittance of ( a) all-E-isomer -rich astaxanthin and ( b) Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin . The astaxanthin samples were dissolved i n ethyl acetate at a concentration of 0.01 mg/mL.  Astaxanthin supplementation induced an increase in the erythema value of  the UV -irradiated dorsal skin (Figure 5b), but no increase was observed in the placebo group.  Moreover, the erythema value increased in the skin area that was not irradiated with UV light (Figure 6c). Thus, it is considered that the increase in erythema values was not due
to UV irradiation , but due to the deposition of astaxanthin in the skin. Amp le studies have demonstrated that long -term intake of high concentrations of carotenoids results in skin pigmentation [26,27]. Interestingly, the erythema value was higher with E -AST -D supple-mentation than with Z -AST -D supplementation, although the astaxan thin concentration in the skin was almost the same (Figure 2b).  This might be because carotenoid Z-isomers have lower molar absorption coefficients than the all -E-isomers and have shorter wave-lengths of the absorption spectra compared to that of the all -E-isomers [19,20,28] , that is, the chromogenic property  of the Z-isomers is lower than that of the all -E-isomers. In ad-dition, we investigated color tones (i.e., L, a, and b values) of all-E-isomer - and Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin for further discussion of the differences in skin pigmentation between
them. The L, a, and b values of  all-E-isomer -rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were 77.7, 29.7, and 48.2, respectively, and those of Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL
them. The L, a, and b values of  all-E-isomer -rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were 77.7, 29.7, and 48.2, respectively, and those of Z-isomer -rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were 83.3, 15.1, and 52.7, respectively. The higher a value of all -E-isomer -rich astaxanthin  indicates higher redness and greenness  than the Z-isomer -rich astaxan-thin. Hence, the oral intake of Z -AST -D for skincare purposes is superior to E -AST -D in-take in the following two aspects: inhibition of UV light -induced skin damage  and reduc-tion of skin pigmentation caused by the accumulation of astaxanthin. Furthermore, con-sumption of Z -AST -D increases the bloo d astaxanthin concentration more than consump-tion of E-AST -D, which might result in a variety of health benefits, such as a reduced risk of cancer and  chronic diseases  [29,30 ]. As mentioned above, the accumulation efficiency
of astaxanthin Z-isomers in the skin of rats is higher than that in guinea pigs. Thus, it is possible that the skin -protective effect of Z -AST -D against UV light -induced skin damage  is more pronounced in r ats. It is expected that the bioavailability and skin accumulation Figure 8. Transmittance of ( a) all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin and ( b)Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin. Theastaxanthin samples were dissolved in ethyl acetate at a concentration of 0.01 mg/mL.Astaxanthin supplementation induced an increase in the erythema value of the UV-irradiated dorsal skin (Figure 5b), but no increase was observed in the placebo group.Moreover, the erythema value increased in the skin area that was not irradiated withUV light (Figure 6c). Thus, it is considered that the increase in erythema values wasnot due to UV irradiation, but due to the deposition of astaxanthin in the skin. Amplestudies have demonstrated that long-term intake of high concentrations of carotenoids
results in skin pigmentation [ 26,27]. Interestingly, the erythema value was higher withE-AST-D supplementation than with Z-AST-D supplementation, although the astaxanthinconcentration in the skin was almost the same (Figure 2b). This might be because carotenoidZ-isomers have lower molar absorption coefﬁcients than the all- E-isomers and have shorterwavelengths of the absorption spectra compared to that of the all- E-isomers [ 19,20,28], thatis, the chromogenic property of the Z-isomers is lower than that of the all- E-isomers. Inaddition, we investigated color tones (i.e., L,a, and bvalues) of all- E-isomer- and Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin for further discussion of the differences in skin pigmentation between them.The L,a, and bvalues of all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in ethyl acetate) were77.7, 29.7, and 48.2, respectively, and those of Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin (0.01 mg/mL in
ethyl acetate) were 83.3, 15.1, and 52.7, respectively. The higher avalue of all- E-isomer-richastaxanthin indicates higher redness and greenness than the Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin.Hence, the oral intake of Z-AST-D for skincare purposes is superior to E-AST-D intake inthe following two aspects: inhibition of UV light-induced skin damage and reduction ofskin pigmentation caused by the accumulation of astaxanthin. Furthermore, consumptionof Z-AST-D increases the blood astaxanthin concentration more than consumption ofE-AST-D, which might result in a variety of health beneﬁts, such as a reduced risk ofcancer and chronic diseases [ 29,30]. As mentioned above, the accumulation efﬁciency ofastaxanthin Z-isomers in the skin of rats is higher than that in guinea pigs. Thus, it is
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 9 of 12possible that the skin-protective effect of Z-AST-D against UV light-induced skin damageis more pronounced in rats. It is expected that the bioavailability and skin accumulationcharacteristics of astaxanthin isomers will be determined in various animals, includinghumans, and that their effects on UV light-induced skin damage will be evaluated.4. Materials and Methods4.1. MaterialsHigh-purity (all- E)-astaxanthin standard, high-performance liquid chromatography(HPLC)-grade organic solvents (hexane, ethyl acetate, acetone, and dichloromethane[CH 2Cl2]), and soybean oil were purchased from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corp.(Osaka, Japan ). Analytical-grade ethanol and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) were pur-chased from Kanto Chemical Co., Inc. (Tokyo, Japan).4.2. Diet PreparationAstaxanthin rich in the Z-isomers was prepared from the all- E-isomer standard via
thermal treatment and solid-liquid separation, as described in our previous study [ 14,15].Brieﬂy, a 2 mg/mL (all- E)-astaxanthin solution in CH 2Cl2was heated at 80◦C for 4 h fortheZ-isomerization, and the solution was evaporated to dryness using a rotary evaporator(EYELA N-1300, Tokyo Rikakikai Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) under reduced pressure at 40◦C.The resulting solid was suspended in ethanol and stored at 4◦C for 1 h to crystallize andprecipitate the all- E-isomer. The insoluble substance, mainly composed of the all- E-isomer,was removed using a 0.22- µm PTFE ﬁlter (Osaka Chemical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan). Afterremoving the ethanol from the ﬁltrate using an evaporator under reduced pressure at40◦C,Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin was obtained. Intact (all- E)-astaxanthin and preparedZ-isomer-rich astaxanthin were suspended in soybean oil at a concentration of 10 mg/mLusing an ultrasonic homogenizer (UP-200P; Tomy Seiko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). These
soybean-oil-based E-AST-D and Z-AST-D were used in the animal tests.4.3. Animals and TreatmentsAnimal experiments were performed at I Tech Lab. Co., Ltd. (Gifu, Japan). Theprotocols for animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care andUse Committee of the I Tech Lab (Permission No. ITL-21-GO-319). Female Weiser-Maplesguinea pigs (8-week-old) were purchased from Japan SLC Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan). Theguinea pigs were housed in an animal room at a temperature of 23 ±5◦C and humidity of55±25% with a 12-h light-dark cycle. Animals were allowed free access to an astaxanthin-free standard laboratory diet (0525; Japan SLC Inc., Shizuoka, Japan) and water. After1 week of acclimation with the standard diet, the guinea pigs were randomly assigned tothree groups: placebo (soybean oil), E-AST-D (10 mg of all- E-isomer-rich astaxanthin/kgbody weight), and Z-AST-D (10 mg of Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin/kg body weight). They
were fed the diets via intragastric intubation daily for 3 weeks. The UV irradiation wasperformed using a UV lamp (Dermaray-200 type equipped with UV-A and UV-B lamps;Terumo Clinical Supply Co., Ltd., Gifu, Japan) and the distance from the lamp to the guineapigs was adjusted so that the average UV-B light intensity was 0.8 mW/cm2[31–33]. Theguinea pigs were shaved on their backs and irradiated with a UV lamp (2 cm×2 cm) , andthe non-irradiated area was covered with aluminum foil. During irradiation, living guineapigs were immobilized so that they could not move. The UV irradiation was applied for8 min per day on the 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, and 18th days after the initiation of test dietsupplementation. Guinea pigs were sacriﬁced after three days from the last UV irradiation(i.e., the 21st day after the initiation of test diet supplementation) by exsanguination underanesthesia, and blood and dorsal skin samples were collected. Plasma samples were
obtained from heparin-treated blood by centrifugation at 1700 ×gfor 15 min [ 14,15]. Thecollected plasma and skin samples were stored at −80◦C until analysis.
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 10 of 124.4. Evaluation of Dorsal SkinThe dorsal skin condition was evaluated on the 8th, 9th, 11th, 13th, 15th, 17th, 19th, and21st days after the initiation of test diet supplementation, that is, immediately before the UV-light irradiation and on the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, and 13th days after the initiation ofUV irradiation. Skin elasticity was measured using a Cutometer (MPA 580; Integral Corp. ,Tokyo, Japan), TEWL was analyzed using a Tewameter (TM300; Integral Corp. , Tokyo,Japan), and skin pigmentation (melanin and erythema values) was assessed using a Mexam-eter (MX18; Integral Corp., Tokyo, Japan) [ 34,35]. Subjective skin conditions were assessedby experts from Applied Medical Research (Osaka, Japan) on 13-day UV-irradiated dorsalskin samples stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The epidermal thickness of the dorsalskin was measured using an image analysis system (WinROOF2018; Mitani Co., Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan). The epidermal layer was deﬁned as the stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum,and stratum basale, excluding the stratum corneum (Figure S2).4.5. Extraction of Astaxanthin Isomers from the Plasma and SkinExtraction of astaxanthin isomers from plasma and skin samples was performedaccording to a previously described method [ 14,15]. Astaxanthin isomers were extractedfrom the plasma samples using hexane containing 0.01% BHT with a vortex mixer. Prior toextraction, the same volume of ethanol as the collected plasma was added to precipitatethe proteins. Hexane and water were separated with centrifugal separation treatmentand the hexane layer containing astaxanthin isomers was carefully collected. This hexaneextraction was carried out three times for each plasma sample at room temperature andthen hexane was removed using a nitrogen gas stream. The resulting solid was dissolvedin hexane/ethyl acetate (70:30, v/v) and ﬁltered through a 0.22- µm PTFE membrane ﬁlter
before HPLC analysis. Astaxanthin isomers in skin samples were extracted using acetonecontaining 0.01% BHT. Extraction was carried out via ultrasonication (CPX1800H-J; YamatoScientiﬁc Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for 15 min in an ice water bath (approximately 4◦C) toprevent the thermal isomerization of astaxanthin isomers. The extracted liquid was ﬁlteredthrough a 0.22- µm PTFE membrane ﬁlter, and the resulting ﬁltrate was evaporated todryness using a rotary evaporator. The resulting substance was dissolved in hexane/ethylacetate (70:30, v/v), ﬁltered through a 0.22- µm PTFE membrane ﬁlter, and then analyzedby HPLC.4.6. Analysis of Astaxanthin IsomersAstaxanthin isomers in the plasma and skin of guinea pigs were analyzed by normal-phase HPLC equipped with two silica gel columns connected in tandem (Luna 5 µm Silica(2), 2×150 mm ×4.6 mm, 100 Å, Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA, USA) as previously
described [ 15,19]. Brieﬂy, a mixture of hexane/ethyl acetate/acetone (70:20:10, v/v/v ) wasused as the mobile phase, and the ﬂow rate was maintained at 1.2 mL/min. Astaxanthinisomers were detected using a photodiode array detector (SPD-M20A, Shimadzu Corp.,Kyoto, Japan) at 470 nm and peak identiﬁcation was performed based on HPLC retentiontimes, spectral data, and relative intensities of the Z-peak to the absorption maximumpeak of the isomer ( Q-ratio) (Table S1) [ 19–22]. The UV-light-shielding abilities and colorindices (Hunter L[lightness], a[redness and greenness], and b[yellowness and blueness])ofall-E-isomer-rich astaxanthin (total Z-isomer ratio = 1.8%) and Z-isomer-rich astaxanthin(total Z-isomer ratio = 89.8%) were assessed using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (V-750, JascoCorp., Tokyo, Japan) equipped with UV shield factor calculation and color calculation pro-grams. For this, the astaxanthin samples were dissolved in ethyl acetate at a concentration
of0.01 mg/mL . The UV-light-shielding ability was assessed in UV-A (320–400 nm) andUV-B (280–320 nm) regions (Figure 8).4.7. Statistical Analysis
of0.01 mg/mL . The UV-light-shielding ability was assessed in UV-A (320–400 nm) andUV-B (280–320 nm) regions (Figure 8).4.7. Statistical AnalysisData are reported as mean ±standard error of the mean of more than three experi-mental skin samples. The differences in mean values were analyzed by Student’s t-test with
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 11 of 12the EZR software program (version 1.54; Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical University,Saitama, Japan), and signiﬁcant differences were calculated at p< 0.05 or p< 0.01.5. ConclusionsWhen guinea pigs were fed E-AST-D and Z-AST-D, the accumulation of astaxanthinin the dorsal skin was almost the same between the two dietary groups; however, the totalZ-isomer ratio of astaxanthin in the skin was higher in the case of Z-AST-D supplementation.Astaxanthin supplementation signiﬁcantly suppressed UV light-induced skin-damagingeffects, such as reduced elasticity and increased TEWL levels. A comparison betweenE-AST-D and Z-AST-D indicated that Z-AST-D was more effective in suppressing UVlight-induced skin damage. This may be because astaxanthin Z-isomers have a higherUV light-shielding ability than the all- E-isomer. Moreover, Z-AST-D supplementationresulted in a greater reduction in skin pigmentation caused by astaxanthin accumulation
compared with E-AST-D supplementation. Hence, the intake of Z-isomer-rich astaxanthinis considered very effective in suppressing UV light-induced skin damage. To ensure theusefulness of astaxanthin Z-isomers for skin health, it is necessary to conduct human andother animal trials in the future.Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at:https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/md20070414/s1, Figure S1: Normal-phase HPLC chro-matograms of astaxanthin isomers in plasma and dorsal skin of the guinea pigs; Figure S2: Pho-tographs of dorsal skin stained with hematoxylin and eosin showing the epidermal area and theimage of the extracted epidermal area; Table S1: Absorption maxima and relative intensities of theZ-peaks ( Q-ratio) of astaxanthin isomers separated and observed using normal-phase HPLC.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.H.; methodology, M.H. and H.K.; validation, M.H.; for-
mal analysis, M.H. and Y.Z.; investigation, M.H. and Y.Z.; data curation, M.H.; writing—original draftpreparation, M.H.; writing—review and editing, H.K., T.H., Y.Z. and M.G.; supervision, M.G.; fundingacquisition, M.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This work was supported by the Adaptable and Seamless Technology Transfer Programthrough Target-Driven R&D (A-STEP) from the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) (grantnumber: JPMJTR20U7).Institutional Review Board Statement: The animal study protocol was approved by the InstitutionalAnimal Care and Use Committee of the I Tech Lab (Permission No. ITL-21-GO-319).Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Maoka, T. Carotenoids as natural functional pigments. J. Nat. Med. 2020 ,74, 1–16. [CrossRef]
2. Maoka, T. Carotenoids in marine animals. Mar. Drugs 2011 ,9, 278–293. [CrossRef]3. Brendler, T.; Williamson, E.M. Astaxanthin: How much is too much? A safety review. Phytother. Res. 2019 ,33, 3090–3111.[CrossRef]4. Miki, W. Biological functions and activities of animal carotenoids. Pure Appl. Chem. 1991 ,63, 141–146. [CrossRef]5. Naguib, Y.M.A. Antioxidant activities of astaxanthin and related carotenoids. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2000 ,48, 1150–1154. [CrossRef]6. Fakhri, S.; Abbaszadeh, F.; Dargahi, L.; Jorjani, M. Astaxanthin: A mechanistic review on its biological activities and healthbeneﬁts. Pharmacol. Res. 2018 ,136, 1–20. [CrossRef]7. Davinelli, S.; Nielsen, M.E.; Scapagnini, G. Astaxanthin in skin health, repair, and disease: A comprehensive review. Nutrients2018 ,10, 522. [CrossRef]8. Li, X.; Matsumoto, T.; Takuwa, M.; Ali, M.S.E.S.; Hirabashi, T.; Kondo, H.; Fujino, H. Protective effects of astaxanthin supplemen-
tation against ultraviolet-induced photoaging in hairless mice. Biomedicines 2020 ,8, 18. [CrossRef]
tation against ultraviolet-induced photoaging in hairless mice. Biomedicines 2020 ,8, 18. [CrossRef]9. Ito, N.; Seki, S.; Ueda, F. The protective role of astaxanthin for UV-induced skin deterioration in healthy people—A randomized,double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Nutrients 2018 ,10, 817. [CrossRef]10. Komatsu, T.; Sasaki, S.; Manabe, Y.; Hirata, T.; Sugawara, T. Preventive effect of dietary astaxanthin on UVA-induced skinphotoaging in hairless mice. PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0171178. [CrossRef]
Mar. Drugs 2022 ,20, 414 12 of 1211. Rehman, A.; Tong, Q.; Jafari, S.M.; Assadpour, E.; Shehzad, Q.; Aadil, R.M.; Iqbal, M.W.; Rashed, M.M.A.; Mushtaq, B.S.;Ashraf, W. Carotenoid-loaded nanocarriers: A comprehensive review. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2020 ,275, 102048. [CrossRef]12. Honda, M. Application of E/Z-isomerization technology for enhancing processing efﬁciency, health-promoting effects, andusability of carotenoids: A review and future perspectives. J. Oleo Sci. 2022 ,71, 151–165. [CrossRef]13. Honda, M.; Kageyama, H.; Hibino, T.; Zhang, Y.; Diono, W.; Kanda, H.; Yamaguchi, R.; Takemura, R.; Fukaya, T.; Goto, M.Improved carotenoid processing with sustainable solvents utilizing Z-isomerization-induced alteration in physicochemicalproperties: A review and future directions. Molecules 2019 ,24, 2149. [CrossRef]14. Honda, M.; Takasu, S.; Nakagawa, K.; Tsuda, T. Differences in bioavailability and tissue accumulation efﬁciency of (all- E)- and
(Z)-carotenoids: A comparative study. Food Chem. 2021 ,361, 130119. [CrossRef]15. Honda, M.; Murakami, K.; Osawa, Y.; Kawashima, Y.; Hirasawa, K.; Kuroda, I. Z-Isomers of astaxanthin exhibit greaterbioavailability and tissue accumulation efﬁciency than the all- E-isomer. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2021 ,69, 3489–3495. [CrossRef]16. Yang, C.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, H.; Sun, Q.; Liu, R.; Li, J.; Wu, L.; Tsao, R. Rapid and efﬁcient conversion of all- E-astaxanthin to9Z-and 13 Z-isomers and assessment of their stability and antioxidant activities. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2017 ,65, 818–826. [CrossRef]17. Yang, C.; Hassan, Y.I.; Liu, R.; Zhang, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Tsao, R. Anti-inﬂammatory effects of different astaxanthin isomersand the roles of lipid transporters in the cellular transport of astaxanthin isomers in Caco-2 cell monolayers. J. Agric. Food Chem.2019 ,67, 6222–6231. [CrossRef]
2019 ,67, 6222–6231. [CrossRef]18. Yuan, J.P .; Chen, F. Chromatographic separation and puriﬁcation of trans -astaxanthin from the extracts of Haematococcus pluvialis .J. Agric. Food Chem. 1998 ,46, 3371–3375. [CrossRef]19. Honda, M.; Kageyama, H.; Hibino, T.; Sowa, T.; Kawashima, Y. Efﬁcient and environmentally friendly method for carotenoidextraction from Paracoccus carotinifaciens utilizing naturally occurring Z-isomerization-accelerating catalysts. Process Biochem.2020 ,89, 146–154. [CrossRef]20. Honda, M.; Murakami, K.; Zhang, Y.; Goto, M. Rapid and continuous astaxanthin isomerization in subcritical ethanol. Ind. Eng.Chem. Res. 2021 ,60, 14060–14068. [CrossRef]21. Su, F.; Xu, H.; Yang, N.; Liu, W.; Liu, J. Hydrolytic efﬁciency and isomerization during de-esteriﬁcation of natural astaxanthinesters by saponiﬁcation and enzymolysis. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 2018 ,34, 37–42. [CrossRef]
22. Subramanian, B.; Tchoukanova, N.; Djaoued, Y.; Pelletier, C.; Ferron, M.; Robichaud, J. Investigations on the geometrical isomersof astaxanthin: Raman spectroscopy of conjugated polyene chain with electronic and mechanical conﬁnement. J. Raman Spectrosc.2014 ,45, 299–304. [CrossRef]23. Honda, M.; Kawashima, Y.; Hirasawa, K.; Uemura, T.; Sun, J.; Hayashi, Y. Astaxanthin Z-isomer-rich diets enhance egg yolkpigmentation in laying hens compared to that in all- E-isomer-rich diets. Anim. Sci. J. 2021 ,92, e13512. [CrossRef]24. Bjerkeng, B.; Berge, G.M. Apparent digestibility coefﬁcients and accumulation of astaxanthin E/Zisomers in Atlantic salmon(Salmo salar L.) and Atlantic halibut ( Hippoglossus hippoglossus L.).Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2000 ,127, 423–432.[CrossRef]25. Huang, J.; Hui, B. Rat intestinal homogenate and pancreatic juice can induce the Z-isomerization of all- E-lycopene in vitro .Sci.Rep. 2020 ,10, 9949. [CrossRef]
Rep. 2020 ,10, 9949. [CrossRef]26. Tan, K.W.; Graf, B.A.; Mitra, S.R.; Stephen, I.D. Impact of fresh fruit smoothie consumption on apparent health of Asian faces.Evol. Hum. Behav. 2017 ,38, 522–529. [CrossRef]
26. Tan, K.W.; Graf, B.A.; Mitra, S.R.; Stephen, I.D. Impact of fresh fruit smoothie consumption on apparent health of Asian faces.Evol. Hum. Behav. 2017 ,38, 522–529. [CrossRef]27. Perrett, D.I.; Talamas, S.N.; Cairns, P .; Henderson, A.J. Skin color cues to human health: Carotenoids, aerobic ﬁtness, and body fat.Front. Psychol. 2020 ,11, 392. [CrossRef]28. Honda, M.; Takahashi, N.; Kuwa, T.; Takehara, M.; Inoue, Y.; Kumagai, T. Spectral characterisation of Z-isomers of lycopeneformed during heat treatment and solvent effects on the E/Zisomerisation process. Food Chem. 2015 ,171, 323–329. [CrossRef]29. Donaldson, M.S. A carotenoid health index based on plasma carotenoids and health outcomes. Nutrients 2011 ,3, 1003–1022.[CrossRef]30. Böhm, V .; Lietz, G.; Olmedilla-Alonso, B.; Phelan, D.; Reboul, E.; B ánati, D.; Borel, P .; Corte-Real, J.; de Lera, A.R.;
Desmarchelier, C.; et al. From carotenoid intake to carotenoid blood and tissue concentrations–implications for dietary intakerecommendations. Nutr. Rev. 2021 ,79, 544–573. [CrossRef]31. Tsukahara, K.; Moriwaki, S.; Fujimura, T.; Takema, Y. Inhibitory effect of an extract of Sanguisorba ofﬁcinalis L. onultraviolet-B-induced photodamage of rat skin. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2001 ,24, 998–1003. [CrossRef]32. Sajo, M.E.J.; Kim, C.S.; Kim, S.K.; Shim, K.Y.; Kang, T.Y.; Lee, K.J. Antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory effects of shungite againstultraviolet B irradiation-induced skin damage in hairless mice. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017 ,2017 , 7340143. [CrossRef]33. Waditee-Sirisattha, R.; Kageyama, H. Protective effects of mycosporine-like amino acid-containing emulsions on UV-treatedmouse ear tissue from the viewpoints of antioxidation and antiglycation. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 2021 ,223, 112296.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]34. D ˛ abrowska, M.; Nowak, I. Noninvasive evaluation of the inﬂuence of aucubin-containing cosmetic macroemulsion on selectedskin parameters. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2021 ,20, 1022–1030. [CrossRef]35. Pavlou, P .; Rallis, M.; Deliconstantinos, G.; Papaioannou, G.; Grando, S.A. In-vivo data on the inﬂuence of tobacco smoke and UVlight on murine skin. Toxicol. Ind. Health 2009 ,25, 231–239. [CrossRef]
