moleculesReviewMarine-Derived Compounds with Potential Use asCosmeceuticals and NutricosmeticsAna Alves1, Em ília Sousa1,2, Anake Kijjoa2,3,*and Madalena Pinto1,2,*1Laborat ório de Qu ímica Org ânica e Farmac êutica, Departamento de Ci ências Qu ímicas,Faculdade de Farm ácia, Universidade do Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira 228, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal ;anajoao93@hotmail.com (A.A.); esousa@ ﬀ.up.pt (E.S.)2Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigaç ão Marinha e Ambiental (CIIMAR), Universidade do Porto,Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leix ões, Avenida General Norton de Matos s /n, 4450-208 Matosinhos,Portugal3ICBAS-Instituto de Ci ências Biom édicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Rua de Jorge ViterboFerreira 228, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal*Correspondence: ankijjoa@icbas.up.pt (A.K.); madalena@ ﬀ.up.pt (M.P .); Tel.: +35-(19)-6609-2514 (M.P .)Academic Editor: Madalena PintoReceived: 9 May 2020; Accepted: 27 May 2020; Published: 29 May 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: The cosmetic industry is among the fastest growing industries in the last decade. As thebeauty concepts have been revolutionized, many terms have been coined to accompany the innovationof this industry, since the beauty products are not just conﬁned to those that are applied to protectand enhance the appearance of the human body. Consequently, the terms such as cosmeceuticals andnutricosmetics have emerged to give a notion of the health beneﬁts of the products that create thebeauty from inside to outside. In the past years, natural products-based cosmeceuticals have gained ahuge amount of attention not only from researchers but also from the public due to the general beliefthat they are harmless. Notably, in recent years, the demand for cosmeceuticals from the marine
resources has been exponentially on the rise due to their unique chemical and biological propertiesthat are not found in terrestrial resources. Therefore, the present review addresses the importance ofmarine-derived compounds, stressing new chemical entities with cosmeceutical potential from themarine natural resources and their mechanisms of action by which these compounds exert on thebody functions as well as their related health beneﬁts. Marine environments are the most importantreservoir of biodiversity that provide biologically active substances whose potential is still to bediscovered for application as pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, and cosmeceuticals. Marine organismsare not only an important renewable source of valuable bulk compounds used in cosmetic industrysuch as agar and carrageenan, which are used as gelling and thickening agents to increase the viscosityof cosmetic formulations, but also of small molecules such as ectoine (to promote skin hydration),
trichodin A (to prevent product alteration caused by microbial contamination), and mytiloxanthin(as a coloring agent). Marine-derived molecules can also function as active ingredients, being the maincompounds that determine the function of cosmeceuticals such as anti-tyrosinase (kojic acid), antiacne(sargafuran), whitening (chrysophanol), UV protection (scytonemin, mycosporine-like amino acids(MAAs)), antioxidants, and anti-wrinkle (astaxanthin and PUFAs).Keywords: cosmeceuticals; nutricosmetics; marine-derived compounds; anti-tyrosinase; antiaging;anti-wrinkle; UV protection1. IntroductionThe European Commission (EC) regulation No.1223 /2009 deﬁnes cosmetics as “products intendedto be applied to the external parts of the human body such as epidermis, hair, nails, lips and externalMolecules 2020 ,25, 2536; doi:10.3390 /molecules25112536 www.mdpi.com /journal /molecules
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 2 of 38genital organs, or teeth and the mucous membranes of the oral cavity with the exclusive or principalobjective to clean, perfume, protect or change their appearance or keep them in good conditions” [ 1].Although, cosmetics are not intended to a ﬀect the structure and function of the body, there are manyrequirements for cosmetics, including safety, lack of side e ﬀects, and their ability to show positive e ﬀectson well-being [ 2]. As the market of cosmetics is highly dynamic and new products are being constantlylaunched in an extremely fast rate, new concepts have also been continuously emerged, and new termshave been coined. Thus, the term “cosmeceuticals”, which derives from a combination of “cosmetics”and “pharmaceuticals”, and was popularized by Kilgman [ 3], refers to cosmetic products with drug-likebeneﬁts. Although the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) does not recognize this
term, it is widely used in the cosmetic industry [ 4]. In turn, the most recent concept, representingthe latest trend in the beauty industry is “nutricosmetics”, which is emerged from a combination of“cosmeceuticals” and “nutraceuticals”, and these are destined for the oral supplementation of nutrientsformulated and marketed speciﬁcally for beauty purposes [ 4]. Nutricosmetics are characterized asnatural health products with a capacity to improve the function and appearance of the skin, hair,and nails when ingested. It is believed that these compounds exert their beautiﬁcation e ﬀects and /orpersonal hygiene within the body. Thus, nutricosmetics are becoming a strong trend, since consumerstoday have a great awareness of the foods and food supplements, tending to acquire preferentiallyproducts from natural origin that can restore and improve health and beauty without posing anyprejudicial e ﬀects [4].
prejudicial e ﬀects [4].Cosmeceuticals comprise active ingredients such as vitamins, minerals, phytochemicals, enzymes,which exist in various types of formulations such as creams, lotions, and ointments [ 5]. These naturalbioactive substances can derive from diverse sources such as terrestrial plants, microorganisms,and marine organisms. These substances can have a myriad of functional roles including thosewith beneﬁcial e ﬀects on human health [ 5], which can promote healthy skin, hair, and nails atcellular levels [ 6]. Although plant-derived ingredients are still very popular and widely used ascosmeceuticals, they also have some limitations because plants generally grow too slowly and theirchemical composition varies from season to season and from region to region. On the contrary, marineﬂora and fauna not only produce chemically unique biomolecules not found in terrestrial resources but
also can be grown rapidly in large quantities and cost e ﬀective by modern aquaculture techniques [ 7].2. Biological Targets and Mechanisms of Action of CosmeceuticalsCurrently, there is a great demand of cosmeceuticals that function as skin depigmentation,UV ﬁlters, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-wrinkle, antiaging, skin hydrating, antiacne, as well as antioxidantand cytoprotective agents [ 8]. Therefore, this section will brieﬂy discuss the biological activities andunderlying mechanisms of action of some major cosmeceuticals as well as biochemical pathways andtargets involved in these processes.2.1. Antimelanogenic ActivityThe demand for skincare products is motivated by the intention to brighten and lighten the skintone as well as to eliminate local hyperpigmentation [ 9]. Skin whitening involves the use of natural orsynthetic substances that cause a decrease in pigmentation by reducing the melanin concentration
in the skin. This practice may be driven by dermatological needs such as skin hyperpigmentationcaused by autoimmune conditions, exposure to UV radiation, genetic factors, and hormonal changesthat can induce an overproduction of melanin in the skin [ 10]. The depigmentation process can
caused by autoimmune conditions, exposure to UV radiation, genetic factors, and hormonal changesthat can induce an overproduction of melanin in the skin [ 10]. The depigmentation process caninvolve one or more steps in the melanogenic pathway, such as melanosome transfer or post-transferpigment processing, and degradation. Therefore, melanin biosynthesis can be prevented by avoidingUV exposure, the inhibition of the tyrosinase enzyme, melanocytes metabolism and proliferation, orremoving melanin itself [ 11]. Skin whitening can be achieved by several mechanisms, such as theinhibition of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, downregulation of melanocortin 1 receptoractivity, interference with melanosome maturation and transfer, melanocyte loss, and inhibition of
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 3 of 38the tyrosinase enzyme [ 12]. Several depigmenting agents modulate skin pigmentation by inﬂuencingthe transcription and activity of tyrosinase-related melanogenic enzymes, tyrosinase-related protein-1(TYRP-1), tyrosinase-related protein-2 (TYRP-2), or peroxidase [ 13]. Tyrosinase inhibition has becomethe most common and increasingly popular in skin whitening cosmetic products. Until now, theuse of synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors is rather limited owing to their toxicity, low stability, poor skinpenetration, and low activity [ 14]. Traditionally, compounds from plants such as a hydroquinoneglycoside arbutin ( 1) and azelaic acid ( 2), as well as from fungi such as kojic acid ( 3) (Figure 1) [ 10],have been widely used as skin whiteners in cosmetics. However, in recent years, the research has beenfocused on compounds from marine organisms, especially phlorotannins such as 7-phloroeckol ( 4)
from brown algae (Figure 1), since it is generally believed that these compounds are safer than theconventional skin whiteners. The safety question originated from the idea that the active principles arenot isolated, but instead exist in a complex and stable chemical clusters that prevent their negativeeﬀects on the site of application [15].Molecules 2020 , 25, x 3 of 39  by influencing the transcription and activity of ty rosinase-related melanogenic enzymes, tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TYRP-1), tyrosinase-related prot ein-2 (TYRP-2), or peroxidase [13]. Tyrosinase inhibition has become the most common and increasingly popular in skin whitening cosmetic products. Until now, the use of synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors is rather limited owing to their toxicity, low stability, poor skin penetration, and low activi ty [14]. Traditionally, compounds from plants such as a hydroquinone glycoside arbutin ( 1) and azelaic acid ( 2), as well as from fungi such as kojic acid
(3) (Figure 1) [10], have been widely used as skin whiteners in cosmetics. However, in recent years, the research has been focused on compounds from marine organisms, especially phlorotannins such as 7-phloroeckol ( 4) from brown algae (Figure 1), since it is  generally believed that these compounds are safer than the conventional skin whiteners. The safety question originated from the idea that the active principles are not isolated, but instead exist in a complex and stable chemical clusters that prevent their negative effects on  the site of application [15].  Figure 1.  Structures of arbutin ( 1), azelaic acid ( 2), kojic acid ( 3), and 7-phloroeckol ( 4). Anti-Tyrosinase Activity Skin pigmentation is the most important photoprotective factor, since melanin does not only function as a broadband UV absorbent but also possesses antioxidant and radical scavenging properties [16]. In addition, melanin also plays an important role in camouflage, heat regulation, and
cosmetic interaction. Pigmentation is highly heri table and regulated by gene tic, environmental, and endocrine factors that modulate the amount, type, and distribution of melanin in the skin, hair, and eyes. As the skin is the largest organ of the body that is always subject to internal and external conditions, it often responses to these factors by modifying the constitutive pigmentation pattern [17]. Consistently, overproduction or a lack of melani n pigment is not just an aesthetic problem since minor changes in the physiological status of the hu man body or exposure to harmful external factors can affect pigmentation patterns either in transito ry (such as in pregnancy) or permanent (e.g., age spots) manners [17]. For this reason, there is al so a great demand for whitening cosmetics for the treatment of lentigo, pregnancy mask, or even hy perpigmentation caused by  medicine poisoning.
Melanin is produced by sequential enzymatic pr ocesses in melanosomes, an organelle residing
treatment of lentigo, pregnancy mask, or even hy perpigmentation caused by  medicine poisoning. Melanin is produced by sequential enzymatic pr ocesses in melanosomes, an organelle residing in melanocytes, and then transferred to nearby keratinocytes for photoprotection [18,19]. Tyrosinase is a multifunctional, membrane glycosylated and copper-containing oxidase enzyme that intervenes in the early stages of melanogenesis by the hydrox ylation of tyrosine to 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) and subsequently oxidizes DOPA to dopaquinone [20]. Since tyrosinase is the rate-limiting enzyme, it is critical for melanin synthesis and controls the pigmentation in the skin. Thus, the Figure 1. Structures of arbutin ( 1), azelaic acid ( 2), kojic acid ( 3), and 7-phloroeckol ( 4).Anti-Tyrosinase ActivitySkin pigmentation is the most important photoprotective factor, since melanin does not onlyfunction as a broadband UV absorbent but also possesses antioxidant and radical scavenging
properties [ 16]. In addition, melanin also plays an important role in camouﬂage, heat regulation,and cosmetic interaction. Pigmentation is highly heritable and regulated by genetic, environmental,and endocrine factors that modulate the amount, type, and distribution of melanin in the skin, hair,and eyes. As the skin is the largest organ of the body that is always subject to internal and externalconditions, it often responses to these factors by modifying the constitutive pigmentation pattern [ 17].Consistently, overproduction or a lack of melanin pigment is not just an aesthetic problem since minorchanges in the physiological status of the human body or exposure to harmful external factors canaﬀect pigmentation patterns either in transitory (such as in pregnancy) or permanent (e.g., age spots)manners [ 17]. For this reason, there is also a great demand for whitening cosmetics for the treatment oflentigo, pregnancy mask, or even hyperpigmentation caused by medicine poisoning.
Melanin is produced by sequential enzymatic processes in melanosomes, an organelle residing inmelanocytes, and then transferred to nearby keratinocytes for photoprotection [ 18,19]. Tyrosinase is amultifunctional, membrane glycosylated and copper-containing oxidase enzyme that intervenes in theearly stages of melanogenesis by the hydroxylation of tyrosine to 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 4 of 38and subsequently oxidizes DOPA to dopaquinone [ 20]. Since tyrosinase is the rate-limiting enzyme,it is critical for melanin synthesis and controls the pigmentation in the skin. Thus, the inhibition of thisbiological target is currently the most common approach for the development of skin whitening agentsfor cosmetics [18].Despite a large number of compounds exhibiting the in vitro tyrosinase inhibitory activity, only afew were e ﬀective in clinical trials [ 21,22]. Thus, understanding the mechanisms by which di ﬀerentfactors and compounds induce melanogenesis is fundamental to design and develop products withparticular purposes such as pigmentary diseases therapy and tanning products to reduce skin cancer risk,among others [ 17]. Furthermore, tyrosinase was also reported to catalyze the formation of dopaminequinone in human substantia nigra, which is a substance that may be involved in a dopamine
neurotoxicity and various neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s disease. Consistently,tyrosinase might also be a potential target for drug development for the treatment of Parkinson’sdisease [ 23]. The discovery of novel tyrosinase inhibitors with an ability to regulate melanogenesis isof special interest, as the excessive production of melanin leads to hyperpigmentation of the skin inthe form of freckles, the so-called “age spots” and melanoma. Although several tyrosinase inhibitorsbelonging to di ﬀerent chemical classes have been discovered from marine resources as skin whiteningagents or for the treatment of pigmentation disturbances, some of them have negative e ﬀects on humanhealth [24].Another important aspect is that although the inhibitory strength of tyrosinase inhibitors isnormally expressed as their values of half inhibitory concentration (IC 50), it is not possible to directly
compare the inhibitory activity of di ﬀerent compounds from their IC 50values reported in the literature,since the experimental conditions such as substrate concentrations, incubation time, and the batchesof commercial tyrosinase enzymes used varied among di ﬀerent assays. To avoid the discrepancy,most studies conducted to evaluate new tyrosinase inhibitors use a standard tyrosinase inhibitor suchas kojic acid ( 3) (Figure 1) as a positive control [ 20]. Kojic acid ( 3), a fungal metabolite currently used asa skin whitening agent in cosmetic and also as a food additive to prevent enzymatic browning, is themost intensively studied tyrosinase inhibitor [25].As tyrosinase inhibitors are not only important depigmentation agents in cosmetics butalso clinically useful for the treatment of some dermatological diseases associated with melaninhyperpigmentation [ 26], it is important to correctly deﬁne the term “tyrosinase inhibitor”. Generally,
the designation of “tyrosinase inhibitor” is not always very clear, because some authors use thesame terminology to refer to inhibitors of melanogenesis whose action mainly involves interferencein melanin formation but without any direct e ﬀect on the tyrosinase enzyme. Thus, only speciﬁcinactivators and /or speciﬁc inhibitors of tyrosinase, which bind directly to the enzyme and inhibit itsactivity, are considered “true inhibitors”. These “true inhibitors” of tyrosinase are then divided into twocategories: (1) speciﬁc tyrosinase inhibitors that bind reversibly to the enzyme, thus reducing its catalyticcapacity [ 20], and (2) speciﬁc tyrosinase inactivators, also known as irreversible inhibitors or “suicidesubstrates”, which form a covalent bond to tyrosinase, thus altering its active site and inactivating theenzyme irreversibly during the catalytic process (e.g., L-DOPA and catechol). Most importantly, these
compounds are generally speciﬁc for tyrosinase and do not inactivate other proteins [ 27,28]. Tyrosinaseinhibitors can be also categorized, based either on their chemical structures or inhibitory mechanisms,
inhibitors can be also categorized, based either on their chemical structures or inhibitory mechanisms,into ﬁve major classes: (1) polyphenols, (2) benzaldehyde and benzoate derivatives, (3) long-chain lipidsand steroids, (4) other natural or synthetic inhibitors, and (5) irreversible inactivators. Polyphenolsrepresent the most diverse and largest group of tyrosinase inhibitors, ﬂavonoids being the majorrepresentative of this group [ 29]. In addition to ﬂavonoids, several stilbenes and coumarin derivativesare found to have anti-tyrosinase activity [30].2.2. Antiaging ActivityThe term “skin aging” refers to the degradation of the dermis, including thinning, dryness, laxity,fragility, enlarged pores, ﬁne lines and wrinkles, vasculature prominences, increase in transparency,
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 5 of 38and loss of elasticity [ 31]. The aging process reduces skin thickness, elasticity, and curling of elasticﬁbers in the skin, which gives rise to wrinkles [ 32]. Intrinsic aging is generally determined by geneticfactors; however, extrinsic factors such as exposure to sunlight, pollution or nicotine, repetitive musclemovements such as squinting or frowning, and lifestyle such as diet, sleeping position, and overallhealth also contribute to the aging process [ 31]. Aging is also inﬂuenced by a decrease in collagen geneexpression, low ﬁbroblast activity, and ﬁbroblast regeneration as well as shrinking of the lamellar barrier,which results in the inability of the skin to retain moisture. Although the mechanisms underlying skinaging are not completely elucidated, the cosmetic industry continues to o ﬀer an enormous variety ofantiaging products, most of which is claimed to stimulate collagen and glycosaminoglycan (GAG)
synthesis by ﬁbroblasts in the epidermis, thus increasing the ﬁrmness and ﬂexibility of the corneallayer of the skin [33].Human skin is the anatomical barrier for pathogens and physical damages, acting as a partitionbetween internal and external environments [ 34,35]. The skin protects our body from externalaggressors, especially the sun, which involves a series of mechanisms that minimize the damageswhen exposed to UV radiation. These mechanisms can be controlled by certain organic and inorganiccompounds, e.g., melanin ( 5) (Figure 2) [ 34,35]. Di ﬀerent organisms produce di ﬀerent chemicalsto protect themselves from the deleterious e ﬀects of UV radiation. For example, while animals(including humans) use melanin ( 5) to protect themselves from UV radiation, higher plants producesecondary metabolites such as ﬂavonoids, and microorganisms that live in the marine environmentswith high volume of sunlight produce compounds such as scytonemin ( 6) (Figure 2), mycosporine-like
amino acids (MAAs), and several other UV-absorbing substances of unknown chemical structurefor the same purpose [ 36,37]. Carotenoids, another class of UV ﬁlters produced by many species ofmicroalgae, are also major active compounds among the top ingredients with antiaging properties [ 38],among which β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2) is one of the most e ﬀective compounds to prevent reactiveoxygen species (ROS) formation, thus avoiding cellular damage and the aging process [39].Molecules 2020 , 25, x 7 of 39  advantage over their synthetic counterparts, since th ey have low irritancy to the skin, which is ideal for the anti-wrinkle formulations [81].  Figure 2.  The structures of melanin ( 5), scytonemin ( 6), β-carotene ( 7), mannosylerythritol ( 8), rhamnolipid ( 9), and sophorolipids (free acid type  (10a ) and lactone type (10b )). 2.3. Antioxidant Activity Antioxidants play an important role in cellul ar protection against aging by preventing UV-
induced ROS such as superoxide anion (O 2-), hydroxyl radical HO.), and H 2O2 to attack membrane lipids, proteins, and DNA [82,83]. Since the oxidatio n of membrane lipid is one of the most important factors that decreases the youthful appearance of the skin [84], the prevention of ROS formation is fundamental. Antioxidants provide protection against the pro-oxidative environment to which human skin is exposed, in particular, UV radiation, smoke, and air pollutants [82,83]. Therefore, the consumption of antioxidant-rich f ood supplements is an important strategy used in the so-called “antioxidant therapy” to maintain health as well as to prevent many diseases. Antioxidants consist of enzymatic and non-enzymatic molecules. Enzymatic antioxidants include superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GSH), glutathione reductase (GR), and glutathione transferase (GST), which are present in human pl asma and erythrocytes [85,86]. Non-enzymatic
transferase (GST), which are present in human pl asma and erythrocytes [85,86]. Non-enzymatic antioxidants consist of many classes of small molecules such as β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2), R-tocopherol (TOH) ( 11), ascorbic acid ( 12), and ubiquinol ( 13) (Figure 3), among others [87]. Currently, many synthetic antioxidants su ch as butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) ( 14), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) ( 15), tert- butylhydroquinone (TBHQ) ( 16), and propyl gallate ( 17) (Figure 3) are used as additives to suppress oxidation in food , cosmetics, and drugs. However, the use of these synthetic antioxidants for food or  drugs has been restricted, because they may lead to potential problems in human health due to their toxicity and lack of safety [88,89]. On the contrary, since natural antioxidants are considered as safe alternat ives, many research efforts have been carried out to discover effective natural antioxid ants for the cosmetics industry [90 –93]. Natural antioxidants
such as phlorotannins, sulfated polysaccharides, fucosterol ( 18), and fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3), all derived from macroalgae, are believed to be good  alternatives for the cosmetics industry [8,94]. Figure 2. The structures of melanin ( 5), scytonemin ( 6),β-carotene ( 7), mannosylerythritol ( 8),rhamnolipid ( 9), and sophorolipids (free acid type ( 10a) and lactone type ( 10b)).
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 6 of 382.2.1. Antiphotoaging ActivityChronic exposure to UV radiation can cause dermatoheliosis or photoaging [ 40]. Exposure to UVirradiation, both UVA (400 nm <λ<320 nm) and UVB (320 nm <λ<290 nm), can lead to alterations inthe composition of the dermal extracellular matrix (ECM), resulting in wrinkles, laxity, coarseness,mottled pigmentation, and histological changes including epidermal thickness and connective tissuealteration or even skin cancer (melanoma), which are typically mediated by ROS [ 41–43]. Continuousexposure to UV radiation leads to numerous complications that are correlated with various pathologicalconsequences of the skin damage. For example, sunburn occurs when exposure to UV radiationexceeds the protective capacity of an individual’s melanin [ 43–46]. Although short-term solar exposurecan be beneﬁcial on mood and vitamin D synthesis, it can also cause an immediate skin burn,
detrimental skin thickening, actinic erythema, and excessive tanning. On the other hand, the long-termeﬀects are all negative, including photo-induced skin aging and photo-carcinogenesis caused by UVradiation-induced immunosuppression. The severity of these long-term e ﬀects requires the use of anappropriate protection during UV radiation exposure [ 47]. Although UVB a ﬀects mainly the epidermisand UVA intervenes directly in the dermal compartment, both are the major factors responsible forthe photoaging of human skin, damaging dermal ﬁbroblasts, through the induction of cytokines,matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and mitochondrial DNA mutations [ 48,49]. Radiation-inducedoxidation may cause photoaging by the reduction of antioxidant enzymes and the antioxidant defensemechanism, which may result in signiﬁcant oxidative damage, immunomodulation, the activationof melanogenesis, and ultimately carcinogenesis [ 50]. To avoid the deleterious e ﬀects caused by UV
exposure, sunscreen products that commonly contain organic and /or inorganic ﬁlters are used [ 51–53].However, a number of naturally occurring photoprotective compounds such as scytonemin ( 6, fromcyanobacteria), mycosporines (from fungi and cyanobacteria), MAAs (from cyanobacteria, microalgae,macroalgae, yeasts, fungi, sponges, corals, and animals), ﬂavonoids (from higher plants), melanins(in humans and other animals and even some bacteria), and several other UV-absorbing substances ofunknown chemical structures from di ﬀerent organisms have been explored to develop novel UV ﬁltersfor sunscreen products to prevent the photodamage [54–56].A variety of photosynthetic organisms have been investigated as sources of photoprotectivecompounds. These include mycosporines, MAAs, and several other UV ﬁlters [ 42,56,57]. MAAs belongto a family of secondary metabolites produced by a variety of organisms, especially those inhabit
ecosystems with a high amount of sunlight such as marine and freshwater environments, for protectionagainst solar radiation [ 58]. These low molecular weight (usually <400 Da) and colorless compounds arewater soluble and share the same chemical sca ﬀold, but they di ﬀer in substituents and /or the presenceand type of amino acids. Their structures consist of cyclohexenone or cyclohexenimine chromophoreslinked to a nitrogen substituent of an amino acid or its iminoalcohol by a conjugation [ 58,59].MAAs absorb UV radiation ranging from 310 to 362 nm, and dissipate this energy in the form of heatradiation to the surrounding environment [ 60]. The protection e ﬃciency of MAAs against UV radiationdepends also on their location in the cell, i.e., MAAs located in the cytoplasm provide a limitedprotection against UV radiation while extracellular MAAs are more e ﬀective protector [ 61,62]. On the
other hand, scytonemin ( 6) (Figure 2), a stable yellow-brown and lipid-soluble pigment, is locatedin the extracellular polysaccharide sheath of some cyanobacteria. Scytonemin ( 6) has a maximum
other hand, scytonemin ( 6) (Figure 2), a stable yellow-brown and lipid-soluble pigment, is locatedin the extracellular polysaccharide sheath of some cyanobacteria. Scytonemin ( 6) has a maximumabsorption at 386 nm, but also absorbs signiﬁcantly at 252, 278, and 300 nm. Recent studies suggestedthat scytonemin ( 6) not only has a potential as a UV ﬁlter in cosmetics but also as an anticancerdrug [63].2.2.2. Anti-Wrinkle ActivityA number of investigations revealed that MMPs, a family of secreted or transmembrane zincendopeptidases, are responsible for the inhibition of collagen synthesis in photoaged skin [ 64]. MMPsare produced by a variety of cells, including ﬁbroblasts, keratinocytes, mast cells, macrophages, andneutrophils, and they are believed to play a major role in wrinkle formation [ 65,66]. MMPs can be
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 7 of 38sub-divided in three major functional groups, i.e., interstitial collagenases (which degrade types I, II,and III collagen) [ 67], stromelysins (which degrade laminin, ﬁbronectin, and proteoglycans) [ 68], andgelatinases (which degrade type IV and V collagens) [ 69]. MMPs expression is usually induced byvarious extracellular stimuli such as growth factors, cytokines, and UV radiation [ 70,71]. MMP geneexpression can be also inﬂuenced by ROS through the signal transduction pathway [ 72]. Moreover,MMPs overexpression is associated with tissue remodeling, repair, and destruction phenomena.For example, MMP-2 and MMP-9 can degrade ECM and inﬂuence the formation of wrinkles andskin thickness [ 73]. The induction of collagenase or MMP-1, leading to collagen type I degradation,can enhance wrinkle formation, and since collagen type I is a major constituent of the connective
tissue, it cannot be compensated by a concomitant induction of collagen synthesis [ 74]. This imbalanceis usually increased by the inﬂuence of UVA irradiation, resulting in a decreased expression ofcollagen 1A1 and collagen 1A2, which induces the upregulation of cytokine interleukin (IL)-6 [ 75].On the other hand, the transcription factor, activating protein-1 (AP1), which is activated uponUVA stimulation, induces the MMP-1 synthesis and the repression of collagen 1A1 and collagen1A2 [ 76]. Accordingly, MMPs are useful markers for skin aging and agents that stimulate collagensynthesis and /or reduce the photo-induced upregulation of MMPs are potentially useful for skincareproducts [ 33]. Interestingly, several studies have revealed that nutrient-derived compounds such aschitooligosaccharides, ﬂavonoids, polyphenols, and fatty acids are able to inhibit the activation andexpression of MMPs [ 71,77,78]. Therefore, these compounds could have a strong potential for the
development of nutricosmetic products.All the anti-wrinkle /antiaging cosmetic formulations normally contain moisturizing componentsto maintain skin hydration, which is essential for skin functions. The external application of lipidsthat limit water loss, or of compounds with a capacity to form bonds with water molecules areused to mimic the natural hydrating mechanisms of the skin [ 10]. Traditionally, linoleic acid andγ-linolenic acid are commonly used for the oil /water emulsion to retain the water in the skin inorder to restore transepidermal water loss (TEWL) to its normal level [ 79]. However, recently, somemarine microorganisms-derived biosurfactants such as mannosylerythritol ( 8), rhamnolipids ( 9),and sophorolipids ( 10aand 10b) (Figure 2) are being investigated for their application in the cosmeticindustry due to their emulsifying, solubilizing, wetting, foaming, and dispersing properties, which can
not only enhance the solubilization of hydrophobic ingredients in the products but also facilitatetheir delivery through the skin barrier [ 80]. Moreover, these marine-derived biosurfactants have anadvantage over their synthetic counterparts, since they have low irritancy to the skin, which is idealfor the anti-wrinkle formulations [81].2.3. Antioxidant ActivityAntioxidants play an important role in cellular protection against aging by preventing UV-inducedROS such as superoxide anion (O 2−), hydroxyl radical HO.), and H 2O2to attack membrane lipids,proteins, and DNA [ 82,83]. Since the oxidation of membrane lipid is one of the most importantfactors that decreases the youthful appearance of the skin [ 84], the prevention of ROS formationis fundamental. Antioxidants provide protection against the pro-oxidative environment to whichhuman skin is exposed, in particular, UV radiation, smoke, and air pollutants [ 82,83]. Therefore,
the consumption of antioxidant-rich food supplements is an important strategy used in the so-called“antioxidant therapy” to maintain health as well as to prevent many diseases. Antioxidants consist
the consumption of antioxidant-rich food supplements is an important strategy used in the so-called“antioxidant therapy” to maintain health as well as to prevent many diseases. Antioxidants consistof enzymatic and non-enzymatic molecules. Enzymatic antioxidants include superoxide dismutase(SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GSH), glutathione reductase (GR), and glutathionetransferase (GST), which are present in human plasma and erythrocytes [ 85,86]. Non-enzymaticantioxidants consist of many classes of small molecules such as β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2), R-tocopherol(TOH) ( 11), ascorbic acid ( 12), and ubiquinol ( 13) (Figure 3), among others [87].
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 8 of 38Molecules 2020 , 25, x 8 of 39   Figure 3.  Structures of R-tocopherol ( 11), ascorbic acid ( 12), ubiquinol ( 13), hydroxyanisole ( 14), butylated hydroxytoluene ( 15), tertiary butylhydroquinone ( 16), propyl gallate ( 17), fucosterol ( 18), and fucoxanthin ( 19). Natural pigments such as chlorophylls, carotenoids, and tocopherol derivatives such as vitamin E and isoprenoids are also interesting natural an tioxidants that can be obtained from marine resources [90 –93]. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of carotenoids, which contribute to their photoprotection of the skin through inhi bition of UVA-induced ROS toxicity, make them major ingredients in many sunscreen lotions [53]. On the other hand, MAAs can not only protect the skin against UV radiation but also exhibit a high an tioxidant activity by scavenging superoxide anion, and therefore prevent lipid peroxidation [95 –97]. The properties of M AAs as UV filters and ROS
scavengers suggest that they could be very useful  ingredients for sunscreen products [98]. Another interesting class of natural antioxidants is marine-derived oligosaccharides and peptides. Algae-derived carbohydrates have been suggested to have, besides their thickening and moisturizing properties, antioxidant, anti-melanogenic, and antiaging properties, which are beneficial to skin, therefore representing value-a dded cosmeceuticals [99,100]. 2.4. Antiacne Activity Acne vulgaris, commonly known as acne or pimples, which is a typical condition of adolescence but can also happen in adults, is the most common skin disorder characterized by the inflammation of the sebaceous glands [101]. Acne is caused by multi-factorial events including hormonal, microbiological, and immunological mechanisms such as the androgen-mediated stimulation of sebaceous gland activity, follicular hyperker atinization, and inflammation. The bacterium
Propionibacterium acnes  is a causative agent of the inflammatory stage and thus initiates the inflamed lesion [102 –104]. Therefore, P. acnes and Staphylococcus epidermidis  are the main targets for the prevention and medical treatment of acne  [101,103]. These anaerobic bacteria stimulate a production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and indu ce the release of ROS whose excessive production results in a destructive phenomenon leading to scar ring [105]. They also release lipases to digest a Figure 3. Structures of R-tocopherol ( 11), ascorbic acid ( 12), ubiquinol ( 13), hydroxyanisole ( 14),butylated hydroxytoluene ( 15), tertiary butylhydroquinone ( 16), propyl gallate ( 17), fucosterol ( 18),and fucoxanthin ( 19).Currently, many synthetic antioxidants such as butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) ( 14), butylatedhydroxytoluene (BHT) ( 15),tert-butylhydroquinone (TBHQ) ( 16), and propyl gallate ( 17) (Figure 3)
are used as additives to suppress oxidation in food, cosmetics, and drugs. However, the use ofthese synthetic antioxidants for food or drugs has been restricted, because they may lead to potentialproblems in human health due to their toxicity and lack of safety [ 88,89]. On the contrary, since naturalantioxidants are considered as safe alternatives, many research e ﬀorts have been carried out todiscover e ﬀective natural antioxidants for the cosmetics industry [ 90–93]. Natural antioxidants such asphlorotannins, sulfated polysaccharides, fucosterol ( 18), and fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3), all derivedfrom macroalgae, are believed to be good alternatives for the cosmetics industry [8,94].Natural pigments such as chlorophylls, carotenoids, and tocopherol derivatives such as vitaminE and isoprenoids are also interesting natural antioxidants that can be obtained from marineresources [90–93] . The antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory properties of carotenoids, which contribute
to their photoprotection of the skin through inhibition of UVA-induced ROS toxicity, make them
resources [90–93] . The antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory properties of carotenoids, which contributeto their photoprotection of the skin through inhibition of UVA-induced ROS toxicity, make themmajor ingredients in many sunscreen lotions [ 53]. On the other hand, MAAs can not only protectthe skin against UV radiation but also exhibit a high antioxidant activity by scavenging superoxideanion, and therefore prevent lipid peroxidation [ 95–97]. The properties of MAAs as UV ﬁlters andROS scavengers suggest that they could be very useful ingredients for sunscreen products [ 98].Another interesting class of natural antioxidants is marine-derived oligosaccharides and peptides.Algae-derived carbohydrates have been suggested to have, besides their thickening and moisturizingproperties, antioxidant, anti-melanogenic, and antiaging properties, which are beneﬁcial to skin,therefore representing value-added cosmeceuticals [99,100].
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 9 of 382.4. Antiacne ActivityAcne vulgaris, commonly known as acne or pimples, which is a typical condition of adolescence butcan also happen in adults, is the most common skin disorder characterized by the inﬂammation of thesebaceous glands [ 101]. Acne is caused by multi-factorial events including hormonal, microbiological,and immunological mechanisms such as the androgen-mediated stimulation of sebaceous glandactivity, follicular hyperkeratinization, and inﬂammation. The bacterium Propionibacterium acnes is acausative agent of the inﬂammatory stage and thus initiates the inﬂamed lesion [ 102–104]. Therefore,P . acnes and Staphylococcus epidermidis are the main targets for the prevention and medical treatment ofacne [ 101,103]. These anaerobic bacteria stimulate a production of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines andinduce the release of ROS whose excessive production results in a destructive phenomenon leading
to scarring [ 105]. They also release lipases to digest a surplus of the skin oil and sebum, which inturn stimulates an intense local inﬂammation that bursts hair follicles. Therefore, the inhibition of thegrowth of P . acnes has been recognized as a strategic method for treatment of acne in the cosmeticsindustry. In the search for new antibacterial compounds against P . acnes from marine bioresources todevelop new natural cosmetic products to prevent acne, sargafuran ( 20) (Figure 4), isolated from theextract of a marine brown alga Sargassum macrocarpum , was found to exhibit potent antiacne activityagainst P . acnes with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value of 15 µg/mL [ 106]. In an e ﬀort toﬁnd mari (ne-derived compounds to treat acne vulgaris, Choi et al. have evaluated the antibacterialactivity of various species of macroalgae, commonly found around the coast of South Korea; however,
only Ecklonia kurome ,E. cava, and Ishige sinicola exhibited strong growth inhibitory activity againstP . acnes as well as an anti-inﬂammatory activity [ 107]. Therefore, compounds produced by thesethree algal species could be promising agents for the development of cosmetic products to combatacne vulgaris.Molecules 2020 , 25, x 11 of 39  biotechnological potential due to its myriad of pharmacological effects and its non-toxic edible resources [138]. Specifically, low molecular weight fucoidans (LMF), which have a better bioavailability in tissues when compared to high molecular weight fucoidans (HMF), have been found to exhibit benefici al effects such as anti-inflammation  and angiogenesis, suggesting their clinical potential for dermal wound healing [108]. In this context, Park et al. have investigated the wound-healing properties of LMF, which wa s extracted from the marine brown seaweed Undaria
pinnatifida, in a full-thickness dermal excision rat model in comparison with a commercial product Madecassol Care™, which contains 1% Centella asiatica . They have found that the topical application of LMF showed much better effects on wound contraction, in a dose-dependent manner, a n d  f a s t e r  h a l f - c l o s u r e  t i m e  ( C T 5 0 )  w h e n  c o m p a r e d  t o  M a d e c a s s o l  C a r e ™ ,  i n d i c a t i n g  t h a t  L M F  enhanced the wound healing throug h its anti-inflammatory activity or promotion of the granulation phase. These results are supported by the fact that fucoidans mediate anti-inflammatory effects via the reduction of neutrophil adhesion and leukoc yte recruitment, or the inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines release, as previously re ported [139]. Additionally, LMF also accelerated angiogenesis and collagen deposition in the increased granular tissue, thus enhancing re-
epithelialization. This phenomenon could be explai ned by the fact that collagen deposition and a formation of tight cross-links among collagen molecules and with other proteins, as well as the
epithelialization. This phenomenon could be explai ned by the fact that collagen deposition and a formation of tight cross-links among collagen molecules and with other proteins, as well as the proliferation of the various cells in the granular tissue, could enhance wound contraction [140]. On the other hand, MMPs, especially MMP2 and MMP9, are known to be mediators of the collagen matrix during remodeling and wound re-epithelialization [141]. In this context, it was found that treatment with LMF caused an increase in MMP9  on day 7 post-treatment in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting that LMF caused an alteration of the temporal expression of MMP9 to accelerate tissue remodeling in response to the increased secret ion of various cytokines or  their protection from the proteolytic degradation. Additionally, LMF treatment caused a reduction of the lipid peroxidation (malondialdehyde), while the antioxidant enzymes such as SOD, CAT, and GSH levels
were increased. Previous studies have report ed that the sulfate contents of fucoidan ( 23) (Figure 4) [142] played an important role in its antioxidant ac tivity, thus the high numbers of sulfate groups in LMF might contribute to its strong antioxidant activity. On the other hand, there is a strong evidence that transforming growth factor beta  (TGF-β) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are involved in the improvement of wound repair by  increasing the fibroblast repopulation and angiogenesis [143], and since LMF treatment also showed a substantial increase in TGF- β and VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) immunoactive cells, this phenomenon could also contribute to its wound-healing capacity.  Figure 4.  Structures of sargafuran ( 20), docosahexaenoic acid ( 21), eicosapentaenoic acid ( 22), and fucoidan ( 23). 3. Cosmeceuticals from Marine Origin  The increasing awareness of consumers for natu ral cosmetics has trigge red a surge to explore
nature’s wealth for biologically active compound s for cosmetic applications [9]. Cosmetics that Figure 4. Structures of sargafuran ( 20), docosahexaenoic acid ( 21), eicosapentaenoic acid ( 22), andfucoidan ( 23).2.5. Wound Healing and Anti-Inﬂammatory ActivitiesWound healing is a complex and tightly regulated process of recovering the forms and anatomicalfunctions of injured tissues, which consists of three overlapping phases [ 108,109]. The initial inflammatoryphase, characterized by platelet activation and the release of growth factors and cytokines, is followed bythe proliferative phase, where growth factors are secreted and cell proliferation is enhanced, and finallythe last phase consisting of the remodeling, in which collagen production and organization take place,which leads to the mature scar [ 110]. Acute or normal wound healing proceeds through the orderlyoverlapping processes, allowing for repair of the skin function and integrity in a coordinated manner in
healthy individuals, in a period of 7 to 10 days [ 111]. The smooth progression of all these events willlead to a normal completion of wound healing and restore the disrupted functions of the skin [ 112,113].However, any changes that interrupt the healing process can aggravate tissue damage and delay the
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 10 of 38repair process, contributing to chronic wound healing. Various factors, such as infections, underlyingdiseases (e.g., diabetes or cardiovascular disease), medications (e.g., steroids) and old age can impair thewound-healing process [ 109,111]. On the other hand, inflammation is a vital event of the body’s immuneresponse that involves the interaction of a complex cascade of various cells, including leukocytes, bloodcells, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells [ 108]. There are two types of signals in the inflammatory process:those that start and maintain the inflammation, and the others that stop the process, and the asymmetryof these signals can cause cell and tissue damage. Thus, the deregulation of the whole process can lead tochronic inflammation and even to death in some cases [ 114]. Inflammatory skin diseases are very commondermatological problems that exist in a variety of forms, i.e., from occasional rashes accompanied by skin
itching and redness to more chronic conditions such as atopic dermatitis, rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis,and psoriasis [ 115]. Cutaneous inflammation has been linked to many diseases, including cancer anddiscoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) as well as visible anticipated skin aging. However, visible skinaging can be reduced and prevented by a daily use of antioxidants or anti-inflammatory cosmeceuticals,coupled with a diet rich in anti-inflammatory and antioxidant supplementation [ 116]. Microbiologicaland immunological factors and toxic agents can initiate the inflammatory response by activating a varietyof humoral and cellular mediators such as prostaglandins (PGs), leukotrienes (LTs), NO, tumor necrosisfactor alpha (TNF- α), and cytokines of the interleukin (IL) families [ 117]. Dermal and epidermal cellsconstitutively produce various cytokines and eicosanoids that play a crucial role in the maintenance
of homeostasis and regulation of skin inflammation, and whose levels are regulated by physiologicaland pathophysiological events [ 118,119]. Arachidonic acid (AA), a precursor of the pro-inflammatoryeicosanoids, is released from membrane phospholipids in the course of inflammatory activation and thenmetabolized to PGs and LTs [ 118,119]. Various strategies have been investigated to control the excessiveproduction of lipid mediators on different levels of biochemical pathways, such as the inhibition ofphospholipase A2 (PLA2), triggering of enzyme for AA release, blockage of cyclooxygenase (COX) andlipoxygenase (LOX) pathways, and the development of receptor antagonists against platelet-activatingfactor (PAF) and LTs [ 118,119]. Most conventional treatments for dermal wounds such as nonsteroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), immunomodulatory drugs, and topical corticosteroids aim to reduce
inflammation [ 120]. However, this treatment can have a negative impact on wound healing, includingadverse effects such as atrophy, osteoporosis, obesity, and glaucoma [ 121]. Although it is pivotal tosearch for new anti-inflammatory agents with less adverse effects, the endeavor is quite challenging dueto the complexity of the inflammatory process and its role in the host defense. However, recent progressto unravel the mechanisms involved in inflammation has allowed the identification of new targets [ 122].Considering the marine resources, none can compare with sea cucumbers in terms ofwound-healing properties [ 123–125]. Sea cucumbers, especially Stichopus hermanni , commonly knownas “gamat emas”, have long been recognized in the folk medicine for the treatment of a myriadof diseases, including wound healing [ 126].In vivo studies, using various types of animal models,demonstrated that wounds treated with sea cucumber extracts were better and more rapidly healed
when compared to those without treatment. The topical application of extracts of various species of
demonstrated that wounds treated with sea cucumber extracts were better and more rapidly healedwhen compared to those without treatment. The topical application of extracts of various species ofsea cucumbers to wounds induced in animals was found to accelerate the wound contraction rate,which is a fundamental process in a wound-healing phase [ 127]. Moreover, treating a burn woundwith a S. hermanii -based hydrogel wound dressing resulted in a signiﬁcant wound contraction rates atday 21 and 28 post-burn wound. On the contrary, no signiﬁcant di ﬀerences were detected at day 7and 14 [ 128]. This e ﬀect might be due to the cross-linked “gamat hydrogel ( S. hermanii ) dressing” thatconfers its capacity to retain the active ingredients and delays their delivery on the wounded skin,thus acting at a later stage of the wound-healing phase. The advantage of this hydrogel dressing isthat biologically active compounds are immobilized for a longer period in the hydrogel matrices, thus
creating a sustained and controlled release system that could signiﬁcantly enhance the activity of theincorporated sea cucumber extract during tissue repair and e ﬀectively interact with the wounds andfacilitate a healing process at a later stage [ 128]. Another sea cucumber species, S. choronotus, was alsofound to act at the initial phase of wound healing [ 125]. Interestingly, its aqueous extract showed
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 11 of 38antioxidant activity approximately 80% higher than its organic counterpart [ 129]. Since the presenceof excessive free radicals is associated with impaired wound healing, thus free radicals scavengingby antioxidants present in the aqueous extracts of cucumbers would contribute to wound healing.Moreover, fatty acids composition analysis revealed that the aqueous extract contained higher contentof docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) ( 21) (Figure 4) than the organic extract [ 130]. It was hypothesized thatDHA ( 21) may stimulate pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production at wound sites, thus helping to controlan infection as well as preparing the tissue for further repair by enhancing phagocytosis, stimulatingthe migration of keratinocytes at wound edges, increasing ﬁbroblast chemotaxis and proliferation,triggering ECM proteins breakdown, as well as regulating the release of other cytokines and growth
factors [ 131]. Besides, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) ( 22) and DHA ( 21) (Figure 4), the major fatty acidsin sea cucumbers, also intervene in the process of inﬂammation by stimulation of the production ofresolvins (which primarily inhibit IL-1 βproduction) and protectins (which inhibit TNF- αand IL-1βproduction) through COX-2 and 5-LOX pathways [132]. The study of other species of sea cucumbersalso corroborated that their aqueous extracts are more e ﬃcient in wound healing than their organicextracts. Furthermore, the anti-inﬂammatory e ﬀect of sea cucumbers in clinical settings was also studiedby incorporating sea cucumber extracts into Carbopol®gel base and applied topically to diabetic footulcer patients for 12 weeks. The results showed that the levels of TNF- αbetween the beginning and onweeks 8, 10, and 12 were signiﬁcantly di ﬀerent [ 133]. It was suggested that the saponin content in the
extracts of sea cucumbers may play a role in preventing the lipopolysaccharide-induced production ofTNF-αby nuclear factor- κB (NF-κB), which is a transcription factor that regulates the transcription ofmany genes involved in the inﬂammation process [134,135].Another marine-derived compound with wound-healing capacity is fucoidan ( 23) (Figure 4).Fucoidan ( 23) is a fucose-enriched and sulfated polysaccharide found mainly in the ECM of brownalgae. Fucoidan ( 23) is made up of l-fucose, sulfate groups, and one or more small proportions ofother sugars [ 136]. Structurally, fucoidan ( 23) consists of two types of homofucose: those containingrepeated (1→3)-l-fucopyranose, and the others consisting of alternating and repeated (1 →3)- and(1→4)-l-fucopyranose [ 137]. This class of polysaccharide has been extensively investigated for itsbiotechnological potential due to its myriad of pharmacological e ﬀects and its non-toxic edible
resources [ 138]. Speciﬁcally, low molecular weight fucoidans (LMF), which have a better bioavailabilityin tissues when compared to high molecular weight fucoidans (HMF), have been found to exhibitbeneﬁcial e ﬀects such as anti-inﬂammation and angiogenesis, suggesting their clinical potential fordermal wound healing [ 108]. In this context, Park et al. have investigated the wound-healing propertiesof LMF, which was extracted from the marine brown seaweed Undaria pinnatiﬁda, in a full-thicknessdermal excision rat model in comparison with a commercial product Madecassol Care ™, whichcontains 1% Centella asiatica . They have found that the topical application of LMF showed muchbetter e ﬀects on wound contraction, in a dose-dependent manner, and faster half-closure time (CT50)when compared to Madecassol Care ™, indicating that LMF enhanced the wound healing through itsanti-inﬂammatory activity or promotion of the granulation phase. These results are supported by
the fact that fucoidans mediate anti-inﬂammatory e ﬀects via the reduction of neutrophil adhesionand leukocyte recruitment, or the inhibition of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines release, as previously
the fact that fucoidans mediate anti-inﬂammatory e ﬀects via the reduction of neutrophil adhesionand leukocyte recruitment, or the inhibition of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines release, as previouslyreported [ 139]. Additionally, LMF also accelerated angiogenesis and collagen deposition in theincreased granular tissue, thus enhancing re-epithelialization. This phenomenon could be explainedby the fact that collagen deposition and a formation of tight cross-links among collagen moleculesand with other proteins, as well as the proliferation of the various cells in the granular tissue, couldenhance wound contraction [ 140]. On the other hand, MMPs, especially MMP2 and MMP9, are knownto be mediators of the collagen matrix during remodeling and wound re-epithelialization [ 141]. In thiscontext, it was found that treatment with LMF caused an increase in MMP9 on day 7 post-treatment ina dose-dependent manner, suggesting that LMF caused an alteration of the temporal expression of
MMP9 to accelerate tissue remodeling in response to the increased secretion of various cytokines ortheir protection from the proteolytic degradation. Additionally, LMF treatment caused a reduction
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 12 of 38of the lipid peroxidation (malondialdehyde), while the antioxidant enzymes such as SOD, CAT, andGSH levels were increased. Previous studies have reported that the sulfate contents of fucoidan(23) (Figure 4) [ 142] played an important role in its antioxidant activity, thus the high numbersof sulfate groups in LMF might contribute to its strong antioxidant activity. On the other hand,there is a strong evidence that transforming growth factor beta (TGF- β) and vascular endothelialgrowth factor (VEGF) are involved in the improvement of wound repair by increasing the ﬁbroblastrepopulation and angiogenesis [ 143], and since LMF treatment also showed a substantial increase inTGF-βand VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) immunoactive cells, this phenomenon could also contribute toits wound-healing capacity.3. Cosmeceuticals from Marine OriginThe increasing awareness of consumers for natural cosmetics has triggered a surge to explore
nature’s wealth for biologically active compounds for cosmetic applications [ 9]. Cosmetics thatincorporate marine-based extracts or compounds are increasingly launched by the cosmetics industryas an increasing number of consumers are demanding products from natural sources [ 6]. A globaltendency for products considered healthy, environmentally sustainable, and ecologically friendlyobtained has led the cosmetics industry to invest more and more in the research and development (R&D)of new products containing substances or extracts derived from natural resources [ 144]. Therefore, moreand more consumers are looking for cosmetic products with novel bioactive compounds as ingredientsobtained from natural resources because of their numerous beneﬁcial e ﬀects when compared to theirnon-natural counterparts. Although plant natural products have been traditionally used (and arestill used) as active ingredients for natural cosmetics, marine resources have recently emerged as a
rich source of structurally diverse compounds with a myriad of biological properties awaiting tobe explored as cosmeceuticals /nutricosmetics. The marine environment represents an extraordinarybiodiversity, which is important source of a huge chemical diversity with a great potential for industrialdevelopment for pharmaceuticals, cosmeceuticals, nutritional supplements, molecular probes, ﬁnechemicals, and agrochemicals [ 145]. Moreover, with so many new marine species still to be discovered,more research e ﬀorts will be needed to appreciate the vast potentialities that marine environment has tooﬀer [9]. Marine organisms have evolved biochemical and physiological mechanisms that include theproduction of bioactive compounds necessary for reproduction, communication, and protection againstpredation, infection, and competition [ 146]. Not surprisingly, many of these compounds have a great
potential as cosmeceuticals or nutricosmetics due to their antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-allergic,antiaging, anti-wrinkle, anti-tyrosinase, MMP inhibitory activities as well as UV protection [147].Currently, the search for new marine natural products depends on the harvest of specimenswhose drawback is their sustainability and replicability. Sustainability issues are associated withlarge amounts of biomass that are usually required for drug discovery, whereas replicability problemsare related with environmental variability and community-level changes to the chemical ecologyof the target organisms [ 148]. Individuals of the same species sampled in di ﬀerent geographicalareas or di ﬀerent seasons may not contain the same chemical composition and therefore may notguarantee the supply of the target metabolite [ 149]. However, recent techniques in aquaculture ofmarine invertebrates may o ﬀer an alternative to overcome these two issues, as animal biomass can be
continuously produced using homogenous environmental conditions [150].3.1. Macroalgae-Derived Compounds
continuously produced using homogenous environmental conditions [150].3.1. Macroalgae-Derived CompoundsIn general, marine brown and red algae are commonly used as cosmeceuticals in cosmeticproducts [ 151]. Traditionally, macroalgae or seaweeds have been used in the production of phycocolloidssuch as agar, carrageenan, and alginates. Furthermore, some types of brown and red macroalgaeare used in cosmetics due to their vitamins, minerals, amino acids, sugars, and lipids content, inaddition to the presence of other biologically active compounds [ 152,153]. Macroalgae commonlyused in cosmetics are Ulva lactuca, Ascophyllum nodosum, Laminaria longicruris, L. saccharina, L. digitata,
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 13 of 38Alaria esculenta ,Chondrus crispus ,Mastocarpus stellatus , and various species of Porphyra . Normally,algae respond to many stress factors, to which they are exposed in natural environments, by theproduction of a variety of chemical compounds for their defense. Many of these compounds areconsidered valuable as cosmeceuticals for skincare for protection against UV radiation, oxidativestress and aging, smoothening, moisturizing and whitening, and also as pigments for many cosmeticproducts [ 144]. The functional products of macroalgae have been used for decades by the cosmeticindustry as emollients, skin conditioning agents, and viscosity controlling ingredients, mainly due totheir physicochemical properties. Their bulk products, such as agar and carrageenan, have been usedas gelling, thickening, and stabilizer in cosmetic products as well as nutraceuticals [154].
Brown algae account for approximately 59% of the total macroalgae cultivated in the world,followed by red algae at 40% and green algae at less than 1%. Macroalgae can be cultivated onseashores in a large scale with a relatively rapid growth rate, and with a possibility to control theproduction of their bioactive compounds such as proteins, polyphenols, and pigments by manipulatingthe culture conditions [ 155]. A lipophilic extract of a brown alga Alaria esculenta was e ﬀective inthe reduction of cutaneous progerin [ 156], whose over-production is caused by cellular senescenceand progressive telomeres damage, which occur naturally [ 157]. By using a novel gelatin digestionassay to investigate the in vitro inhibitory e ﬀects of Ecklonia cava -derived phlorotannin on MMPactivity, Kim et al. have observed its complete inhibition of bacterial collagenase-1 activity [ 158].A sensitive ﬂuorimetric assay revealed that phlorotannin 6,6’-dieckol ( 24) from E. cava (Figure 5)
can signiﬁcantly inhibit MMP2 and MMP9 activities through the activation of the NF- κB pathway.Additionally, 7-phloroeckol ( 4) (Figure 1) also exhibited excellent inhibitory e ﬀects on pigmentation,which is probably due to its tyrosinase inhibitory activity, and it was proposed as a skin-whiteningagent [ 154,159–161]. Eckol ( 25) and dieckol ( 26) (Figure 5), phlorotannins from E. stolonifera extract alsodisplayed a strong inhibition of MMP1 expression [ 162]. Diphlorethohydroxycarmalol ( 28) (Figure 5),a phlorotannin, isolated from a marine brown alga Ishige okamurae , exhibited a high potency for thewhitening of the skin [ 163], in addition to protective properties against DNA damage induced byUVB radiation via damaged tail and morphological changes in ﬁbroblasts. These dual biologicalproperties of diphlorethohydroxycarmalol ( 28) make it an interesting cosmeceutical candidate [ 159].
Phloroglucinol derivatives from brown algae also possess the tyrosinase inhibitory activity due to theirability to chelate copper in this enzyme [ 164].In vivo studies have shown that both dietary and topicalapplication of polyphenols from brown algae suppressed COX-2 expression and cell proliferation.These results suggest the role of brown algal polyphenols as potential cancer chemopreventive agentsagainst photocarcinogenesis and other adverse e ﬀects of UVB radiation exposure [ 165]. On the otherhand, dolabelladienetriol ( 27) (Figure 5), a dolabellane diterpene isolated from the brown marine algaDictyota pfa ﬃi, was found to downregulate the production of TNF- αand nitric oxide (NO) through aninhibition of NF κB, thus conferring its anti-inﬂammatory activity [ 122]. All of these evidences suggestthat bioactive compounds derived from seaweeds are promising for skincare [ 165]. Another important
seaweed is Laminaria japonica , which is also known as “kombu” in Japan, is used to produce specialalgae-based active ingredients for protective formulations against UV radiation, since it contains a
algae-based active ingredients for protective formulations against UV radiation, since it contains ahighly concentrated form of marine minerals and trace elements. As this alga also produces extremelyeﬀective moisture binding agents that prevent it from drying out at low tide, its extract could beexplored as a potential skin moisturizer as well as to maintain skin ﬁrmness [ 166]. This alga is also arich source of fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3), which has several beneﬁcial properties for skincare such asantioxidant and anti-tyrosinase activities, antimelanogenesis in melanoma, and anti-UVB-induced skinpigmentation. Moreover, fucoxanthin ( 19) oral tratment signiﬁcantly suppressed the mRNA expressionof melanogenesis-related tyrosinase enzyme, suggesting that this compound negatively regulated themelanogenesis factor at a transcriptional level through the suppression of prostaglandin synthesis
and melanogenic stimulant receptors (neurotrophin, PGE2, and melanocyte-stimulating hormoneexpression) [ 167]. Another species of Laminaria with cosmetic potential is L. saccharina , whose extract isrich in proteins, vitamins, minerals, and carbohydrates. The extract of this alga was reported to have
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 14 of 38anti-inﬂammatory and healing properties, in addition to regulating sebaceous gland activity [ 168].The most common edible brown macroalgae of the Sargassaceae family, Hizikia fusiformis , was reportedto contain the anti-tyrosinase ﬂavonoid glycoside [ 169].In vitro studies of the methanol extract of ared marine alga Corallina pilulifera (CPM) revealed that it can prevent UV-induced oxidative stress andMMP2 and MMP9 expressions in human dermal ﬁbroblast (HDF) cells. A combination of algal extractsfrom the red algae Meristotheca dakarensis and Jania rubens , available on the market as dermocea®(Gelyma), was claimed to stimulate keratin, GAGs, and collagens I and III synthesis [ 170]. All ofthese studies point to a great potential of marine brown and red algae, in the form of extracts or purecompounds, as valuable marine-derived cosmeceuticals.Molecules 2020 , 25, x 14 of 39
Molecules 2020 , 25, x 14 of 39   Figure 5.  Structures of 6,6´-dieckol ( 24), eckol ( 25), dieckol ( 26), dolabelladienetriol ( 27), and diphlorethohydroxycarmalol ( 28). Extracts of green algae have also been incorporated in various cosmetic products. The extract of Codium tomentosum  was claimed to be a good source of glucuronic acid ( 38), and it is used for a distribution of water in the skin as well as to protect the skin from the harmful effects of a dry environment [5]. Extracts of the green alga Chlamydocapsa  sp., also known as snow alga, are used for topical application to prevent photoaging in the products for skincare and hair protection. Furthermore, it could protect against the loss of  the barrier function induced by environmental exposure, decrease TEWL, and avoid wrinkles formatio n after exposure to UV radiation, cold or dry condition [171]. 3.2. Marine Invertebrate-Derived Compounds  3.2.1. Marine Sponge-Derived Compounds
3.2.1. Marine Sponge-Derived Compounds When dealing with secondary metabolites produced by marine invertebrates, especially marine sponges, it is important to consider their relationship with the associated microorganisms and phytoplankton, as some of their isolated bioactive secondary metabolites are suggested to be produced by the functional groups of enzymes or iginated from the associated microorganisms [172]. These microorganisms can be very important for new pharmaceuticals, cosmeceuticals, and nutraceuticals, because they are renewable resources of different natural products [173,174]. Indeed, marine sponges are considered depositories of ma rine microbial diversity, which can provide a new avenue in marine biotechnology [175]. This is ev idenced by the fact that many sponge-derived metabolites resemble bacterial and fungal natural products or belong to the class of compounds typically produced by these microorganisms [176]. Some re ports have confirmed that some
compounds, originally isolated from marine sponge  extracts, are in fact biosynthesized by sponge-associated microorganisms, since the sponge meso hyl is usually inhabited by microbes, and many natural products isolated from the marine sponges such as antibiotics, antifungal, and antipredator or antifouling compounds seem to be metabolites produced by marine microbes [176]. In the case of bacteria, they provide their hosts with products of  their metabolism, thereby granting the sponges an access to bacteria-specific traits such as autotrophy, nitrogen fixation, and nitrification. These bacteria can also process metabolic waste compounds that  stabilize the sponge skeleton and provide Figure 5. Structures of 6,6 ´-dieckol ( 24), eckol ( 25), dieckol ( 26), dolabelladienetriol ( 27), anddiphlorethohydroxycarmalol ( 28).Extracts of green algae have also been incorporated in various cosmetic products. The extract
ofCodium tomentosum was claimed to be a good source of glucuronic acid ( 38), and it is used fora distribution of water in the skin as well as to protect the skin from the harmful e ﬀects of a dry
ofCodium tomentosum was claimed to be a good source of glucuronic acid ( 38), and it is used fora distribution of water in the skin as well as to protect the skin from the harmful e ﬀects of a dryenvironment [ 5]. Extracts of the green alga Chlamydocapsa sp., also known as snow alga, are used fortopical application to prevent photoaging in the products for skincare and hair protection. Furthermore,it could protect against the loss of the barrier function induced by environmental exposure, decreaseTEWL, and avoid wrinkles formation after exposure to UV radiation, cold or dry condition [171].3.2. Marine Invertebrate-Derived Compounds3.2.1. Marine Sponge-Derived CompoundsWhen dealing with secondary metabolites produced by marine invertebrates, especially marinesponges, it is important to consider their relationship with the associated microorganisms andphytoplankton, as some of their isolated bioactive secondary metabolites are suggested to be
produced by the functional groups of enzymes originated from the associated microorganisms [ 172].These microorganisms can be very important for new pharmaceuticals, cosmeceuticals, and nutraceuticals,because they are renewable resources of different natural products [ 173,174]. Indeed, marine spongesare considered depositories of marine microbial diversity, which can provide a new avenue in marine
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 15 of 38biotechnology [ 175]. This is evidenced by the fact that many sponge-derived metabolites resemblebacterial and fungal natural products or belong to the class of compounds typically produced bythese microorganisms [ 176]. Some reports have confirmed that some compounds, originally isolatedfrom marine sponge extracts, are in fact biosynthesized by sponge-associated microorganisms, sincethe sponge mesohyl is usually inhabited by microbes, and many natural products isolated from themarine sponges such as antibiotics, antifungal, and antipredator or antifouling compounds seem tobe metabolites produced by marine microbes [ 176]. In the case of bacteria, they provide their hostswith products of their metabolism, thereby granting the sponges an access to bacteria-specific traitssuch as autotrophy, nitrogen fixation, and nitrification. These bacteria can also process metabolic waste
compounds that stabilize the sponge skeleton and provide protection against UV radiation [ 177–179].In turn, marine sponges also release enzymes to compete for the ground, to delay the growth of bacteriaand fungi to present hosting from uninvited guests, and these enzymes can be used as skin-whiteningagents in several cosmetic formulations [ 147]. Although only a few bioactive compounds isolated frommarine sponges have been explored by the cosmetics industry so far, there is an increasing number ofsponge metabolites with cosmeceutical potentiality. For example, halistanol trisulphate ( 29) (Figure 6),a C-29 steroidal detergent isolated from the Indo-Pacific sponge Haliclona sp., was shown to inhibit thematuration of tyrosinase to a form that is associated with melanin synthesis in the pigmented humanmelanoma cell line, MM418 [ 180]. Gagunin D ( 30) (Figure 6), a highly oxygenated diterpene of the 10,
13-bis- epi-homoverrucosane scaffold, isolated from the marine sponge Phorbas sp., was found to exhibitantimelanogenic activity by suppression of the tyrosinase expression and increasing the rate of tyrosinasedegradation, in addition to the inhibition of tyrosinase enzymatic activity, in mouse melan-a cells anda reconstructed human skin model [ 18]. Moreover, gagunin D ( 30) also suppressed the expressionof proteins associated with melanosome transfer. Due to its multi-functional properties, gagunin D(30) and its analogs can be considered as potential candidates for skin-whitening cosmeceuticals [ 18].Marine sponges are also known to produce more than 40 carotenoids [ 181], most of which are arylcarotenoids such as isorenieratene, renieratene, and renierapurpurin. Since sponges have no biosyntheticmachinery to synthesize carotenoids, these pigments are directly accumulated by food intake or through
metabolic transformations. Carotenoids play vital roles in marine sponge including the photoprotectiveand antioxidant functions via light energy dissipation and free radical detoxification due to exposure toexcessive solar radiation and harmful UV radiation [ 182]. Besides aryl carotenoids, the red color pigmentsmytiloxanthin derivatives, 19-butanoyloxymytiloxanthin ( 31), and 19-hexanoyloxymytiloxanthin ( 32)(Figure 6) were also isolated from the bright orange-colored sponge Phakellia stellidem [183]. It is interestingto note that mytiloxanthin, a metabolite of fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3), exhibits almost the same singletoxygen quenching and lipid peroxidation inhibitory activities as those of astaxanthin ( 33) (Figure 6),but with higher scavenging activity for hydroxyl radical [ 184]. Consequently, these compounds couldhave a great value as cosmeceuticals for skincare products.Marine sponge-derived collagen has also been evaluated for its biocompatibility and regenerative
potential [ 185–187]. An in vitro toxicity, antioxidant activity, healing capacity, and photoprotection oftrypsin-digested collagen extracts, also called marine collagen hydrolysates (MCHs), from the marine
trypsin-digested collagen extracts, also called marine collagen hydrolysates (MCHs), from the marinesponge Chondrosia reniformis were evaluated [ 188], due to its particular physicochemical characteristicsand dynamic plasticity [ 189,190]. This study was based on the fact that collagen hydrolysates fromvarious sources demonstrated good biocompatibility, penetration capacity, and protective propertiesfor the skin in di ﬀerent experimental models. It was found that the four MCHs exhibited not onlyno toxicity and signiﬁcant antioxidant activity by promoting the elimination of ROS but also awound-healing capacity by promoting a more accelerated proliferative stage. These data open theway for the application of these MCHs as cosmeceuticals to repair damaged or photoaged skin [ 188].Nevertheless, further studies are needed to validate these promising products before they can belaunched to the market.
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 16 of 38Molecules 2020 , 25, x 16 of 39  preparation of lipsticks and deodorants [147]. Al though only few coral secondary metabolites have found their use as cosmeceuticals, the diterpene glycosides pseudopterosins A –D (34-37 ) (Figure 6), isolated from the Caribbean Gorgonian coral Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae , are the most notable marine natural products in the cosmetic indust ry [192]. These compounds possess a variety of biological activities ranging from anti-inflammatory and analgesic [193 –195], antibacterial [196], antiacne [197] to wound healing [198,199]. These compounds are the first commercially licensed natural products for use as an additive in Estée Lauder skincare and anti-wrinkle cosmetic product under the brand name Resilience® [200]. However, the most stud ied member of this class of compounds for their anti-inflammatory activity was pseudopterosin A ( 34) (Figure 6), which
inhibited phagosome formation and triggered intracellular calcium release by a mechanism that involved its binding to the G protein-coupled recept or [201]. Other pseudopterosins with exceptional anti-inflammatory activity have been also identified and are suggested to inhibit the synthesis of leukotrienes and degranulation of human neutrophils [122].  Figure 6.  Structures of halistanol trisulphate ( 29), gagunin D ( 30), 19-butanoyloxymytiloxanthin  (31), 19-hexanoyloxymytiloxanthin ( 32), astaxanthin ( 33), and pseudopterosins A –D (34-37 ). 3.2.3. Sea Cucumber-Derived Compounds Sea cucumbers are also rich in bioactive comp ounds such as saponins , chondroitin sulfate, collagen, vitamins, amino acids, phenols, triterpe ne glycosides, carotenoid s, bioactive peptides, minerals, fatty acids, and gelatin. Among the health benefits of sea cucumbers are wound healing, neuroprotective, antitumor, anticoagulant, anti microbial, and antioxidant properties [202]. Sea
cucumber extracts are rich in vitamins A, B1 (thi amine), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), and minerals (calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc, selenium, germanium, strontium, copper, manganese) that can be used as cosmeceuticals or nutricosmetics. The vitamins and minerals in sea cucumber extracts are easy to be absorbed and provide moisture while stim ulating the renovation of damaged skin cells [6]. Figure 6. Structures of halistanol trisulphate ( 29), gagunin D ( 30), 19-butanoyloxymytiloxanthin ( 31),19-hexanoyloxymytiloxanthin ( 32), astaxanthin ( 33), and pseudopterosins A–D ( 34-37).The hexane, methanol, and ethanol extracts of the marine sponge Acanthella cavernosa wereevaluated for their antibacterial and antibioﬁlm activities against P . acnes , as well as their antioxidantactivity; however, only the ethanol extract exhibited the in vitro antibacterial and antibioﬁlm activitiesagainst this bacterium. Therefore, this marine sponge has a potential to be applied as a natural
marine-derived cosmeceutical for acne prevention [191].3.2.2. Coral-Derived CompoundsCoral powder is used as a sustainable material in numerous cosmetic products due to itsphysical, chemical, and textural characteristics as well as its mineral content [ 147]. Chemically, itis composed mainly of calcium carbonate but may contain about 74 other minerals, except heavymetals. Coral powder is used for a topical application to provide minerals for the skin, to protectagainst UV radiation and also as antioxidant, antiaging, antiacne, skin softening, as well as forthe preparation of lipsticks and deodorants [ 147]. Although only few coral secondary metaboliteshave found their use as cosmeceuticals, the diterpene glycosides pseudopterosins A–D ( 34–37)(Figure 6), isolated from the Caribbean Gorgonian coral Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae , are the mostnotable marine natural products in the cosmetic industry [ 192]. These compounds possess a variety
of biological activities ranging from anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic [ 193–195], antibacterial [ 196],
of biological activities ranging from anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic [ 193–195], antibacterial [ 196],antiacne [ 197] to wound healing [ 198,199]. These compounds are the ﬁrst commercially licensed naturalproducts for use as an additive in Est ée Lauder skincare and anti-wrinkle cosmetic product under thebrand name Resilience®[200]. However, the most studied member of this class of compounds fortheir anti-inﬂammatory activity was pseudopterosin A ( 34) (Figure 6), which inhibited phagosomeformation and triggered intracellular calcium release by a mechanism that involved its binding to theG protein-coupled receptor [ 201]. Other pseudopterosins with exceptional anti-inﬂammatory activity
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 17 of 38have been also identiﬁed and are suggested to inhibit the synthesis of leukotrienes and degranulationof human neutrophils [122].3.2.3. Sea Cucumber-Derived CompoundsSea cucumbers are also rich in bioactive compounds such as saponins, chondroitin sulfate, collagen,vitamins, amino acids, phenols, triterpene glycosides, carotenoids, bioactive peptides, minerals, fattyacids, and gelatin. Among the health beneﬁts of sea cucumbers are wound healing, neuroprotective,antitumor, anticoagulant, antimicrobial, and antioxidant properties [ 202]. Sea cucumber extracts arerich in vitamins A, B1 (thiamine), B2 (riboﬂavin), B3 (niacin), and minerals (calcium, magnesium, iron,zinc, selenium, germanium, strontium, copper, manganese) that can be used as cosmeceuticals ornutricosmetics. The vitamins and minerals in sea cucumber extracts are easy to be absorbed and provide
moisture while stimulating the renovation of damaged skin cells [ 6]. The investigation conducted onthe Red Sea cucumber ( Stichopus japonicus ) extract showed a remarkable inhibition of melanogenesis inmelanoma and inhibited the expression of tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related proteins (TYRP-1 andTYRP-2). Yoon et al. demonstrated that the ethyl acetate fraction of the S. japonicus extract inhibitedmelanogenesis in murine melanoma cells, decreasing the protein level of the melanocyte-speciﬁcisoform of the tyrosinase-related genes [ 203]. Evaluation of the skin-whitening e ﬀects of the extractsofSanguisorba o ﬃcinalis and Stichopus japonicus showed that the extract of S. japonicus exhibited61.78% inhibition of tyrosinase activity, while the mixture of both extracts showed 59.14% inhibition.Interestingly, the mixture of both extracts displayed a notable inhibition of melanogenesis in the
clone M-3 cell melanocyte [ 204]. A glycoprotein fraction of boiled S. japonicus has been shown toenhance tyrosinase inhibitory activity by 50% [ 205]. The tyrosinase inhibition exhibited by the bioactiveextracts of sea cucumber species makes them promising skin-whitening cosmeceuticals with numerousadvantages such as low cytotoxicity, high safety, and wide acceptance.Another important aspect of sea cucumbers is their considerable amount of novel sulfatedpolysaccharides, which have great potential for the development of cosmeceuticals and pharmaceuticals.The sulfated polysaccharides isolated from the body wall of sea cucumbers, named fucosylatedchondroitin sulfates (FuCS), are structurally di ﬀerent from sulfated polysaccharides isolated fromother invertebrates, vertebrates, and algae [ 206]. The high amount of these sulfated glycans can beseparated into three fractions: the ﬁrst fraction has a high amount of fucose, the second contains
primarily fucoidan ( 23) (Figure 4), and the third has a high proportion of glucuronic acid ( 38) [206].FuCS were isolated from several sea cucumber species, including Ludwigothurea grisea ,Pearsonothuriagraeﬀei,Holothuria vagabunda ,H. edulis, H. nobilis ,Stichopus tremulus ,S. japonicus ,Isostichopus badionotus ,Thelenata ananas ,Apostichopus japonicas ,Acaudina molpadioidea , and Athyonidium chilensis . Structurally,FuCS are composed of repetitive units of β-d-glucuronic acid ( 38) and N-acetyl-β-d-glucosamine ( 39)(Figure 7) [ 207,208]. It has been reported that sea cucumber fucoidan (Figure 4) exhibits numerousbiological activities [ 209,210]. For example, fucoidan ( 23) from Thelenota ananas was shown to possessa signiﬁcant superoxide radical scavenging activity, which is improved with the increasing sulfatecontent. Moreover, additional 2- O-sulphation in a speciﬁc residue increases the radical scavenging
eﬀect, suggesting that the antioxidant activity of fucoidan ( 23) derived from T. ananas depends onthe sulfation pattern and not simply on the sulfate content [ 211]. Moreover, the sulfate content and
the sulfation pattern and not simply on the sulfate content [ 211]. Moreover, the sulfate content andstructural feature of fucoidan ( 23) (Figure 4) have a profound relationship with its biological properties.Fucoidan ( 23) isolated from S. japonicus ,I. badionotus , and L. grisea showed interesting biologicalactivities that can be exploited as cosmeceuticals [ 209]. As fucoidan ( 23) could increase the MMP1activity in human skin, it can be used as an antiaging agent to prevent wrinkle formation and skinphotoaging for cosmetic products [209,210].
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 18 of 38Molecules 2020 , 25, x 18 of 39  on plant saponins, more in-depth research on saponi ns from sea cucumbers is necessary to verify if they have the same beneficial effects as their plant counterparts. The ecological concept also plays a fundamenta l role in searching for bioactive compounds useful for cosmeceuticals and nutricosmetics. Example of this is an observation that MAAs have a protective role in many marine organisms such as the holothuroids, especially  the black sea cucumber Holothuria atra  [216], where they occur predominantly in its epidermal tissues.  The epidermal tissue of H. atra  contains varied amounts of several MAAs such as mycosporine-glycine ( 40), asterina-330 (41), shinorine ( 42), porphyra-334 ( 43), palythine ( 44), and palythinol ( 45) (Figure 7), whereas the ripe ovaries and brooded juveniles of Cucumaria ferrari  contain moderate amou nts of mycosporine-gly
(40), shinorine ( 42), porphyra-334 ( 43), and palythine ( 44) [217]. Sunscreen form ulations containing liposomes of porphyra-334 ( 43), obtained from sea cucumbers, were found to diminish skin lipid oxidation and skin aging parameters such as low elasticity, wrinkle depth, and roughness. Upon irradiation, reactive intermediates were not produced by porphyra-334 ( 43), suggesting that this compound transformed absorbed UV radiation into harmless thermal energy [218]. Extracts of some sea cucumber species, especially S. hermanni , H. fuscogilva , A. mauritiana , A. crassa , B. vitiensis , B. tenuissima , P.graeffe i, B. cousteaui , H. atra , H. leucospilota , and H. nobilis  exhibited potent antibacterial activity  [219,220]. The report showed that ¦Â-cryptoxanthin ( 46), xanthophyll ( 47) (Figure 7), and β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2), isolated from the Egyptian sea cucumber H. scabra , exhibited
strong antibacterial activity against S. aureus  (ATCC 6538) [219]. This finding can be important for the use of carotenoids-containing sea cucumber extracts to prevent the microbial contamination in cosmetics that can cause deterioration of the products  and pose a serious risk to the consumers [221]. As mentioned earlier, some bioactive metabolites of sea cucumbers can induce tissue repair and enhance the wound-healing process. It has been re ported that GAGs of the integumentary tissue of S. vastus  and S. hermanni  exerted wound-healing properties in ra ts [123,222]. Masre et al. reported that part of the sea cucumber tegument had the highest total O-sulfated GAG content, followed by internal organs and coelomic fluid [222].  Figure 7. Structures of β-d-glucuronic acid ( 38),N-acetyl-β-d-glucosamine ( 39), mycosporine-glycine(40), asterina-330 ( 41), shinorine ( 42), porphyra-334 ( 43), palythine ( 44), palythinol ( 45),β-cryptoxanthin(46), and xanthophyll ( 47).
(46), and xanthophyll ( 47).Sea cucumbers have been reported to have high amounts of collagen and mucopolysaccharidesthat are relatively safe when compared with animal collagen [ 42,57]. The total protein of the body wallof sea cucumbers contains approximately 70% of insoluble collagen ﬁbers, which can be convertedinto gelatin after hydrolysis. Collagen ﬁbers are hardly soluble due to the intermolecular cross-linksformed by non-helical telopeptides of adjacent collagen molecules, whereas gelatin is a soluble proteinobtained by the partial hydrolysis of collagen [ 212,213]. Studies on sea cucumber collagen havebeen mainly focused on the functions of its hydrolytic bioactive peptides, including damaged tissuerepairing, antitumor, antioxidant, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitory activities. Due totheir antioxidant property, collagen ﬁbers have been used in skincare products [ 214]. Another group of
constituents of sea cucumbers is saponins [ 215]. These compounds play an important role in chemicaldefense and possess a wide spectrum of pharmacological activity. The majority of sea cucumber
constituents of sea cucumbers is saponins [ 215]. These compounds play an important role in chemicaldefense and possess a wide spectrum of pharmacological activity. The majority of sea cucumbersaponins are usually triterpene glycosides of the holostane type [ 215]. Some saponins can decreasedandru ﬀand alleviate psoriasis when applied topically, in addition to decreasing hyperpigmentation,rosacea, strengthening blood vessels, and improving water penetration. Since a majority of the researchstudies on pharmacological activity has been conducted on plant saponins, more in-depth research onsaponins from sea cucumbers is necessary to verify if they have the same beneﬁcial e ﬀects as theirplant counterparts.The ecological concept also plays a fundamental role in searching for bioactive compounds usefulfor cosmeceuticals and nutricosmetics. Example of this is an observation that MAAs have a protective
role in many marine organisms such as the holothuroids, especially the black sea cucumber Holothuriaatra [216], where they occur predominantly in its epidermal tissues. The epidermal tissue of H. atracontains varied amounts of several MAAs such as mycosporine-glycine ( 40), asterina-330 ( 41), shinorine(42), porphyra-334 ( 43), palythine ( 44), and palythinol ( 45) (Figure 7), whereas the ripe ovaries and
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 19 of 38brooded juveniles of Cucumaria ferrari contain moderate amounts of mycosporine-gly ( 40), shinorine(42), porphyra-334 ( 43), and palythine ( 44) [217]. Sunscreen formulations containing liposomes ofporphyra-334 ( 43), obtained from sea cucumbers, were found to diminish skin lipid oxidation andskin aging parameters such as low elasticity, wrinkle depth, and roughness. Upon irradiation, reactiveintermediates were not produced by porphyra-334 ( 43), suggesting that this compound transformedabsorbed UV radiation into harmless thermal energy [ 218]. Extracts of some sea cucumber species,especially S. hermanni ,H. fuscogilva ,A. mauritiana ,A. crassa ,B. vitiensis ,B. tenuissima ,P . grae ﬀei,B. cousteaui ,H. atra ,H. leucospilota , and H. nobilis exhibited potent antibacterial activity [ 219,220].The report showed that β-cryptoxanthin ( 46), xanthophyll ( 47) (Figure 7), and β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2),
isolated from the Egyptian sea cucumber H. scabra , exhibited strong antibacterial activity againstS. aureus (ATCC 6538) [ 219]. This ﬁnding can be important for the use of carotenoids-containing seacucumber extracts to prevent the microbial contamination in cosmetics that can cause deterioration ofthe products and pose a serious risk to the consumers [221].As mentioned earlier, some bioactive metabolites of sea cucumbers can induce tissue repair andenhance the wound-healing process. It has been reported that GAGs of the integumentary tissue ofS. vastus and S. hermanni exerted wound-healing properties in rats [ 123,222]. Masre et al. reported thatpart of the sea cucumber tegument had the highest total O-sulfated GAG content, followed by internalorgans and coelomic ﬂuid [222].3.3. Marine Microorganisms-Derived CompoundsMarine microorganisms, including fungi, fungi-like protists, and bacteria have attracted great
attention as potential lead compound producers [ 223,224]. Despite a relatively small number ofthe species of these organisms being studied so far, thousands of compounds have been isolatedand identiﬁed, among which only a small percentage has been investigated for their potential ascommercially useful products [ 225]. Anyhow, the popularity of marine ingredients has caused concernsthat large-scale sourcing or non-sustainable production methods could disrupt marine ecosystemsthat are already under strain. Since many marine microorganisms are cultivable and can be culturedin fermenters, they present a great advantage as a sustainable resources to produce high-valuedcompounds [226].3.3.1. Microalgae-Derived CompoundsThe diversity of microalgae makes them a rich source of bioactive compounds with potentialapplications as nutraceuticals and cosmeceuticals. Microalgae also constitute major food products,
mainly for animal feed due to their fatty acids, tocopherols, sterols, proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins,minerals, antioxidants, and pigments (e.g., chlorophyll and carotenoids) contents [ 227]. Microalgae,including Chlorella ,Spirulina ,Dunaliella, and Odontella species have also been used as ingredientsin cosmetics [ 33]. In terms of cosmeceuticals, microalgae are of great interest as some of themsynthesize substances that absorb UV radiation, which can prevent dermal ECM deterioration,wrinkles, laxity, coarseness, and mottled pigmentation of the skin. For example, the cyanobacterialsunscreen pigment scytonemin ( 6) (Figure 2) absorbs UVA /UVB radiation more e ﬃciently than acommercial formulation [ 228]. Scytonemin ( 6) is produced by several cyanobacteria such as Nostoc sp.,Calothrix crustacean, orChlorogloeopsis sp. [ 229]. Another UV protection pigment is β-carotene ( 7)(Figure 2), the main carotenoid produced by the halotolerant microalga Dunaliella salina, which can
produce more than 10% of β-carotene ( 7) of its dry weight [ 230]. Another well-known carotenoid
(Figure 2), the main carotenoid produced by the halotolerant microalga Dunaliella salina, which canproduce more than 10% of β-carotene ( 7) of its dry weight [ 230]. Another well-known carotenoidproduced by microalgae is astaxanthin ( 33) (Figure 6). This compound has been extensively studied forits beneﬁcial e ﬀects on skin health as well as for its photoprotective e ﬀects against UV radiation [ 231].As astaxanthin ( 33) can improve skin health by inﬂuencing the various stages of the oxidativedamage cascade, in addition to suppressing various inﬂammatory mediators [ 232], it was thereforeconsidered a strong antioxidant and an excellent anti-inﬂammatory agent. Moreover, it also exhibitsimmunomodulatory and DNA repair properties, which further supports its use to maintain skin health
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 20 of 38and to prevent skin damage [ 231].Haematococcus pluvialis accumulates large amounts of astaxanthin(33), and it is considered as the main natural source for human consumption. Due to a huge demandof astaxanthin ( 33) as cosmeceutical /nutricosmetic, a sustainable production of astaxanthin ( 33) byH. pluvialis has already reached an industrial scale [233].Other carotenoids such as lutein ( 48), canthaxanthin ( 49), lycopene ( 50), and zeaxanthin ( 51)(Figure 8) have also gained some importance in the health and cosmetics sectors [38]. Lutein ( 48) hasbeen shown to protect the epidermal and dermal layers of the skin against UV-induced oxidativedamage, especially in combination with other antioxidant and immunoprotective substances [ 234].Microalgae also possess a moisturizing property that can improve and maintain the barrier functionof the skin, hair, etc., keeping them in a healthy appearance. For example, some proteins and their
hydrolysates from Spirulina sp. confer a moisturizing property in hair products providing the retentionof water, and they are recommended for atopic dermatitis or other dry skin conditions [ 144,235].Oils obtained from the dried material of intact cells of some microalgae, especially form the genusChlorella , have softening and smoothening properties for skin and hair [ 236,237]. Another emergingmarine cosmeceutical for topical application for skincare cosmetic is alguronic acid. Alguronic acidis not a pure compound but a trade name created for an undetermined mixture of polysaccharidesproduced by microalgae by “Solazyme” (currently TerraVia Holdings, Inc.). In 2011, the acid wasintroduced to the market as an active ingredient in a commercial product called Algenist antiagingskincare formula [79].Molecules 2020 , 25, x 20 of 39  polysaccharides produced by microa lgae by “Solazyme” (currently Te rraVia Holdings, Inc.). In 2011,
the acid was introduced to the market as an active ingredient in a commercial product called Algenist antiaging skincare formula [79]. The pure extract of the marine microalga Nannochloropsis oculata  contains zeaxanthin ( 51) (Figure 8) and PUFA-containing lipids which are rich in EPA ( 22) (Figure 4) [238,239]. The extract of this microalga, cultivated in special photobioreac tors where they are optima lly exposed to light and CO 2, was licensed for a natural skincare ingredient PEPHA®-TIGHT [240] for antiaging formulation taking advantage of a combination of the anti-tyrosinase and antioxidant properties of zeaxanthin (51) and a moisturizing effect of EPA ( 22). The extract of the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum , rich in fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3) [241] and ϖ-3 PUFAs such as EPA ( 22) and DHA ( 21) (Figure 4) [242], was found to promote
proteasome activity in skin cells, particularly keratinocytes, fibroblasts, or melanocytes. This extract can protect the skin from the adverse effects of UV radiation exposure in addition to improving the elasticity and firmness of the skin. It may delay the appearance of wrinkles and/or reduce their depth [243]. The extract of P. tricornutum is used as an ingredient in two antiaging and revitalizing creams for skincare, i.e., Depollutine® and Megassane® [244]. Extracts of the diatoms Thalassiosira  sp. and Chaetoceros  sp. and of the microalgae Chlorococcum  sp. and Monodus  sp., which contain fucoxanthin ( 19) and other carotenoid pigments [245–247] and ϖ-3 PUFAs such as DHA ( 21) and EPA ( 22) [248,249], are proposed for formulations to prevent hair loss, since they could modulate melanogenesis in hair and skin, improving and stimulating keratinocyte differentiation, melanocyte proliferation, and the growth of hair and hair follicles [250].
follicles [250].  Figure 8.  Structures of lutein ( 48), canthaxanthin ( 49), lycopene ( 50), and zeaxanthin ( 51). 3.3.2. Marine Bacteria-Derived Compounds
follicles [250].  Figure 8.  Structures of lutein ( 48), canthaxanthin ( 49), lycopene ( 50), and zeaxanthin ( 51). 3.3.2. Marine Bacteria-Derived Compounds Marine bacteria are abundant on the surface of the sea but decrease in number with increasing depth, and most of them are associated with organic particles or zooplanktons as their substrate. Marine bacteria are prolific prod ucers of secondary metabolites for their own defense against other microorganisms as they thrive in harsh oceanic climates, and these secondary metabolites can serve as a good source of bioactive compounds [223]. A large number of bacterial bioactive secondary metabolites have high commercial value and have found their place in pharmaceutical and cosmetics industries [5]. Indeed, many compounds derived from  marine bacteria such as alkaloids, peptides, proteins, lipids, mycosporines, and MAAs, glycosides, and isoprenoids exhibit photoprotective,
antiaging, antimicrobial, antioxidant, and moisturizing activities [251]. Figure 8. Structures of lutein ( 48), canthaxanthin ( 49), lycopene ( 50), and zeaxanthin ( 51).The pure extract of the marine microalga Nannochloropsis oculata contains zeaxanthin ( 51) (Figure 8)and PUFA-containing lipids which are rich in EPA ( 22) (Figure 4) [ 238,239]. The extract of this microalga,cultivated in special photobioreactors where they are optimally exposed to light and CO 2, was licensedfor a natural skincare ingredient PEPHA®-TIGHT [ 240] for antiaging formulation taking advantage ofa combination of the anti-tyrosinase and antioxidant properties of zeaxanthin ( 51) and a moisturizingeﬀect of EPA ( 22).The extract of the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum , rich in fucoxanthin ( 19) (Figure 3) [ 241]andω-3 PUFAs such as EPA ( 22) and DHA ( 21) (Figure 4) [ 242], was found to promote proteasome
activity in skin cells, particularly keratinocytes, ﬁbroblasts, or melanocytes. This extract can protectthe skin from the adverse e ﬀects of UV radiation exposure in addition to improving the elasticityand ﬁrmness of the skin. It may delay the appearance of wrinkles and /or reduce their depth [ 243].
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 21 of 38The extract of P . tricornutum is used as an ingredient in two antiaging and revitalizing creams forskincare, i.e., Depollutine®and Megassane®[244].Extracts of the diatoms Thalassiosira sp. and Chaetoceros sp. and of the microalgae Chlorococcum sp.and Monodus sp., which contain fucoxanthin ( 19) and other carotenoid pigments [ 245–247] andω-3PUFAs such as DHA ( 21) and EPA ( 22) [248,249], are proposed for formulations to prevent hair loss,since they could modulate melanogenesis in hair and skin, improving and stimulating keratinocytediﬀerentiation, melanocyte proliferation, and the growth of hair and hair follicles [250].3.3.2. Marine Bacteria-Derived CompoundsMarine bacteria are abundant on the surface of the sea but decrease in number with increasingdepth, and most of them are associated with organic particles or zooplanktons as their substrate.
Marine bacteria are proliﬁc producers of secondary metabolites for their own defense against othermicroorganisms as they thrive in harsh oceanic climates, and these secondary metabolites can serveas a good source of bioactive compounds [ 223]. A large number of bacterial bioactive secondarymetabolites have high commercial value and have found their place in pharmaceutical and cosmeticsindustries [ 5]. Indeed, many compounds derived from marine bacteria such as alkaloids, peptides,proteins, lipids, mycosporines, and MAAs, glycosides, and isoprenoids exhibit photoprotective,antiaging, antimicrobial, antioxidant, and moisturizing activities [251].Among the bioactive compounds with antiaging activity of the marine origin, polysaccharides(PSs) are one of the most exploited cosmeceutical products [ 252], and bacteria are the most favorableorganisms for the production of higher PSs [ 253]. Deepsane, an exopolysaccharide derived from the
marine bacterium Alteromonas macleodii , is commercially available under the name Abyssine®[1]for soothing and reducing the irritation of sensitive skin against chemical, mechanical, and UVBaggression [ 254,255]. A mixture of PSs from Pseudoalteromonas sp., isolated from Antarctic waters,is incorporated in the formulation of antiaging products. This mixture, obtained through fermentation,is able to enhance the synthesis of collagen I, contributing to the amelioration of skin structuralproperties [ 254]. A deep-sea hydrothermal vent marine bacterium, Vibrio diabolicus , produces anexopolysaccharide HE 800 ( 52) (Figure 9) that is structurally analogous to hyaluronic acid ( 53) (Figure 9),with unique functions that stimulate collagen structuring [256].Two rare carotenoids with relevant antioxidant activity, saproxanthin ( 54) and myxol ( 55) (Figure 9),were isolated from new strains of marine bacteria belonging to the family Flavobacteriaceae. The addition
of saproxanthin ( 54) or myxol ( 55) to cosmetics might help reinforcing biological membranes, decreasingpermeability to oxygen and enhancing protection against oxidation. Interestingly, the antioxidantactivity of saproxanthin ( 54) and myxol ( 55) is even greater than that of zeaxanthin ( 51) (Figure 8) andβ-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2) [ 257]. Astaxanthin ( 33) (Figure 6) is also produced by some marine-derivedbacteria such as Paracoccus sp. [258] and Agrobacterium sp. [259].Methylene chloride, produced by new species of the marine bacteria ( Pseudomonas sp.), canreduce the pigmentation of human melanocytes and cultured skin cells by inhibiting the expression oftyrosinase [ 260]. The N-acyldehydrotyrosine analogues, thalassotalic acids A ( 56), B ( 57), and C ( 58)(Figure 9), isolated from the marine bacterium Thalassotalea sp., which was obtained from a bivalve,exhibited the anti-tyrosinase activity. Interestingly, the anti-tyrosinase activity of thalassotalic acid A ( 52)
is comparable to that of the commercially used control compound, arbutin ( 1) (Figure 1). The authors
is comparable to that of the commercially used control compound, arbutin ( 1) (Figure 1). The authorssuggested that the presence of a carboxylic acid and a linear aliphatic chain contribute to an increase ofthe enzymatic inhibition within this structural class of compounds [ 261]. Another bacteria-derivedcompound is ectoine or 1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinecarboxylic acid ( 59) (Figure 9), which isan osmo-protectant produced by several bacterial species in response to osmotic stress [ 262]. Ectoine ( 59)was ﬁrst isolated from Ectothiorhodospira halochloris but has been also isolated from other halophilicbacteria such as α- andγ-proteobacteria and some Actinobacteridae under high salt concentrations [ 263].This compound improves the hydration of the cell surface by increasing intermolecular spacing andboosts the mobility of the lipid head groups in the cell membrane [ 262], and it is well tolerated by
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 22 of 38humans [ 264–266]. Thus, ectoine ( 59) is an e ﬀective long-term moisturizer that prevents dehydrationof the epidermis [ 262,267]. It also reduces skin inﬂammation and is currently being investigated forthe treatment of moderate atopic dermatitis [264].Molecules 2020 , 25, x 22 of 39   Figure 9.  Structures of exopolysaccharide ( 52), hyaluronic acid ( 53), saproxanthin ( 54), myxol ( 55), thalassotalic acids A ( 56), B ( 57), and C ( 58), ectoine ( 59), and ethyl oleate ( 60). 3.3.3.  Marine Fungi-De rived Compounds  Several marine-derived fungi produce secondary metabolites with cosmeceutical potential. For example, Phaeotheca triangularis , Trimmatostroma salinum , Hortaea werneckii , Aureobasidium pullulans,  and Cryptococcus liquefaciens  are known to produce MAAs [271]. The benzodiazepine alkaloids, circumdatins I ( 61), C ( 62), and G ( 63) (Figure 10), isolated from the culture of the marine
sponge-associated fungus Exophiala  sp. (Family: Herpotrichiellaceae) displayed more potent UVA protecting activity than the positive control oxybenzone ( 64) (Figure 10), which is currently used in sunscreen formulations [272]. Myrothenone A ( 65) and 6- n-pentyl-α-pyrone ( 66) (Figure 10), isolated from the culture of the algicolous fungus Myrothecium  sp. which was obtained from the marine green alga Enteromorpha compressa , exhibited stronger anti-tyrosinase activity (IC 50 = 6.6 and 0.8 µM, respectively) than kojic acid ( 3, IC50 = 7.7µM) [273]. The culture of the fungus Botrytis sp., isolated from the surface of the red seaweed Hyalosiphonia caespitosa , furnished 6-[( E)-hept-1-enyl]- α-pyrone ( 67) (Figure 10), which also exhibited more potent anti-tyrosinase activity than kojic acid ( 3) [274]. Culture of the marine sediment-derived Trichoderma viridae H1-7 produced homothallin II
(68) (Figure 10), which is a competitive inhibitor of the mushroom tyrosinase. This compounds appeared to inhibit the enzyme by binding to a copper active site of the enzyme [275]. Although only a few marine fungal metabolites ha ve made their way to the cosmetics world, a patent of a skin-whitening agent, chrysophanol ( 69) (Figure 10), extracted from the algicolous fungus Microsporum  sp. (MFS-YL), was filed in the USA (U.S. patent 201 40056834A1) [10]. By adding the abiotic stressor, CuCl 2, to the culture of the marine-derived fungus Pestalotiopsis  sp. Z233, isolated from the marine alga Sargassum horneri , two previously unreported sesquiterpenes, 1 β, 5α, 6α, 14-tetraacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy- 7 β H-eudesman-2 β, 11-diol ( 70) and 4α, 5α-diacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy-7 βH-eudesman-1β, 2β, 11, 14-tetraol ( 71) were obtained (Figure 10). Compounds 70 and 71 exhibited inhibitory activity against the mushroom tyrosinase with IC 50 values of 14.8 µM and 22.3 µM, which are
comparable to that of kojic acid ( 3, IC 50 = 21.2 µM) [276]. A culture broth of the marine fungus Alternaria sp., isolated from the surface of a marine green alga Ulva pertusa , produced two kojic acid derivatives, i.e., kojic acid dimethyl ether ( 72) and kojic acid monomethyl ether ( 73), together with phomaligol A ( 74) (Figure 10); however, only kojic acid displayed anti-tyrosinase activity [277]. Figure 9. Structures of exopolysaccharide ( 52), hyaluronic acid ( 53), saproxanthin ( 54),myxol ( 55),thalassotalic acids A ( 56), B ( 57), and C ( 58), ectoine ( 59), and ethyl oleate ( 60).Fatty acid esters are common ingredients in cosmetic formulations as natural emollient andemulsiﬁers [ 79]. Although many fatty acids esters currently used in cosmetics are obtained from higherplants, some bacteria can also produce unique fatty acid esters. Thus, ethyl oleate ( 60) (Figure 9),which is widely used in many cosmetic products as emollient and perfuming, was also obtained
from actinomycetes Nocardiopsis dassonvillei , which is a symbiont of the marine sponge Dendrilla nigra .
which is widely used in many cosmetic products as emollient and perfuming, was also obtainedfrom actinomycetes Nocardiopsis dassonvillei , which is a symbiont of the marine sponge Dendrilla nigra .This compound also displayed anti-inﬂammatory activity [ 268]. Therefore, ethyl oleate ( 60) could be apotential multifunctional cosmeceutical for skincare products that can be produced in a sustainable way.Many marine sponge-derived Actinomycetes sp. and Streptomyces sp. have been also investigatedas a renewable sources of carotenoids for biotechnological products such as food- and cosmetic-gradenatural pigments [269,270].3.3.3. Marine Fungi-Derived CompoundsSeveral marine-derived fungi produce secondary metabolites with cosmeceutical potential.For example, Phaeotheca triangularis ,Trimmatostroma salinum ,Hortaea werneckii ,Aureobasidium pullulans, andCryptococcus liquefaciens are known to produce MAAs [ 271]. The benzodiazepine alkaloids, circumdatins
I (61), C ( 62), and G ( 63) (Figure 10), isolated from the culture of the marine sponge-associated fungusExophiala sp. (Family: Herpotrichiellaceae) displayed more potent UVA protecting activity than thepositive control oxybenzone ( 64) (Figure 10), which is currently used in sunscreen formulations [ 272].Myrothenone A ( 65) and 6- n-pentyl-α-pyrone ( 66) (Figure 10), isolated from the culture of the algicolousfungus Myrothecium sp. which was obtained from the marine green alga Enteromorpha compressa , exhibitedstronger anti-tyrosinase activity (IC 50=6.6 and 0.8µM, respectively) than kojic acid ( 3, IC 50=7.7µM) [273].The culture of the fungus Botrytis sp., isolated from the surface of the red seaweed Hyalosiphonia caespitosa ,furnished 6-[( E)-hept-1-enyl]- α-pyrone ( 67) (Figure 10), which also exhibited more potent anti-tyrosinase
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 23 of 38activity than kojic acid ( 3) [274]. Culture of the marine sediment-derived Trichoderma viridae H1-7produced homothallin II ( 68) (Figure 10), which is a competitive inhibitor of the mushroom tyrosinase.This compounds appeared to inhibit the enzyme by binding to a copper active site of the enzyme [ 275].Although only a few marine fungal metabolites have made their way to the cosmetics world, a patent of askin-whitening agent, chrysophanol ( 69) (Figure 10), extracted from the algicolous fungus Microsporum sp.(MFS-YL), was filed in the USA (U.S. patent 20140056834A1) [ 10]. By adding the abiotic stressor, CuCl 2,to the culture of the marine-derived fungus Pestalotiopsis sp. Z233, isolated from the marine alga Sargassumhorneri , two previously unreported sesquiterpenes, 1 β, 5α, 6α, 14-tetraacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy- 7 βH-eudesman-2 β, 11-diol ( 70) and 4α, 5α-diacetoxy-9α-benzoyloxy-7 βH-eudesman-1 β, 2β, 11, 14-tetraol
(71) were obtained (Figure 10). Compounds 70and71exhibited inhibitory activity against the mushroomtyrosinase with IC 50values of 14.8 µM and 22.3µM, which are comparable to that of kojic acid ( 3,IC50=21.2µM) [276]. A culture broth of the marine fungus Alternaria sp., isolated from the surface of amarine green alga Ulva pertusa , produced two kojic acid derivatives, i.e., kojic acid dimethyl ether ( 72)and kojic acid monomethyl ether ( 73), together with phomaligol A ( 74) (Figure 10); however, only kojicacid displayed anti-tyrosinase activity [277].Squalene ( 75) (Figure 10), which was originally obtained from shark liver oil, can be also obtainedfrom microorganisms such as the protista Thraustochytriales. As a common lipid produced by sebaceousglands, squalene ( 75) plays an important role in topical skin lubrication and cellular structure andprotection. Thus, squalene ( 75) is used in cosmetics to keep skin moisturized. Moisturizing creams
containing squalene ( 75) are non-toxic, non-irritating, and non-sensitizing, while providing antistaticand emollient properties [ 278]. On the other hand, fatty acids are known not only for their use as dietarysupplements but also for their broad spectrum cosmeceuticals due to their role in soft tissue repairand skin nourishment through the stimulation of collagen production as well as anti-inﬂammatoryand wound-healing properties [ 279].Thraustochytrids, or fungi-like protists, have been explored forthe industrial production of PUFAs such as DHA ( 21), EPA ( 22) (Figure 4), and docosapentaenoic(DPA) ( 76) (Figure 10) due to their high production per unit of biomass [ 280,281]. In particular, thespecies belonging to Schizochytrium ,Aurantiochytrium , and Ulkenia , from the Thraustochytriaceaefamily, are the main producers of DHA ( 21) [282]. DHA-rich oils from Thraustochytrids are currently
on the market as nutraceuticals; however, they also have a great potential as cosmeticeutical andnutricosmetic [ 283].Thraustochytrids such as Thraustochytriidae sp. ONC-T18, CHN-1, Ulkenia sp.AS4-A1 and Aurantiochytrium sp. KH105) also produce carotenoids, including β-carotene ( 7) (Figure 2),astaxanthin ( 33) (Figure 6), canthaxanthin ( 49), and zeaxanthin ( 51) (Figure 8), phoenicoxanthin ( 77),and echinenone ( 78) (Figure 10), which can be used as photoprotective and antioxidant ingredients indiﬀerent cosmetic formulations [283].A highly N-methylated linear octapeptide RHM1 ( 79) (Figure 10), isolated from the culture ofa marine-derived Acremonium sp., which was obtained from an unidentiﬁed marine sponge fromPapua New Guinea, exhibited antibacterial activity against S. epidermidis, which is a causative agent ofacne [ 105]. Another class of fungal metabolites with a myriad of biological activities is meroterpenoids.
Recently, Zhang et al. [ 284], in their search for bioactive secondary metabolites from the culture ofa marine sponge-associated fungus Penicillium brasilianum WZXY-m122-9, have isolated a series of
Recently, Zhang et al. [ 284], in their search for bioactive secondary metabolites from the culture ofa marine sponge-associated fungus Penicillium brasilianum WZXY-m122-9, have isolated a series ofmeroterpenoids, which they have named brasilianoids A–F ( 80–85) (Figure 10). Interestingly, only 80showed signiﬁcant stimulation of the expression of ﬁlaggrin, which is an essential natural moisturizingfactor that maintains the ability to regulate the skin’s moisture barrier [ 285], and of caspase-14, which isresponsible for controlling TEWL and for sensitivity to UVB damage [ 286]. Thus, this compound isthe ﬁrst example of a natural product that can be used to promote the protection of UVB-inducedcell damage, suggesting that it can have a great potential as cosmeceutical for skincare and for thetreatment of dermatological diseases [284].
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 24 of 38Molecules 2020 , 25, x 24 of 39   Figure 10.  Structures of circumdatins I ( 61), C ( 62) and G ( 63), oxybenzone ( 64), myrothenone A ( 65), 6-n-pentyl- α-pyrone ( 66), 6-[(E)-hept-1-enyl]- α-pyrone ( 67), homothallin II ( 68), chrysophanol ( 69), 1β, 5α, 6α, 14-tetraacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy-7 β H-eudesman-2 β, 11-diol ( 70), 4α, 5α-diacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy- 7 βH-eudesman-1 β, 2β, 11, 14-tetraol ( 71), kojic acid dimethyl ether ( 72), kojic acid monomethyl ether ( 73), phomaligol A ( 74), squalene ( 75), docosapentaenoic ( 76), phoenicoxanthin (77), echinenone ( 78), RHM1 ( 79) and brasilianoids A –F (80–85 ). 3.3.4. Yeasts-Derived Compounds  Figure 10. Structures of circumdatins I ( 61), C ( 62) and G ( 63), oxybenzone ( 64), myrothenone A ( 65),6-n-pentyl-α-pyrone ( 66), 6-[(E)-hept-1-enyl]- α-pyrone ( 67), homothallin II ( 68), chrysophanol ( 69), 1β,
5α, 6α, 14-tetraacetoxy-9 α-benzoyloxy-7 βH-eudesman-2 β, 11-diol ( 70), 4α, 5α-diacetoxy-9α-benzoyloxy-7βH-eudesman-1 β, 2β, 11, 14-tetraol ( 71), kojic acid dimethyl ether ( 72), kojic acid monomethyl ether ( 73),phomaligol A ( 74), squalene ( 75), docosapentaenoic ( 76), phoenicoxanthin ( 77), echinenone ( 78), RHM1(79) and brasilianoids A–F ( 80–85).
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 25 of 383.3.4. Yeasts-Derived CompoundsSeveral genera of yeasts, namely Rhodotorula ,Phaﬃa, and Xanthophyllomyces are known to produceastaxanthin ( 33) (Figure 6) [ 11]. Although yeasts produce lower amounts of astaxanthin ( 33) whencompared to other organisms such as algae, they have several advantages over other organisms,since they have higher growth rates, easier cultivation conditions, and can be genetically modiﬁed orby gene target uncovering to increase carotenoid production rates [287–289].4. Future Perspectives and ConclusionsAs the baby-boomer generation is entering their advanced age, the desire to look younger andhealthier has become the global priority. The inﬂuence of the social media to inform the populationand an e ﬀective dissemination of scientiﬁc research have raised the awareness of the risk of usingmany chemicals in drugs and cosmetics as well as health beneﬁts of compounds obtained from natural
resources. Thus, this millennial is marked by environmentally friendly processes and the use of naturalsubstances. For an alternative to the “green technology”, marine or “blue biotechnology” is gaining itsturf by providing a myriad of natural products that cannot be found in terrestrial environments andwith unprecedented biological and pharmacological properties. Although the pharmaceutical sectorhas been a pioneer in exploiting the treasures from the oceans, the cosmetic and nutraceutical sectorshave now paying more attention to the marine environments.In spite of some products of a marine origin have already appeared on the market, the number ofthese products is still very timid when compared to the vastness of the sea and the future discoveriesthat lie ahead. For example, until 2012, only three types of compounds from marine algae werecommercially exploited, i.e., alginates, agar, and carrageenan. This demonstrates that there are still
many marine compounds, especially small molecules, which can be exploited as cosmeceuticals andnutricosmetics. However, more e ﬀorts for the isolation and characterization of the products to discoverthe pharmacophores, molecular modiﬁcations, evaluation of their pharmacological properties andsafety aspect, improvement of the quality of products, and above all, more investment in R&D is muchneeded. It is interesting to mention also that these marine resources are still poorly exploited due tosome inherent limitations. First and foremost, the quantity of the compounds isolated from biologicalmaterials, which are normally collected from the marine environments, is very small and thus makesit diﬃcult for further bioassays and development. Secondly, the variations of their production thatare inﬂuenced by environmental changes to which marine organisms are exposed. So, there is aneed to ﬁnd a sustainable way such as the farming of marine organisms with optimal conditions
to harvest bioactive metabolites to be used as active ingredients, excipients, and additives. In thisaspect, microbial biotechnology can be considered a promising avenue for obtaining good quantity ofhigh-valued compounds as cosmeceuticals and nutricosmetics.Author Contributions: M.P . and A.K. conceived and planned the project, organized, revised, and corrected themanuscript; A.A. performed a literature search and prepared the draft of the manuscript; E.S. participated inwriting and revising the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This work was partially supported through national funds provided by FCT /MCTES-Foundation forScience and Technology from the Minister of Science, Technology and Higher Education (PIDDAC) and EuropeanRegional Development Fund (ERDF) through the COMPETE-Programa Operacional Factores de Competitividade
(POFC) programme, under the projects PTDC /MAR-BIO /4694/2014 (reference POCI-01-0145-FEDER-016790),
(POFC) programme, under the projects PTDC /MAR-BIO /4694/2014 (reference POCI-01-0145-FEDER-016790),POCI-01-0145-FEDER-028736 and by national fund through FCT-Foundation for Sciences and Technology withinthe scope of UIDB /04423 /2020 and UIDP /04423 /2020.Acknowledgments: We thanks the Department of Chemistry of the Instituto de Ci ências Biom édicas Abel Salazar(ICBAS), the Laboratory of Organic and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and the Coordinator of the Master’s program inPharmaceutical Chemistry of the Faculty of Pharmacy of University of Porto and CIIMAR for logistics and support.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 26 of 38References1. Guillerme:, J.-B.; Couteau, C.; Coi ﬀard, L. Applications for Marine Resources in Cosmetics. Cosmetics 2017 ,4,35. [CrossRef]2. Hyde, K.D.; Bahkali, A.H.; Moslem, M.A. Fungi-an unusual source for cosmetics. Fungal Divers. 2010 ,43,1–9. [CrossRef]3. Kilgman, A. Cosmeceuticals: A broad-spectrum category between cosmetics and drugs. In Cosmeceuticalsand Active Cosmetics, Drug versus Cosmetics ; Elsner, P ., Maibach, H., Eds.; Taylor & Francis: Boca Raton, FL,USA, 2005; pp. 1–9.4. Dini, I.; Laneri, S. Nutricosmetics: A brief overview. Phytother. Res. 2019 ,33, 3054–3063. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Kim, S.-K.; Ravichandran, Y.D.; Khan, S.B.; Kim, Y.T. Prospective of the cosmeceuticals derived from marineorganisms. Biotechnol. Bioproc. E 2008 ,13, 511–523. [CrossRef]6. Siahaan, E.; Pangestuti, R.; Munandar, H.; Kim, S.-K. Cosmeceuticals Properties of Sea Cucumbers: Prospectsand Trends. Cosmetics 2017 ,4, 26. [CrossRef]
and Trends. Cosmetics 2017 ,4, 26. [CrossRef]7. Agrawal, S.; Adholeya, A.; Barrow, C.J.; Deshmukh, S.K. Marine fungi: An untapped bioresource for futurecosmeceuticals. Phytochem. Lett. 2018 ,23, 15–20. [CrossRef]8. Kim, S.K. Marine cosmeceuticals. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2014 ,13, 56–67. [CrossRef]9. Babitha, S.; Kim, E.-K. E ﬀect of marine cosmeceuticals on the pigmentation of skin. In Marine CosmeceuticalsTrends and Prospects ; Kim, S.-K., Ed.; CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2005; p. 63.10. Corinaldesi, C.; Barone, G.; Marcellini, F.; Dell’Anno, A.; Danovaro, R. Marine microbial-derived moleculesand their potential use in cosmeceutical and cosmetic products. Mar. Drugs 2017 ,15, 118. [CrossRef]11. Burger, P .; Landreau, A.; Azoulay, S.; Michel, T.; Fernandez, X. Skin whitening cosmetics: Feedback andchallenges in the development of natural skin lighteners. Cosmetics 2016 ,3, 36. [CrossRef]
12. Ebanks, J.P .; Wickett, R.R.; Boissy, R.E. Mechanisms regulating skin pigmentation: The rise and fall ofcomplexion coloration. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009 ,10, 4066–4087. [CrossRef]13. Pillaiyar, T.; Manickam, M.; Namasivayam, V . Skin whitening agents: Medicinal chemistry perspective oftyrosinase inhibitors. J. Enzyme Inhib. Med. Chem. 2017 ,32, 403–425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]14. Masum, M.N.; Yamauchi, K.; Mitsunaga, T. Tyrosinase inhibitors from natural and synthetic sources asskin-lightening agents. Rev. Agric. Sci. 2019 ,7, 41–58. [CrossRef]15. Azam, M.S.; Choi, J.; Lee, M.-S.; Kim, H.-R. Hypopigmenting e ﬀects of brown algae-derived phytochemicals:A review on molecular mechanisms. Mar. Drugs 2017 ,15, 297. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Brenner, M.; Hearing, V .J. The protective role of melanin against UV damage in human skin. Photochem. Photobiol.2008 ,84, 539–549. [CrossRef]
2008 ,84, 539–549. [CrossRef]17. Costin, G.E.; Hearing, V .J. Human skin pigmentation: Melanocytes modulate skin color in response to stress.FASEB J. 2007 ,21, 976–994. [CrossRef]18. Lee, H.Y.; Jang, E.J.; Bae, S.Y.; Jeon, J.E.; Park, H.J.; Shin, J.; Lee, S.K. Anti-melanogenic activity of gagunin D,a highly oxygenated diterpenoid from the marine sponge Phorbas sp., via modulating tyrosinase expressionand degradation. Mar. Drugs 2016 ,14, 212. [CrossRef]19. Correia, M.S.; Moreiras, H.; Pereira, F.J.C.; Neto, M.V .; Festas, T.C.; Tarafder, A.K.; Ramalho, J.S.; Seabra, M.C.;Barral, D.C. Melanin transferred to keratinocytes resides in nondegradative endocytic compartments.J. Investig. Dermatol. 2018 ,138, 637–646. [CrossRef]20. Chang, T.-S. An updated review of tyrosinase inhibitors. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009 ,10, 2440–2475. [CrossRef]21. Kim, Y.M.; Yun, J.; Lee, C.K.; Lee, H.; Min, K.R.; Kim, Y. Oxyresveratrol and hydroxystilbene compounds.
Inhibitory e ﬀect on tyrosinase and mechanism of action. J. Biol. Chem. 2002 ,277, 16340–16344. [CrossRef]22. Solano, F.; Briganti, S.; Picardo, M.; Ghanem, G. Hypopigmenting agents: An updated review on biological,chemical and clinical aspects. Pigment Cell Res. 2006 ,19, 550–571. [CrossRef]
22. Solano, F.; Briganti, S.; Picardo, M.; Ghanem, G. Hypopigmenting agents: An updated review on biological,chemical and clinical aspects. Pigment Cell Res. 2006 ,19, 550–571. [CrossRef]23. Xu, Y.; Stokes, A.H.; Freeman, W.M.; Kumer, S.C.; Vogt, B.A.; Vrana, K.E. Tyrosinase mRNA is expressed inhuman substantia nigra. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 1997 ,45, 159–162. [CrossRef]24. Abdallah, M. Melasma, novel treatment modalities. J. Pigment. Disord. 2014 ,1, 4. [CrossRef]25. Chen, J.S.; Wei, C.I.; Marshall, M.R. Inhibition mechanism of kojic acid on polyphenol oxidase. J. Agric. FoodChem. 1991 ,39, 1897–1901. [CrossRef]26. Cabanes, J.; Chazarra, S.; Garcia-Carmona, F. Kojic acid, a cosmetic skin whitening agent, is a slow-bindinginhibitor of catecholase activity of tyrosinase. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 1994 ,46, 982–985. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 27 of 3827. Lee, S.Y.; Baek, N.; Nam, T.-G. Natural, semisynthetic and synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors. J. Enzyme Inhib.Med. Chem. 2016 ,31, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Saghaie, L.; Pourfarzam, M.; Fassihi, A.; Sartippour, B. Synthesis and tyrosinase inhibitory properties ofsome novel derivatives of kojic acid. Res. Pharm. Sci. 2013 ,8, 233–242.29. Zuo, A.R.; Dong, H.-H.; Yu, Y.-Y.; Shu, Q.-L.; Zheng, L.-X.; Yu, X.-Y.; Cao, S.-W. The antityrosinase andantioxidant activities of ﬂavonoids dominated by the number and location of phenolic hydroxyl groups.Chin. Med. 2018 ,13, 51. [CrossRef]30. Asthana, S.; Zucca, P .; Vargiu, A.V .; Sanjust, E.; Ruggerone, P .; Rescigno, A. Structure-Activity RelationshipStudy of Hydroxycoumarins and Mushroom Tyrosinase. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015 ,63, 7236–7244. [CrossRef]31. Farage, M.A.; Miller, K.W.; Elsner, P .; Maibach, H.I. Intrinsic and extrinsic factors in skin ageing: A review.
Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2008 ,30, 87–95. [CrossRef]32. McCullough, J.L.; Kelly, K.M. Prevention and treatment of skin aging. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2006 ,1067 ,323–331. [CrossRef]33. Einarsson, S.; Brynjolfsdottir, A.; Krutmann, J. Pharmaceutical and Cosmetic Use of Extracts from AlgaeObtainable from Saline Hot Water Sources. WO Patent 2007 /129331 A2, 15 November 2007.34. Aruoma, O.I. Nutrition and health aspects of free radicals and antioxidants. Food Chem. Toxicol. 1994 ,32,671–683. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Kehrer, J.P . Free radicals as mediators of tissue injury and disease. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 1993 ,23, 21–48. [CrossRef][PubMed]36. Cockell, C.S.; Knowland, J. Ultraviolet radiation screening compounds. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 1999 ,74,311–345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Sinha, R.P .; Klisch, M.; Gröniger, A.; Häder, D.P . Ultraviolet-absorbing /screening substances in cyanobacteria,phytoplankton and macroalgae. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 1998 ,47, 83–94. [CrossRef]
38. Sathasivam, R.; Ki, J.S. A review of the biological activities of microalgal carotenoids and their potential usein healthcare and cosmetic industries. Mar. Drugs 2018 ,16, 26. [CrossRef]39. Alvarez-Rivera, G.; Llompart, M.; Garcia-Jares, C.; Lores, M. Identiﬁcation of unwanted photoproducts ofcosmetic preservatives in personal care products under ultraviolet-light using solid-phase microextractionand micro-matrix solid-phase dispersion. J. Chromatogr. A 2015 ,1390 , 1–12. [CrossRef]40. Tsatsou, F.; Trakatelli, M.; Patsatsi, A.; Kalokasidis, K.; Sotiriadis, D. Extrinsic aging: UV-mediated skincarcinogenesis. Dermatoendocrinol 2012 ,4, 285–297. [CrossRef]41. Kondo, S. The role of cytokines in photoaging. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2000 ,23, S30–S36. [CrossRef]42. Pallela, R.; Na-Young, Y.; Kim, S.K. Anti-photoaging and photoprotective compounds derived from marineorganisms. Mar. Drugs 2010 ,8, 1189–1202. [CrossRef]
43. Rittie, L.; Fisher, G.J. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skin aging. Ageing. Res. Rev. 2002 ,1, 705–720.[CrossRef]44. Agar, N.S.; Halliday, G.M.; Barnetson, R.S.; Ananthaswamy, H.N.; Wheeler, M.; Jones, A.M. The basal layerin human squamous tumors harbors more UVA than UVB ﬁngerprint mutations: A role for UVA in humanskin carcinogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004 ,101, 4954–4959. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Ryu, B.; Qian, Z.-J.; Kim, M.-M.; Nam, K.W.; Kim, S.-K. Anti-photoaging activity and inhibition of matrixmetalloproteinase (MMP) by marine red alga, Corallina pilulifera methanol extract. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2009 ,78, 98–105. [CrossRef]46. Young, A.R.; Claveau, J.; Rossi, A.B. Ultraviolet radiation and the skin: Photobiology and sunscreenphotoprotection. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2017 ,76, S100–S109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]47. Lucas, R.M.; Yazar, S.; Young, A.R.; Norval, M.; Gruijl, F.R.; Takizawa, Y.; Rhodes, L.E.; Sinclair, C.A.;
Neale, R.E. Human health in relation to exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation under changing stratospheric
Neale, R.E. Human health in relation to exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation under changing stratosphericozone and climate. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2019 ,18, 641–680. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Stout, R.; Birch-Machin, M. Mitochondria’s role in skin ageing. Biology 2019 ,8, 29. [CrossRef]49. Karthikeyan, R.; Kanimozhi, G.; Madahavan, N.R.; Agilan, B.; Ganesan, M.; Prasad, N.R.; Rathinaraj, P .Alpha-pinene attenuates UVA-induced photoaging through inhibition of matrix metalloproteinasesexpression in mouse skin. Life Sci. 2019 ,217, 110–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]50. Ramasamy, K.; Shanmugam, M.; Balupillai, A.; Govindhasamy, K.; Gunaseelan, S.; Muthusamy, G.;Robert, B.M.; Nagarajan, R.P . Ultraviolet radiation-induced carcinogenesis: Mechanisms and experimentalmodels. J. Radiat. Cancer Res. 2017 ,8, 4–19. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 28 of 3851. Carreto, J.I.; Carignan, M.O. Mycosporine-like amino acids: Relevant secondary metabolites. Chemical andecological aspects. Mar. Drugs 2011 ,9, 387–446. [CrossRef]52. Gao, Q.; Garcia-Pichel, F. Microbial ultraviolet sunscreens. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2011 ,9, 791–802. [CrossRef]53. Morabito, K.; Shapley , N.C.; Steeley , K.G.; Tripathi, A. Review of sunscreen and the emergence of non-conventionalabsorbers and their applications in ultraviolet protection. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,33, 385–390. [CrossRef]54. Rastogi, R.P .; Sonani, R.R.; Madamwar, D. Cyanobacterial sunscreen scytonemin: Role in photoprotectionand biomedical research. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2015 ,176, 1551–1563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Oren, A.; Gunde-Cimerman, N. Mycosporines and mycosporine-like amino acids: UV protectants ormultipurpose secondary metabolites? FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2007 ,269, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Rosic, N.N. Mycosporine-like amino acids: Making the foundation for organic personalised sunscreens.Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 638. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Rastogi, R.P .; Richa Sinha, R.P .; Singh, S.P .; Häder, D.P . Photoprotective compounds from marine organisms.J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010 ,37, 537–558. [CrossRef]58. Chrapusta, E.; Kaminski, A.; Duchnik, K.; Bober, B.; Adamski, M.; Bialczyk, J. Mycosporine-like amino acids:Potential health and beauty ingredients. Mar. Drugs 2017 ,15, 326. [CrossRef]59. Singh, S.P .; Kumari, S.; Rastogi, R.P .; Singh, K.L.; Sinha, R.P . Mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs): Chemicalstructure, biosynthesis and signiﬁcance as UV-absorbing /screening compounds. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 2008 ,46,7–17.60. Groniger, A.; Sinha, R.P .; Klisch, M.; Hader, D.P . Photoprotective compounds in cyanobacteria, phytoplanktonand macroalgae—A database. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 2000 ,58, 115–122. [CrossRef]
61. Ehling-Schulz, M.; Bilger, W.; Scherer, S. UV-B-induced synthesis of photoprotective pigments andextracellular polysaccharides in the terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc commune. J. Bacteriol. 1997 ,179,1940–1945. [CrossRef]62. Richa Sinha, R. UV-Mediated stress and its mitigation in cyanobacteria. IJP AES 2011 ,1, 155–166.63. Pathak, J.; Pandey, A.; Maurya, P .K.; Rajneesh, R.; Sinha, R.P .; Singh, S.P . Cyanobacterial secondary metabolitescytonemin: A potential photoprotective and pharmaceutical compound. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. India Sect. BBiol. Sci. 2019 ,17, 638. [CrossRef]64. Panwar, P .; Butler, G.S.; Jamroz, A.; Azizi, P .; Overall, C.M.; Bromme, D. Aging-associated modiﬁcationsof collagen a ﬀect its degradation by matrix metalloproteinases. Matrix Biol. 2018 ,65, 30–44. [CrossRef][PubMed]65. Sárdy, M. Role of matrix metalloproteinases in skin ageing. Connect. Tissue Res. 2009 ,50, 132–138. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]66. Freitas-Rodr íguez, S.; Folgueras, A.R.; L ópez-Ot ín, C. The role of matrix metalloproteinases in aging: Tissueremodeling and beyond. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 2017 ,1864 , 2015–2025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Aimes, R.T.; Quigley, J.P . Matrix metalloproteinase-2 is an interstitial collagenase. Inhibitor-free enzymecatalyzes the cleavage of collagen ﬁbrils and soluble native type I collagen generating the speciﬁc 3 /4- and1/4-length fragments. J. Biol. Chem. 1995 ,270, 5872–5876. [CrossRef] [PubMed]68. Welgus, H.G. Stromelysin: Structure and Function. Agents Actions Suppl. 1991 ,35, 61–67.69. Sanjeewa, K.K.A.; Kim, E.A.; Son, K.T.; Jeon, Y.J. Bioactive properties and potentials cosmeceutical applicationsof phlorotannins isolated from brown seaweeds: A review. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 2016 ,162, 100–105.[CrossRef]70. Fisher, G.J.; Choi, H.C.; Bata-Csorgo, Z.; Shao, Y.; Datta, S.; Wang, Z.Q.; Kang, S.; Voorhees, J.J. Ultraviolet
irradiation increases matrix metalloproteinase-8 protein in human skin in vivo .J. Investig. Dermatol. 2001 ,117, 219–226. [CrossRef]
irradiation increases matrix metalloproteinase-8 protein in human skin in vivo .J. Investig. Dermatol. 2001 ,117, 219–226. [CrossRef]71. Tasaki, K.; Shintani, Y.; Saotome, T.; Andoh, A.; Fujiyama, Y.; Hozawa, S.; Bamba, T. Pro-inflammatorycytokine-induced matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) secretion in human pancreatic periacinar myofibroblasts.Pancreatology 2003 ,3, 414–421. [CrossRef]72. Kang, S.; Chung, J.H.; Lee, J.H.; Fisher, G.J.; Wan, Y.S.; Duell, E.A.; Voorhees, J.J. Topical N-acetyl cysteineand genistein prevent ultraviolet-light-induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo .J. Investig. Dermatol. 2003 ,120, 835–841. [CrossRef]73. Inomata, S.; Matsunaga, Y.; Amano, S.; Takada, K.; Kobayashi, K.; Tsunenaga, M.; Nishiyama, T.; Kohno, Y.;Fukuda, M. Possible involvement of gelatinases in basement membrane damage and wrinkle formation inchronically ultraviolet B-exposed hairless mouse. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2003 ,120, 128–134. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 29 of 3874. Schar ﬀetter, K.; Wlaschek, M.; Hogg, A.; Bolsen, K.; Schothorst, A.; Goerz, G.; Krieg, T.; Plewig, G. UVAirradiation induces collagenase in human dermal ﬁbroblasts in vitro and in vivo .Arch. Dermatol. Res. 1991 ,283, 506–511. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Südel, K.M.; Venzke, K.; Mielke, H.; Breitenbach, U.; Mundt, C.; Jaspers, S.; Koop, U.; Sauermann, K.;Knussman-Hartig, E.; Moll, I.; et al. Novel aspects of intrinsic and extrinsic aging of human skin: Beneﬁcialeﬀects of soy extract. Photochem. Photobiol. 2005 ,81, 581–587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Chung, K.Y.; Agarwal, A.; Uitto, J.; Mauviel, A. An AP-1 binding sequence is essential for regulation of thehuman alpha2(I) collagen (COL1A2) promoter activity by transforming growth factor-beta. J. Biol. Chem.1996 ,271, 3272–3278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]77. Zhang, C.; Kim, S.-K. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors (MMPIs) from marine natural products: The
current situation and future prospects. Mar. Drugs 2009 ,7, 71–84. [CrossRef]78. Sim, G.S.; Lee, B.-C.; Cho, H.S.; Lee, J.W.; Kim, J.-H.; Lee, D.-H.; Kim, J.-H.; Pyo, H.-B.; Moon, D.C.; Oh, K.;et al. Structure activity relationship of antioxidative property of ﬂavonoids and inhibitory e ﬀect on matrixmetalloproteinase activity in UVA-irradiated human dermal ﬁbroblast. Arch. Pharm. Res. 2007 ,30, 290–298.[CrossRef]79. Alparslan, L.; Sekeroglu, N.; Kijjoa, A. The potential of marine resources in cosmetics. CUPMAP 2018 ,1,53–66. [CrossRef]80. Varvaresou, A.; Iakovou, K. Biosurfactants in cosmetics and biopharmaceuticals. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2015 ,61, 214–223. [CrossRef]81. Rodríguez-L ópez, L.; Rincon-Fontan, M.; Vecino, X.; Cruz, J.M.; Moldes, A.B. Preservative and IrritantCapacity of Biosurfactants From Di ﬀerent Sources: A Comparative Study. J. Pharm. Sci. 2019 ,108, 2296–2304.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]82. Hettiarachchy, N.S.; Glenn, K.C.; Gnanasambandam, R.; Johnson, M. Natural antioxidant extract fromeenugreek ( Trigonella foenumgraecum ) for ground beef patties. J. Food Sci. 1996 ,61, 516–519. [CrossRef]83. Park, P .J.; Jung, W.K.; Nam, K.S.; Shahidi, F.; Kim, S.K. Purification and characterization of antioxidativepeptides from protein hydrolysate of lecithin-free egg yolk. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 2001 ,78, 651–656. [CrossRef]84. Rinnerthaler, M.; Bischof, J.; Streubel, M.K.; Trost, A.; Richter, K. Oxidative stress in aging human skin.Biomolecules 2015 ,5, 545–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Bland, J.S. Oxidants and antioxidants in clinical medicine: Past, present and future potential. J. Nutr. Environ.Med. 1995 ,5, 255–280. [CrossRef]86. Neumann, C.A.; Krause, D.S.; Carman, C.V .; Das, S.; Dubey, D.P .; Abraham, J.L.; Bronson, R.T.; Fujiwara, Y.;Orkin, S.H.; Van Etten, R.A. Essential role for the peroxiredoxin Prdx1 in erythrocyte antioxidant defence
and tumour suppression. Nature 2003 ,424, 561–565. [CrossRef] [PubMed]87. Thiele, J.J.; Dreher, F.; Packer, L. Antioxidant defense systems in skin. J. Toxicol. Cutaneous Ocul. Toxicol. 2002 ,21, 119–160. [CrossRef]88. Abdel-Late ﬀ, A.; Fisch, K.M.; Wright, A.D.; Konig, G.M. A new antioxidant isobenzofuranone derivativefrom the algicolous marine fungus Epicoccum sp.Planta Med. 2003 ,69, 831–834. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Ahn, G.N.; Kim, K.N.; Cha, S.H.; Song, C.B.; Lee, J.; Heo, M.S.; Yeo, I.K.; Lee, N.H.; Jee, Y.H.; Kim, J.S.; et al.Antioxidant activities of phlorotannins puriﬁed from Ecklonia cava on free radical scavenging using ESR andH2O2-mediated DNA damage. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2007 ,226, 71–79. [CrossRef]90. Miki, W.; Otaki, N.; Yokoyama, A.; Izumida, H.; Shimidzu, N. Okadaxanthin, a novel C-50-carotenoid from abacterium, Pseudomonas sp Kk10206c associated with marine sponge, Halichondria-Okadai .Experientia 1994 ,50, 684–686. [CrossRef]
50, 684–686. [CrossRef]91. Miyashita, K. Function of marine carotenoids. Forum Nutr. 2009 ,61, 136–146. [CrossRef]
50, 684–686. [CrossRef]91. Miyashita, K. Function of marine carotenoids. Forum Nutr. 2009 ,61, 136–146. [CrossRef]92. Yamamoto, K.; Sakata, K.; Watanabe, N.; Yagi, A.; Brinen, L.S.; Clardy, J. Chlorophyllonic acid a methyl-ester, anew chlorophyll-a aelated compound isolated as an antioxidant from short-necked clam, ruditapes philippinarum .Tetrahedron Lett. 1992 ,33, 2587–2588. [CrossRef]93. Yamamoto, Y.; Fujisawa, A.; Hara, A.; Dunlap, W.C. An unusual vitamin E constituent ( α-tocomonoenol)provides enhanced antioxidant protection in marine organisms adapted to cold-water environments.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001 ,98, 13144–13148. [CrossRef]94. Al-Amoudi, O.A.; Mutawie, H.H.; Patel, A.V .; Blunden, G. Chemical composition and antioxidant activities ofJeddah corniche algae, Saudi Arabia. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2009 ,16, 23–29. Available online: https: //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /(accessed on 12 March 2020). [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 30 of 3895. Rezanka, T.; Temina, M.; Tolstikov, A.G.; Dembitsky, V .M. Natural microbial UV radiation ﬁlters–mycosporine-like amino acids. Folia Microbiol. 2004 ,49, 339–352. [CrossRef]96. Suh, S.-S.; Hwang, J.; Park, M.; Seo, H.H.; Kim, H.-S.; Lee, J.H.; Moh, S.H.; Lee, T.-K. Anti-inﬂammationactivities of mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) in response to UV radiation suggest potential anti-skinaging activity. Mar. Drugs 2014 ,12, 5174–5187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]97. Wada, N.; Sakamoto, T.; Matsugo, S. Mycosporine-like amino acids and their derivatives as naturalantioxidants. Antioxidants 2015 ,4, 603–646. [CrossRef] [PubMed]98. Suh, H.J.; Lee, H.W.; Jung, J. Mycosporine glycine protects biological systems against photodynamic damageby quenching singlet oxygen with a high e ﬃciency. Photochem. Photobiol. 2003 ,78, 109–113. [CrossRef]99. Kim, J.H.; Lee, J.-E.; Kim, K.H.; Kang, N.J. Beneﬁcial ﬀfects of marine algae-derived carbohydrates for skin
health. Mar. Drugs 2018 ,16, 459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]100. Gammone, M.A.; Riccioni, G.; D’Orazio, N. Marine carotenoids against oxidative stress: E ﬀects on humanhealth. Mar. Drugs 2015 ,13, 6226–6246. [CrossRef]101. Agrawal, S.; Adholeya, A.; Barrow, C.J.; Deshmukh, S.K. In-vitro evaluation of marine derived fungi againstCutibacterium acnes .Anaerobe 2018 ,49, 5–13. [CrossRef]102. Toyoda, M.; Morohashi, M. Pathogenesis of acne. Med. Electron. Microsc. 2001 ,34, 29–40. [CrossRef]103. Chomnawang, M.T.; Surassmo, S.; Nukoolkarn, V .S.; Gritsanapan, W. Antimicrobial e ﬀects of Thai medicinalplants against acne-inducing bacteria. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2005 ,101, 330–333. [CrossRef]104. Dessinioti, C.; Katsambas, A.D. The role of Propionibacterium acnes in acne pathogenesis: Facts and controversies.Clin. Dermatol. 2010 ,28, 2–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Ralifo, P .; Crews, P . A new structural theme in the imidazole-containing alkaloids from a calcareous Leucetta
sponge. J. Org. Chem. 2004 ,69, 9025–9029. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Kamei, Y.; Sueyoshi, M.; Hayashi, K.; Terada, R.; Nozaki, H. The novel anti- Propionibacterium acnes compound,sargafuran, found in the marine brown alga Sargassum macrocarpum .J. Antibiot. 2009 ,62, 259–263. [CrossRef][PubMed]107. Choi, J.S.; Bae, H.-J.; Kim, S.-J.; Choi, I.S. In vitro antibacterial and anti-inﬂammatory properties of seaweedextracts against acne inducing bacteria, Propionibacterium acnes .J. Environ. Biol. 2011 ,32, 313–318.108. Park, J.H.; Choi, S.H.; Park, S.J.; Lee, Y.J.; Park, J.H.; Song, P .H.; Cho, C.M.; Ku, S.K.; Song, C.H. Promotingwound healing using low molecular weight fucoidan in a full-thickness dermal excision rat model. Mar. Drugs2017 ,15, 112. [CrossRef]109. Ibrahim, N.I.; Wong, S.K.; Mohamed, I.N.; Mohamed, N.; Chin, K.-Y.; Ima-Nirwana, S.; Shuid, A.N. Woundhealing properties of selected natural products. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018 ,15, 2360. [CrossRef]
110. Enoch, S.; Leaper, D.J. Basic science of wound healing. Surgery 2008 ,26, 31–37. [CrossRef]111. Demidova-Rice, T.N.; Hamblin, M.R.; Herman, I.M. Acute and impaired wound healing: Pathophysiologyand current methods for drug delivery, part 1: Normal and chronic wounds: Biology, causes, and approachesto care. Adv. Skin Wound Care 2012 ,25, 304–314. [CrossRef]112. Martin, P . Wound healing—Aiming for perfect skin regeneration. Science 1997 ,276, 75–81. [CrossRef]113. Gopinath, D.; Ahmed, M.R.; Gomathi, K.; Chitra, K.; Sehgal, P .K.; Jayakumar, R. Dermal wound healingprocesses with curcumin incorporated collagen ﬁlms. Biomaterials 2004 ,25, 1911–1917. [CrossRef]114. Fujiwara, N.; Kobayashi, K. Macrophages in inﬂammation. Curr. Drug Targets Inﬂamm. Allergy 2005 ,4,281–286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Fuller, B.B.; Smith, D.R. Topical Anti-inﬂammatories. In Cosmetic Formulation of Skin Care Products , 1st ed.;
Draelos, Z.D., Thaman, L.A., Eds.; Taylor & Francis: New York, NY, USA, 2005; pp. 351–353.
Draelos, Z.D., Thaman, L.A., Eds.; Taylor & Francis: New York, NY, USA, 2005; pp. 351–353.116. Ganceviciene, R.; Liakou, A.I.; Theodoridis, A.; Makrantonaki, E.; Christos, C.; Zouboulis, C.C. Skin anti-agingstrategies. Dermatoendocrinol 2012 ,4, 308–319. [CrossRef] [PubMed]117. Gautam, R.; Jachak, S.M. Recent developments in anti-inﬂammatory natural products. Med. Res. Rev. 2009 ,29, 767–820. [CrossRef] [PubMed]118. Abad, M.J.; Bedoya, L.M.; Bermejo, P . Natural marine anti-inﬂammatory products. Mini Rev. Med. Chem.2008 ,8, 740–754. [CrossRef]119. Reilly, D.M.; Parslew, R.; Sharpe, G.R.; Powell, S.; Green, M.R. Inﬂammatory mediators in normal, sensitiveand diseased skin types. Acta Derm. Venereol. 2000 ,80, 171–174. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 31 of 38120. Vos, T.; Flaxman, A.D.; Naghavi, M.; Lozano, R.; Michaud, C.; Ezzati, M.; Shibuya, K.; Salomon, J.A.;Abdalla, S.; Aboyans, V . Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 diseases and injuries1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010. Lancet 2012 ,380, 2163–2196.[CrossRef]121. McDonough, A.K.; Curtis, J.R.; Saag, K.G. The epidemiology of glucocorticoid-associated adverse events.Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 2008 ,20, 131–137. [CrossRef]122. Gonzalez, Y.; Torres-Mendoza, D.; Jones, G.E.; Fernandez, P .L. Marine diterpenoids as potentialanti-inﬂammatory agents. Mediators Inﬂamm. 2015 ,2015 , 263543. [CrossRef]123. Masre, S.F.; Yip, G.W.; Sirajudeen, K.N.S.; Ghazal, F.C. Wound healing activity of total sulfatedglycosaminoglycan (GAG) from Stichopus vastus andStichopus hermanni integumental tissue in rats. Int. J. Mol.
Med. Adv. Sci. 2010 ,6, 49–53. Available online: http: //medwelljournals.com /abstract /?doi=ijmmas.2010.49.53(accessed on 10 March 2020). [CrossRef]124. Subramaniam, B.S.; Amuthan, A.; D’Almeida, P .M.; Arunkumar, H.D. E ﬃcacy of gamat extract in woundhealing in albino wistar rats. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res. 2013 ,20, 142–145.125. Mazliadiyana, M.; Nazrun, A.S.; Isa, N.M. Optimum dose of sea cucumber ( Stichopus chloronotus ) extract forwound healing. Med. Health 2017 ,12, 83–89. [CrossRef]126. Ming, S. Investigation on component and pharmacology of sea cucumber. Chin. T radit. Pat. Med. 2001 ,10, 21.Available online: http: //en.cnki.com.cn /Article_en /CJFDTOTAL-ZCYA200110021.htm (accessed on 30 April 2020).127. Gupta, S.; Lawrence, W.T. Wound healing: Normal and abnormal mechanisms and closure techniques. In ThePhysiologic Basis for Surgery , 4th ed.; O. ´Leary, J.P ., Tabuenca, A., Capote, L.R., Eds.; Lippincott Williams &Wilkins: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2008; p. 154.
Wilkins: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2008; p. 154.128. Zohdi, R.M.; Zakaria, Z.A.B.; Yusof, N.; Mustapha, N.M.; Abdullah, M.N.H. Sea cucumber ( Stichopus hermanii )based hydrogel to treat burn wounds in rats. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 2011 ,98, 30–37. [CrossRef][PubMed]129. Althunibat, O.Y.; Hashim, R.; Bakhtiar, M.T.; Daud, J.M.; Ikeda, M.-A.; Ibrahim, Z. In vitro antioxidant andantiproliferative activities of three Malaysian sea cucumber species. Eur. J. Sci. Res. 2009 ,37, 376–387.130. Fredalina, B.D.; Ridzwan, B.H.; Abidin, A.A.Z.; Kaswandi, M.A.; Zaiton, H.; Zali, I.; Kittakoop, P .; Jais, A.M.Fatty acid compositions in local sea cucumber, Stichopus chloronotus , for wound healing. Gen. Pharmacol.1999 ,33, 337–340. [CrossRef]131. McDaniel, J.C.; Belury, M.; Ahijevych, K.; Blakely, W. Omega-3 fatty acids e ﬀect on wound healing.Wound Repair Regen. 2008 ,16, 337–345. [CrossRef]
Wound Repair Regen. 2008 ,16, 337–345. [CrossRef]132. Serhan, C.N.; Petasis, N.A. Resolvins and protectins in inﬂammation resolution. Chem. Rev. 2011 ,111,5922–5943. [CrossRef]133. Haryanto, H.; Ogai, K.; Suriadi, S.; Nakagami, G.; Oe, M.; Nakatani, T.; Okuwa, M.; Sanada, H.; Sugama, J.A prospective observational study using sea cucumber and honey as topical therapy for diabetic foot ulcersin Indonesia. J. Wellness Health Care 2017 ,41, 41–56.134. Janakiram, N.B.; Mohammed, A.; Rao, C.V . Sea cucumbers metabolites as potent anti-cancer agents.Mar. Drugs 2015 ,13, 2909–2923. [CrossRef]135. El Barky, A.R.; Ali, E.; Mohamed, T.M. Marine sea cucumber saponins and diabetes. Austin Pancreat Disord.2017 ,1, 1002. Available online: https: //austinpublishinggroup.com /pancreatic-disorders /fulltext /pancreas-v1-id1002.php (accessed on 30 April 2020).136. Usoltseva, R.V .; Anastyuk, S.D.; Surits, V .V .; Shevchenko, N.M.; Thinh, P .D.; Zadorozhny, P .A.; Ermakova, S.P .
Comparison of structure and in vitro anticancer activity of native and modiﬁed fucoidans from Sargassumfeldmannii and S. duplicatum .Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2019 ,124, 220–228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Comparison of structure and in vitro anticancer activity of native and modiﬁed fucoidans from Sargassumfeldmannii and S. duplicatum .Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2019 ,124, 220–228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]137. Usoltseva, R.V .; Shevchenko, N.M.; Malyarenko, O.S.; Anastyuk, S.D.; Kasprik, A.E.; Zvyagintsev, N.V .;Ermakova, S.P . Fucoidans from brown algae Laminaria longipes and Saccharina cichorioides : Structuralcharacteristics, anticancer and radiosensitizing activity in vitro .Carbohydr. Polym. 2019 ,221, 157–165. [CrossRef][PubMed]138. Luthuli, S.; Wu, S.; Cheng, Y.; Zheng, X.; Wu, M.; Tong, H. Therapeutic e ﬀects of Fucoidan: A review onrecent studies. Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]139. Lee, S.-H.; Ko, C.-I.; Ahn, G.; You, S.; Kim, J.-S.; Heu, M.S.; Kim, J.; Jee, Y.; Jeon, Y.-J. Molecular characteristicsand anti-inﬂammatory activity of the fucoidan extracted from Ecklonia cava .Carbohydr. Polym. 2012 ,89,599–606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 32 of 38140. Peluso, G.; Petillo, O.; Ranieri, M.; Santin, M.; Ambrosio, L.; Calabr ó, D.; Avallone, B.; Balsamo, G.Chitosan-mediated stimulation of macrophage function. Biomaterials 1994 ,15, 1215–1220. [CrossRef]141. Gill, S.E.; Parks, W.C. Metalloproteinases and their inhibitors: Regulators of wound healing. Int. J. Biochem.Cell Biol. 2008 ,40, 1334–1347. [CrossRef]142. Wang, J.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Li, P . Synthesized phosphorylated and aminated derivatives offucoidan and their potential antioxidant activity in vitro .Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2009 ,44, 170–174. [CrossRef]143. Savari, R.; Shaﬁei, M.; Galehdari, H.; Kesmati, M. Expression of VEGF and TGF- βgenes in skin woundhealing process induced using phenytoin in male rats. Jundishapur J. Health Sci. 2019 ,11, 6. [CrossRef]144. Ariede, M.B.; Candido, T.M.; Jacome, A.L.M.; Velasco, M.V .R.; Carvalho, J.C.M.; Baby, A.R. Cosmetic
attributes of algae—A review. Algal Res. 2017 ,25, 483–487. [CrossRef]145. Kijjoa, A.; Sawangwong, P . Drugs and Cosmetics from the Sea. Mar. Drugs 2004 ,2, 73–82. [CrossRef]146. Halvorson, H.O. Aquaculture, marine sciences and oceanography: A conﬂuence. connection. Connect. N.Engl. J. High. Educ. Econ. Dev. 1998 ,13, 38.147. Uppla, L. A review on active ingredients from marine sources used in cosmetics. SOJ Pharm. Pharm. Sci.2015 ,2, 1–3. [CrossRef]148. Montaser, R.; Luesch, H. Marine natural products: A new wave of drugs? Future Med. Chem. 2011 ,3,1475–1489. [CrossRef] [PubMed]149. Hay, M.E. Marine chemical ecology: What’s known and what’s next? J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 1996 ,200,103–134. [CrossRef]150. Leal, M.C.; Calado, R.; Sheridan, C.; Alimonti, A.; Osinga, R. Coral aquaculture to support drug discovery.Trends Biotechnol. 2013 ,31, 555–561. [CrossRef]151. Jesumani, V .; Du, H.; Aslam, M.; Pei, P .; Huang, N. Potential use of seaweed bioactive compounds in
skincare-A review. Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 688. [CrossRef]152. Borowitzka, M.A. High-value products from microalgae-their development and commercialisation. J. Appl.Phycol. 2013 ,25, 743–756. [CrossRef]153. Sanghvi, A.M.; Lo, Y.M. Present and potential industrial applications of macro- and microalgae. Recent. Pat.Food Nutr. Agric. 2010 ,2, 187–194. [CrossRef]154. Cha, S.H.; Ko, S.C.; Kim, D.; Jeon, Y .J. Screening of marine algae for potential tyrosinase inhibitor: Those inhibitorsreduced tyrosinase activity and melanin synthesis in zebrafish. J. Dermatol. 2011 ,38, 354–363. [CrossRef]155. Christaki, E.; Bonos, E.; Giannenas, I.; Florou-Paneri, P . Functional properties of carotenoids originating fromalgae. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2013 ,93, 5–11. [CrossRef]156. Verdy, C.; Branka, J.-E.; Mekideche, N. Quantitative assessment of lactate and progerin production in normalhuman cutaneous cells during normal ageing: E ﬀect of an Alaria esculenta extract. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,
33, 462–466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]157. Cao, K.; Blair, C.D.; Faddah, D.A.; Kieckhaefer, J.E.; Olive, M.; Erdos, M.R.; Nabel, E.G.; Collins, F.S. Progerinand telomere dysfunction collaborate to trigger cellular senescence in normal human ﬁbroblasts. J. Clin.Investig. 2011 ,121, 2833–2844. [CrossRef] [PubMed]158. Kim, M.M.; Mendis, E.; Rajapakse, N.; Lee, S.-H.; Kim, S.-K. Phlorotannins in Ecklonia cava extract inhibitmatrix metalloproteinase activity. Life Sci. 2006 ,79, 1436–1443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]159. Yoon, N.Y.; Eom, T.-K.; Kim, M.-M.; Kim, S.-K. Inhibitory E ﬀect of Phlorotannins Isolated from Ecklonia cavaon Mushroom Tyrosinase Activity and Melanin Formation in Mouse B16F10 Melanoma Cells. J. Agric. FoodChem. 2009 ,57, 4124–4129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]160. Le, Q.-T.; Li, Y.; Qian, Z.-J.; Kim, M.-M.; Kim, S.-K. Inhibitory e ﬀects of polyphenols isolated from marinealga Ecklonia cava on histamine release. Process Biochem. 2009 ,44, 168–176. [CrossRef]
alga Ecklonia cava on histamine release. Process Biochem. 2009 ,44, 168–176. [CrossRef]161. Zhang, C.; Li, Y.; Shi, X.; Kim, S.-K. Inhibition of the expression on MMP-2, 9 and morphological changesvia human ﬁbrosarcoma cell line by 6,6’-bieckol from marine alga Ecklonia cava .BMB Rep. 2010 ,43, 62–68.[CrossRef]162. Joe, M.J.; Kim, S.N.; Choi, H.Y.; Shin, W.S.; Park, G.M.; Kang, D.W.; Kim, Y.K. The inhibitory e ﬀects ofeckol and dieckol from Ecklonia stolonifera on the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-1 in human dermalﬁbroblasts. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2006 ,29, 1735–1739. [CrossRef]163. Heo, S.-J.; Ko, S.-C.; Kang, S.-M.; Cha, S.-H.; Lee, S.-H.; Kang, D.-H.; Jung, W.-K.; A ﬀan, A.; Oh, C.; Jeon, Y.-J.Inhibitory e ﬀect of diphlorethohydroxycarmalol on melanogenesis and its protective e ﬀect against UV-Bradiation-induced cell damage. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2010 ,48, 1355–1361. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 33 of 38164. Kang, H.S.; Kim, H.R.; Byun, D.S.; Son, B.W.; Nam, T.J.; Choi, J.S. Tyrosinase inhibitors isolated from theedible brown alga Ecklonia stolonifera .Arch. Pharm. Res. 2004 ,27, 1226–1232. [CrossRef]165. Thomas, N.V .; Kim, S.K. Beneﬁcial e ﬀects of marine algal compounds in cosmeceuticals. Mar. Drugs 2013 ,11,146–164. [CrossRef]166. Choi, J.S.; Moon, W.S.; Choi, J.N.; Do, K.H.; Moon, S.H.; Cho, K.K.; Han, C.-J.; Choi, I.S. E ﬀects of seaweedLaminaria japonica extracts on skin moisturizing activity in vivo .J. Cosmet. Sci. 2013 ,64, 193–205. [PubMed]167. Shimoda, H.; Tanaka, J.; Shan, S.J.; Maoka, T. Anti-pigmentary activity of fucoxanthin and its inﬂuence onskin mRNA expression of melanogenic molecules. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2010 ,62, 1137–1145. [CrossRef][PubMed]168. Fitton, J.H.; Irhimeh, M.; Falk, N. Macroalgal fucoidan extracts: A new opportunity for marine cosmetics.
Cosmetics Toiletries 2007 ,122, 55–64. Available online: https: //www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com (accessed on30 April 2020).169. Kwon, K.S. Flavonoid Glycoside Compound Having Tyrosinase Inhibitory Activity, Derived from An EdibleBrown Alga, Hiziki fusiformis. Korean Patent KR100739871B, 20 February 2006.170. Couteau, C.; Coi ﬀard, L. Seaweed Application in Cosmetics. In Seaweed in Health and Disease Prevention ,1st ed.; Fleurence, J., Levine, I., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016; pp. 423–441.171. Stutz, C.S.; Schmid, D.; Zülli, F. Use of An Extract from Snow Algae in Cosmetic or DermatologicalFormulations. U.S. Patent 8,206,721B2, 26 June 2012.172. Kennedy, J.; Baker, P .; Piper, C.; Cotter, P .D.; Walsh, M.; Mooij, M.J.; Bourke, M.B.; Rea, M.C.; O’Connor, P .M.;Ross, R.P .; et al. Isolation and analysis of bacteria with antimicrobial activities from the marine spongeHaliclona simulans collected from Irish waters. Mar. Biotechnol. 2009 ,11, 384–396. [CrossRef]
173. Lu, X.; Cao, X.; Liu, X.; Jiao, B. Marine microbes-derived anti-bacterial agents. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2010 ,10,1077–1090. [CrossRef]174. Rahman, H.; Austin, B.; Mitchell, W.J.; Morris, P .C.; Jamieson, D.J.; Adams, D.R.; Spragg, A.M.; Schweizer, M.Novel anti-infective compounds from marine bacteria. Mar. Drugs 2010 ,8, 498–518. [CrossRef]175. Selvin, J.; Shanmughapriya, S.; Gandhimathi, R.; Seghal Kiran, G.; Rajeetha Ravji, T.; Natarajaseenivasan, K.;Hema, T.A. Optimization and production of novel antimicrobial agents from sponge associated marineactinomycetes Nocardiopsis dassonvillei MAD08. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2009 ,83, 435–445. [CrossRef]176. Mehbub, M.F.; Lei, J.; Franco, C.; Zhang, W. Marine sponge derived natural products between 2001 and 2010:Trends and opportunities for discovery of bioactives. Mar. Drugs 2014 ,12, 4539–4577. [CrossRef]177. Diaz, M.C.; Rutzler, K. Sponges: An essential component of Caribbean coral reefs. Bull. Mar. Sci. 2001 ,69,
535–546.178. Lee, Y.K.; Lee, J.-H.; Lee, H.K. Microbial symbiosis in marine sponges. J. Microbiol. 2001 ,39, 254–264.179. Thoms, C.; Horn, M.; Wagner, M.; Hentschel, U.; Proksch, P . Monitoring microbial diversity and naturalproduct proﬁles of the sponge Aplysina cavernicola following transplantation. Mar. Biol. 2003 ,142, 685–692.[CrossRef]180. Townsend, E.; Moni, R.; Quinn, R.; Parsons, P .G. Reversible depigmentation of human melanoma cells byhalistanol trisulphate, a novel marine sterol. Melanoma Res. 1992 ,1, 349–357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]181. Liaaen-Jensen, S.; Renstrøm, B.; Ramdahl, T.; Hallenstvet, M.; Bergquist, P . Carotenoids of marine sponges.Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 1982 ,10, 167–174. [CrossRef]182. Galasso, C.; Corinaldesi, C.; Sansone, C. Carotenoids from marine organisms: Biological functions andindustrial applications. Antioxidants 2017 ,6, 96. [CrossRef]
183. Higa, T.; Tanaka, J.-I.; Kitamura, A.; Koyama, T.; Takahashi, M.; Uchida, T. Bioactive compounds from marinesponges. Pure Appl. Chem. 1994 ,66, 2227–2230. [CrossRef]
183. Higa, T.; Tanaka, J.-I.; Kitamura, A.; Koyama, T.; Takahashi, M.; Uchida, T. Bioactive compounds from marinesponges. Pure Appl. Chem. 1994 ,66, 2227–2230. [CrossRef]184. Maoka, T.; Nishino, A.; Yasui, H.; Yamano, Y.; Wada, A. Anti-oxidative activity of mytiloxanthin, a metaboliteof fucoxanthin in shellﬁsh and tunicates. Mar. Drugs 2016 ,14, 93. [CrossRef]185. Kim, M.M.; Mendis, E.; Rajapakse, N.; Lee, S.-H.; Kim, S.-K. E ﬀect of spongin derived from Hymeniacidonsinapium on bone mineralization. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 2009 ,90, 540–546. [CrossRef]186. Nandi, S.K.; Kundu, B.; Mahato, A.; Thakur, N.L.; Joardar, S.N.; Mandal, B.B. In vitro and in vivo evaluationof the marine sponge skeleton as a bone mimicking biomaterial. Integr. Biol. 2015 ,7, 250–262. [CrossRef]187. Green, D.; Howard, D.; Yang, X.; Kelly, M.; Ore ﬀo, R.O.C. Natural marine sponge ﬁber skeleton: A biomimetic
scaﬀold for human osteoprogenitor cell attachment, growth, and di ﬀerentiation. Tissue Eng. 2003 ,9, 1159–1166.[CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 34 of 38188. Pozzolini, M.; Millo, E.; Oliveri, C.; Mirata, S.; Salis, A.; Damonte, G.; Arkel, M.; Scarf ì, S. Elicited ROSscavenging activity, photoprotective, and wound-healing properties of collagen-derived peptides from themarine sponge Chondrosia reniformis .Mar. Drugs 2018 ,16, 465. [CrossRef]189. Wilkie, I.; Parma, L.; Bonasoro, F.; Bavestrello, G.; Cerrano, C.; Carnevali, M.D.C. Mechanical adaptabilityof a sponge extracellular matrix: Evidence for cellular control of mesohyl sti ﬀness in Chondrosia reniformisNardo. J. Exp. Biol. 2006 ,209, 4436–4443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]190. Fassini, D.; Parma, L.; Lembo, F.; Candia Carnevali, M.D.; Wilkie, I.C.; Bonasoro, F. The reaction of the spongeChondrosia reniformis to mechanical stimulation is mediated by the outer epithelium and the release ofstiﬀening factor(s). Zoology 2014 ,117, 282–291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Yanti, C.; Vendy, V .; Hwang, J.-K.K. In vitro antiacne activity of marine sponge Acanthella cavernosa extracts.Int. J. Biol. Pharm. Res. (IJBPR) 2015 ,6, 388–392.192. Look, S.A.; Fenical, W.; Jacobs, R.S.; Clardy, J. The pseudopterosins: Anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic naturalproducts from the sea whip Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae .Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1986 ,83, 6238–6240.[CrossRef]193. Dayan, N.; Grove, G.; Sivalenka, R. Anti-inﬂammatory activity of pseudopterosins by laser doppler bloodﬂow evaluation. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2009 ,31, 480. [CrossRef]194. Mayer, A.M.; Jacobson, P .B.; Fenical, W.; Jacobs, R.S.; Glaser, K.B. Pharmacological characterization ofthe pseudopterosins: Novel anti-inﬂammatory natural products isolated from the Caribbean soft coral,Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae .Life Sci. 1998 ,62, PL401–PL407. [CrossRef]195. Correa, H.; Valenzuela, A.L.; Ospina, L.F.; Duque, C. Anti-inflammatory effects of the gorgonian Pseudopterogorgia
elisabethae collected at the Islands of Providencia and San Andr és (SW Caribbean). J. Inflamm. 2009 ,6, 5. [CrossRef]196. Ata, A.; Win, H.Y.; Holt, D.; Holloway, P .; Segstro, E.P .; Jayatilake, G.S. New antibacterial diterpenes fromPseudopterogorgia elisabethae .Helv. Chim. Acta 2004 ,87, 1090–1098. [CrossRef]197. Onumah, N. A novel anti-inﬂammatory in treatment of acne vulgaris: The pseudopterosins. J. DrugsDermatol. 2013 ,12, 1177–1179.198. Montesinos, M.C.; Gadangi, P .; Longaker, M.; Sung, J.; Levine, J.; Nilsen, D.; Reibman, J.; Li, M.; Jiang, C.K.;Hirschhorn, R.; et al. Wound healing is accelerated by agonists of adenosine A2 (G alpha s-linked) receptors.J. Exp. Med. 1997 ,186, 1615–1620. [CrossRef]199. Mayer, A.M.; Glaser, K.B.; Cuevas, C.; Jacobs, R.S.; Kem, W.; Little, R.D.; Mclntosh, J.M.; Newman, D.J.;Potts, B.C.; Shuster, D.E. The odyssey of marine pharmaceuticals: A current pipeline perspective.Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2010 ,31, 255–265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Newman, D.J.; Cragg, G.M. Marine natural products and related compounds in clinical and advancedpreclinical trials. J. Nat. Prod. 2004 ,67, 1216–1238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]201. Moya, C.E.; Jacobs, R.S. Pseudopterosin A inhibits phagocytosis and alters intracellular calcium turnover ina pertussis toxin sensitive site in Tetrahymena thermophila .Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2006 ,143, 436–443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]202. Pangestuti, R.; Ariﬁn, Z. Medicinal and health beneﬁt e ﬀects of functional sea cucumbers. J. Tradit. Complement.Med. 2017 ,8, 341–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]203. Yoon, W.J.; Kim, M.J.; Koh, H.B.; Lee, W.J.; Lee, N.H.; Hyun, C.G. E ﬀect of Korean Red Sea cucumber(Stichopus japonicus ) on melanogenic protein expression in murine B16 melanoma. Int. J. Pharmacol. 2010 ,6,37–42. [CrossRef]204. Lee, M.-O.; Oh, H.-G.; Park, S.-H.; Lee, H.-A.; Sul, J.-D.; Song, J.; Kim, O. Skin Whitening E ﬀects of Sanguisorba
oﬃcinalis and Stichopus japonicus .Lab. Anim. Res. 2010 ,26, 127–132. [CrossRef]
oﬃcinalis and Stichopus japonicus .Lab. Anim. Res. 2010 ,26, 127–132. [CrossRef]205. Kim, S.J.; Park, S.Y.; Hong, S.M.; Kwon, E.H.; Lee, T.K. Skin whitening and anti-corrugation activities ofglycoprotein fractions from liquid extracts of boiled sea cucumber. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med. 2016 ,9, 1002–1006.[CrossRef]206. Mour ão, P .A.; Bastos, I.G. Highly acidic glycans from sea cucumbers. Isolation and fractionation of fucose-richsulfated polysaccharides from the body wall of Ludwigothurea grisea .Eur. J. Biochem. 1987 ,166, 639–645.[CrossRef]207. Myron, P .; Siddiquee, S.; Azad, S.A. Fucosylated chondroitin sulfate diversity in sea cucumbers: A review.Carbohydr. Polym. 2014 ,112, 173–178. [CrossRef]208. Pomin, V .H. Holothurian fucosylated chondroitin sulfate. Mar. Drugs 2014 ,12, 232–254. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 35 of 38209. Chen, S.; Li, G.; Wu, N.; Guo, X.; Liao, N.; Ye, X.; Liu, D.; Xue, C.; Chai, W. Sulfation pattern of the fucosebranch is important for the anticoagulant and antithrombotic activities of fucosylated chondroitin sulfates.Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2013 ,1830 , 3054–3066. [CrossRef] [PubMed]210. Pomin, V .H. Structure-function relationship of anticoagulant and antithrombotic well-deﬁned sulfatedpolysaccharides from marine invertebrates. Adv. Food Nutr. Res. 2012 ,65, 195–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]211. Yu, L.; Xue, C.; Chang, Y.; Xu, X.; Ge, L.; Liu, G.; Wang, Y. Structure elucidation of fucoidan composedof a novel tetrafucose repeating unit from sea cucumber Thelenota ananas .Food Chem. 2014 ,146, 113–119.[CrossRef] [PubMed]212. Bandaranayake, W.M.; Rocher, A. Role of secondary metabolites and pigments in the epidermal tissues, ripeovaries, viscera, gut contents and diet of the sea cucumber Holothuria atra .Mar. Biol. 1999 ,133, 163–169.
[CrossRef]213. Gomez-Guillen, M.C.; Gimenez, B.; Lopez-Caballero, M.E.; Montero, M.P . Functional and bioactive propertiesof collagen and gelatin from alternative sources: A review. Food Hydrocoll. 2011 ,25, 1813–1827. [CrossRef]214. Rodríguez, M.I.A.; Barroso, L.G.R.; S ánchez, M.L. Collagen: A review on its sources and potential cosmeticapplications. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2018 ,17, 20–26. [CrossRef]215. Correia-da-Silva, M.; Sousa, E.; Pinto, M.M.M.; Kijjoa, A. Anticancer and cancer preventive compounds fromedible marine organisms. Semin. Cancer Biol. 2017 ,46, 55–64. [CrossRef]216. Shick, J.M.; Dunlap, W.C.; Chalker, B.; Banaszak, A.T.; Rosenzweig, T.K. Survey of ultraviolet radiation-absorbing mycosporine-like amino acids in organs of coral reef holothuroids. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 1992 ,90,139–148. Available online: https: //www.int-res.com /articles /meps /90/m090p139.pdf (accessed on 26 April2020). [CrossRef]
2020). [CrossRef]217. McClintock, J.; Karentz, D. Mycosporine-like amino acids in 38 species of subtidal marine organisms fromMcMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Antarct. Sci. 1997 ,9, 392–398. [CrossRef]218. Torres, A.; Enk, C.D.; Hochberg, M.; Srebnik, M. Porphyra-334, a potential natural source for UVA protectivesunscreens. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2006 ,5, 432–435. [CrossRef]219. Afkhami, M.; Ehsanpour, M. Evaluation bioactivity of a Sea cucumber, Stichopus hermanni from Persian Gulf.J. Exp. Biol. 2014 ,4, 254–258.220. Ibrahim, H.A.H. Antibacterial carotenoids of three Holothuria species in Hurghada, Egypt. Egypt. J. Aquat.Res. 2012 ,38, 185–194. [CrossRef]221. Lawrence, A.J.; Aﬁﬁ, R.; Ahmed, M.; Khalifa, S.; Paget, T. Bioactivity as an options value of sea cucumbers inthe Egyptian Red Sea. Conserv. Biol. 2010 ,24, 217–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]222. Masre, S.F.; Yip, G.W.; Sirajudeen, K.N.; Ghazali, F.C. Quantitative analysis of sulphated glycosaminoglycans
content of Malaysian sea cucumber Stichopus hermanni and Stichopus vastus .Nat. Prod. Res. 2012 ,26, 684–689.[CrossRef] [PubMed]223. Bhatnagar, I.; Kim, S.K. Immense essence of excellence: Marine microbial bioactive compounds. Mar. Drugs2010 ,8, 2673–2701. [CrossRef]224. Blunt, J.W.; Copp, B.R.; Keyzers, R.A.; Munro, M.H.; Prinsep, M.R. Marine natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep.2016 ,33, 382–431. [CrossRef]225. Ireland, C.M.; Copp, B.R.; Mark, P .M.P .; McDonald, L.A.; Radisky, D.C.; Swersey, J.C. Biomedical Potential ofMarine Natural Products. In Marine Biotechnology: Pharmaceutical and Bioactive Natural Products ; Attaway, D.H.,Zaborsky, O.R., Eds.; Springer Science +Business Media, LLC: New York, NY, USA, 1993; Volume 1, pp. 1–30.226. Romano, G.; Costantini, M.; Sansone, C.; Lauritano, C.; Ruocco, N.; Lanora, A. Marine microorganisms as apromising and sustainable source of bioactive molecules. Mar. Environ. Res. 2017 ,128, 58–69. [CrossRef]
227. Sousa, I.; Gouveia, L.; Batista, A.P .; Raymundo, A.; Bandarra, N.M. Microalgae in novel food product. In Food
227. Sousa, I.; Gouveia, L.; Batista, A.P .; Raymundo, A.; Bandarra, N.M. Microalgae in novel food product. In FoodChemistry Research Developments ; Konstantinos, N., Papadopoulos, P .P ., Eds.; Nova Science Publishers Inc.:New York, NY, USA, 2008; pp. 75–112.228. Derikvand, P .; Llewellyn, C.A.; Purton, S. Cyanobacterial metabolites as a source of sunscreens andmoisturizers: A comparison with current synthetic compounds. Eur. J. Phycol. 2017 ,52, 43–56. [CrossRef]229. Proteau, P .J.; Gerwick, W.H.; Garcia-Pichel, F.; Castenholz, R. The structure of scytonemin, an ultravioletsunscreen pigment from the sheaths of cyanobacteria. Experientia 1993 ,49, 825–829. [CrossRef]230. Raposo, M.F.D.; Morais, R.M.S.C.; Morais, A.M.M.B. Health applications of bioactive compounds frommarine microalgae. Life Sci. 2013 ,93, 479–486. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 36 of 38231. Singh, K.N.; Patil, S.; Barkate, H. Protective e ﬀects of astaxanthin on skin: Recent scientiﬁc evidence, possiblemechanisms, and potential indications. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,19, 22–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]232. Komatsu, T.; Sasaki, S.; Manabe, Y.; Hirata, T.; Sugawara, T. Preventive e ﬀect of dietary astaxanthin onUVA-induced skin photoaging in hairless mice. PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0171178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]233. Tripathi, U.; Sarada, R.; Rao, S.R.; Ravishankar, G.A. Production of astaxanthin in Haematococcus pluvialiscultured in various media. Bioresour. Technol. 1999 ,68, 197–199. [CrossRef]234. Shi, X.M.; Jiang, Y.; Chen, F. High-yield production of lutein by the green microalga Chlorella protothecoidesin heterotrophic fed-batch culture. Biotechnol. Prog. 2002 ,18, 723–727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]235. Draelos, Z.D. New treatments for restoring impaired epidermal barrier permeability: Skin barrier repair
creams. Clin. Dermatol. 2012 ,30, 345–348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]236. Brooks, G.; Franklin, S. Cosmetic Compositions Comprising Microalgal Components. U.S. Patent 8,557,249B2, 15 October 2013.237. Mourelle, M.L.; G ómez, C.; Soto, J.L.L. The potential use of marine microalgae and cyanobacteria in cosmeticsand thalassotherapy. Cosmetics 2017 ,4, 46. [CrossRef]238. Shen, C.-T.; Chen, P .-Y.; Wu, J.-J.; Lee, T.-M.; Hsu, S.-L.; Chang, C.-M.J.; Young, C.-C.; Shieh, C.-J. Puriﬁcationof algal anti-tyrosinase zeaxanthin from Nannochloropsis oculata using supercritical anti-solvent precipitation.J. Supercrit. Fluids 2011 ,55, 955–962. [CrossRef]239. Pieber, S.; Schober, S.; Mittelbach, M. Pressurized ﬂuid extraction of polyunsaturated fatty acids from themicroalga Nannochloropsis oculata .Biomass Bioenerg. 2012 ,47, 474–482. [CrossRef]240. Amori, P .; Lotti, J.; Lotti, T.; Vitiello, G. Clinical evaluation of a new cosmetic cream containing PEPHA ®-TIGHT
on the skin of childbearing women. J. Biol. Regul. Homeost. Agents. 2017 ,31, 141–145. [PubMed]241. Neumann, U.; Derwenskus, F.; Flister, V .F.; Schmid-Staiger, U.; Hirth, T.; Bischo ﬀ, S.C. Fucoxanthin, Acarotenoid derived from Phaeodactylum tricornutum exerts antiproliferative and antioxidant activities in vitro .Antioxidants 2019 ,8, 183. [CrossRef]242. Pudney, A.; Gandini, C.; Economou, C.K.; Smith, R.; Goddard, P .; Napier, J.A.; Spicer, A.; Sayanova, O.Multifunctionalizing the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum for sustainable co-production of omega-3long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and recombinant phytase. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 11444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]243. Nizard, C.; Friguet, B.; Moreau, M.; Bulteau, A.L.; Saunois, A. Use of Phaeodactylum Algae Extract asCosmetic Agent Promoting the Proteasome Activity of Skin Cells and Cosmetic Composition Comprisingsame. U.S. Patent 204 /0136945A1, 15 July 2004.
same. U.S. Patent 204 /0136945A1, 15 July 2004.244. Abida, H.; Ruchaud, S.; Rios, L.; Humeau, L.; Probert, I.; De Vargas, C.; Bach, S.; Bowler, C. Bioprospectingmarine plankton. Mar Drugs 2013 ,11, 4594–4611. [CrossRef] [PubMed]245. Latasa, M. Pigment composition of Heterocapsa sp. and Thalassiosira weissﬂogii growing in batch culturesunder di ﬀerent irradiances. Sci. Mar. 1995 ,59, 25–37.246. Ishika, T.; Laird, D.W.; Bahri, P .A.; Moheimani, N.R. Co-cultivation and stepwise cultivation of Chaetocerosmuelleri and Amphora sp. for fucoxanthin production under gradual salinity increase. J. Appl. Phycol. 2019 ,31, 1535–1544. [CrossRef]247. Yuan, J.-P .; Chen, F.; Liu, X.; Li, X.-Z. Carotenoid composition in the green microalga Chlorococcum .FoodChem. 2002 ,76, 319–325. [CrossRef]248. Prartono, T.; Kawaroe, M.; Katili, V . Fatty acid composition of three diatom species Skeletonema costatum,Thalassiosira sp. and Chaetoceros gracilis .Int. J. Environ. Bioenerg. 2013 ,6, 28–43.
249. Peltomaa, E.; Hällfors, H.; Taipale, S.J. Comparison of diatoms and dinoﬂagellates from di ﬀerent habitats assources of PUFAs. Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 233. [CrossRef]
249. Peltomaa, E.; Hällfors, H.; Taipale, S.J. Comparison of diatoms and dinoﬂagellates from di ﬀerent habitats assources of PUFAs. Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 233. [CrossRef]250. Zanella, L.; Pertile, P .; Massironi, M.; Massironi, M.; Caviola, E. Extracts of Microalgae and Their Application.U.S. Patent 2019 /0117712 A1, 25 April 2019.251. Imho ﬀ, J.F.; Labes, A.; Wiese, J. Bio-mining the microbial treasures of the ocean: New natural products.Biotechnol. Adv. 2011 ,29, 468–482. [CrossRef]252. Balkrishna, A.; Agarwal, V .; Kumar, G.; Gupta, A.K. Applications of bacterial polysaccharides with specialreference to the cosmetic industry. In Microbial Bioprospecting for Sustainable Development ; Singh, J., Sharma, D.,Kumar, G., Sharma, N.J., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2018; pp. 189–202. [CrossRef]253. Nwodo, U.U.; Green, E.; Okoh, A.I. Bacterial exopolysaccharides: Functionality and prospects. Int. J. Mol.Sci.2012 ,13, 14002–14015. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 37 of 38254. Martins, A.; Vieira, H.; Gaspar, H.; Santos, S. Marketed marine natural products in the pharmaceutical andcosmeceutical industries: Tips for success. Mar. Drugs 2014 ,12, 1066–1101. [CrossRef]255. Costaouec, T.; Cerantola, S.; Ropartz, D.; Ratiskol, J.; Sinquin, C.; Colliec-Jouault, S.; Boisset, C. Structuraldata on a bacterial exopolysaccharide produced by a deep-sea Alteromonas macleodii strain. Carbohydr. Polym.2012 ,90, 49–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]256. Courtois, A.; Berthou, C.; Guezennec, J.; Boisset, C.; Bordron, A. Exopolysaccharides isolated from hydrothermalvent bacteria can modulate the complement system. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, e94965. [CrossRef] [PubMed]257. Shindo, K.; Kikuta, K.; Suzuki, A.; Katsuta, A.; Kasai, H.; Yasumoto-Hirose, M.; Matsuo, Y.; Misawa, N.;Takaichi, S. Rare carotenoids, (3R)-saproxanthin and (3R,2’S)-myxol, isolated from novel marine bacteria
(Flavobacteriaceae) and their antioxidative activities. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007 ,74, 1350–1357. [CrossRef][PubMed]258. Lee, J.H.; Kim, Y.S.; Choi, T.-J.; Lee, W.J.; Kim, Y.T. Paracoccus haeundaensis sp. nov., a Gram-negative,halophilic, astaxanthin-producing bacterium. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2004 ,54, 1699–1702. [CrossRef]259. Yokoyama, A.; Miki, W. Composition and presumed biosynthetic pathway of carotenoids in the astaxanthin-producing bacterium Agrobacterium aurantiacum .FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1995 ,128, 139–144. [CrossRef]260. Kang, H.Y.; Yoon, T.J.; Lee, G.J. Whitening e ﬀects of marine pseudomonas extract. Ann. Dermatol. 2011 ,23,144–149. [CrossRef]261. Deering, R.W.; Chen, J.; Sun, J.; Ma, H.; Dubert, J.; Barja, J.L.; Seeram, N.P .; Wang, H.; Rowley, D.C. N-Acyldehydrotyrosines, tyrosinase inhibitors from the marine bacterium Thalassotalea sp. PP2-459. J. Nat. Prod.2016 ,79, 447–450. [CrossRef]
2016 ,79, 447–450. [CrossRef]262. Bownik, A.; Stepniewska, Z. Ectoine as a promising protective agent in humans and animals. Arh. Hig. RadaToksikol. 2016 ,67, 260–265. [CrossRef]263. Kunte, H.J.; Lentzen, G.; Galinski, E. Industrial production of the cell protectant ectoine: Protectionmechanisms, processes, and products. Curr. Biotechnol. 2014 ,3, 10–25. [CrossRef]264. Marini, A.; Reinelt, K.; Krutmann, J.; Bilstein, A. Ectoine-containing cream in the treatment of mild to moderateatopic dermatitis: A randomised, comparator-controlled, intra-individual double-blind, multi-center trial.Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2014 ,27, 57–65. [CrossRef]265. Heinrich, U.; Garbe, B.; Tronnier, H. In vivo assessment of ectoin: A randomized, vehicle-controlled clinicaltrial. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2007 ,20, 211–218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]266. Zaccai, G.; Bagyan, I.; Combet, J.; Cuello, G.J.; Deme, B.; Fichou, Y.; Gallat, F.X.; Josa, V .M.G.; Gronau, S.;
Haertlein, M.; et al. Neutrons describe ectoine e ﬀects on water H-bonding and hydration around a solubleprotein and a cell membrane. Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 31434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]267. Graf, R.; Anzali, S.; Buenger, J.; Pﬂuecker, F.; Driller, H. The multifunctional role of ectoine as a natural cellprotectant. Clin. Dermatol. 2008 ,26, 326–333. [CrossRef] [PubMed]268. Thomas, T.R.; Kavlekar, D.P .; LokaBharathi, P .A. Marine drugs from sponge-microbe association–a review.Mar. Drugs 2010 ,8, 1417–1468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]269. Dharmaraj, S.; Ashokkumar, B.; Dhevendaran, K. Food-grade pigments from Streptomyces sp. isolated fromthe marine sponge Callyspongia di ﬀusa.Food Res. Int. 2009 ,42, 487–492. [CrossRef]270. Dharmaraj, S.; Ashokkumar, B.; Dhevendaran, K. Fermentative production of carotenoids from marineactinomycetes. Iran. J. Microbiol. 2009 ,1, 36–41.271. Kogej, T.; Gostincar, C.; Volkmann, M.; Gorbushina, A.A.; Gunde-Cimerman, N. Mycosporines in
extremophilic fungi-Novel complementary osmolytes? Environ. Chem. 2006 ,3, 105–110. [CrossRef]272. Zhang, D.; Yang, X.; Kang, J.S.; Choi, H.D.; Son, B.W. Circumdatin I, a new ultraviolet-A protecting
272. Zhang, D.; Yang, X.; Kang, J.S.; Choi, H.D.; Son, B.W. Circumdatin I, a new ultraviolet-A protectingbenzodiazepine alkaloid from a marine isolate of the fungus Exophiala .J. Antibiot. 2008 ,61, 40–42. [CrossRef]273. Li, X.; Kim, M.K.; Lee, U.; Kim, S.K.; Kang, J.S.; Choi, H.D.; Son, B.W. Myrothenones A and B, cyclopentenonederivatives with tyrosinase inhibitory activity from the marine-derived fungus Myrothecium sp.Chem. Pharm.Bull. 2005 ,53, 453–455. [CrossRef]274. Zhang, D.H.; Li, X.G.; Kang, J.S.; Choi, H.D.; Son, B.W. A new α-pyrone derivative, 6-[( E)-hept-1-enyl]-α-pyrone, with tyrosinase inhibitory activity from a marine isolate of the fungus Botrytis. Bull. Korean Chem.Soc. 2007 ,28, 887–888. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2020 ,25, 2536 38 of 38275. Tsuchiya, T.; Yamada, K.; Minoura, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Usami, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Hamada-Sato, N.; Imada, C.;Tsujibo, H. Puriﬁcation and determination of the chemical structure of the tyrosinase inhibitor produced byTrichoderma viride strain H1-7 from a marine environment. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2008 ,31, 1618–1620. [CrossRef][PubMed]276. Wu, B.; Wu, X.; Sun, M.; Li, M. Two novel tyrosinase inhibitory sesquiterpenes induced by CuCl2 from amarine-derived fungus Pestalotiopsis sp. .Z233 Mar. Drugs 2013 ,11, 2713–2721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]277. Li, X.; Jeong, J.H.; Lee, K.T.; Rho, J.R.; Choi, H.D.; Kang, J.S.; Son, B.W. γ-Pyrone derivatives, kojic acid methylethers from a marine-derived fungus Alternaria sp.Arch. Pharm. Res. 2003 ,26, 532–534. [CrossRef] [PubMed]278. Kaya, K.; Nakazawa, A.; Matsuura, H.; Honda, D.; Inouye, I.; Watanabe, M.M. Thraustochytrid Aurantiochytrium
sp 18W-13a accummulates high amounts of squalene. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2011 ,75, 2246–2248. [CrossRef]279. Ziboh, V .A.; Miller, C.C.; Cho, Y. Metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids by skin epidermal enzymes:Generation of antiinﬂammatory and antiproliferative metabolites. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2000 ,71, 361S–366S.[CrossRef]280. Burja, A.M.; Radianingtyas, H.; Windust, A.; Barrow, C.J. Isolation and characterization of polyunsaturatedfatty acid producing Thraustochytrium species: Screening of strains and optimization of omega-3 production.Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2006 ,72, 1161–1169. [CrossRef]281. Xie, Y.; Wang, G. Mechanisms of fatty acid synthesis in marine fungus-like protists. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.2015 ,99, 8363–8375. [CrossRef]282. Gupta, A.; Barrow, C.J.; Puri, M. Omega-3 biotechnology: Thraustochytrids as a novel source of omega-3 oils.Biotechnol. Adv. 2012 ,30, 1733–1745. [CrossRef]
Biotechnol. Adv. 2012 ,30, 1733–1745. [CrossRef]283. Aasen, I.M.; Ertesvag, H.; Heggeset, T.M.; Liu, B.; Brautaset, T.; Vadstein, O.; Ellingsen, T.E. Thraustochytrids asproduction organisms for docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), squalene, and carotenoids. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.2016 ,100, 4309–4321. [CrossRef]284. Zhang, J.; Yuan, B.; Liu, D.; Gao, S.; Proksch, P .; Lin, W. Brasilianoids A-F, new meroterpenoids from thesponge-associated fungus Penicillium brasilianum .Front. Chem. 2018 ,6, 314. [CrossRef]285. Rawlings, A.V .; Harding, C.R. Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol. Ther. 2004 ,17, 43–48.[CrossRef] [PubMed]286. Eckhart, L.; Tschachler, E. Cuts by caspase-14 control the proteolysis of ﬁlaggrin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2011 ,131, 2173–2175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]287. Mata-G ómez, L.C.; Montañez, J.C.; M éndez-Zavala, A.; Aguilar, C.N. Biotechnological production ofcarotenoids by yeasts: An overview. Microb. Cell. Fact. 2014 ,13, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
288. Suen, Y.L.; Tang, H.; Huang, J.; Chen, F. Enhanced production of fatty acids and astaxanthin in Aurantiochytriumsp. by the expression of Vitreoscilla hemoglobin. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014 ,62, 12392–12398. [CrossRef]289. Jin, J.; Wang, Y.; Yao, M.; Gu, X.; Li, B.; Liu, H.; Ding, M.; Xiao, W.; Yuan, Y. Astaxanthin overproduction inyeast by strain engineering and new gene target uncovering. Biotechnol. Biofuels 2018 ,11, 230. [CrossRef]Sample Availability: Samples of the compounds are not available from the authors.©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
