nutrientsReviewPotential of Curcumin in Skin DisordersLaura Vollono1, Mattia Falconi2, Roberta Gaziano3, Federico Iacovelli2, Emi Dika4,Chiara Terracciano5, Luca Bianchi1and Elena Campione1,*1Dermatology Unit, Department of “Medicina dei Sistemi”, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier,1–00133 Rome, Italy2Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Via della Ricerca Scientiﬁca, 1–00133 Rome, Italy3Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata,Via Montpellier, 1–00133 Rome, Italy4Dermatology Unit, Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine-DIMES,University of Bologna, Via Massarenti, 1–40138 Bologna, Italy5Neurology Unit, Guglielmo de Saliceto Hospital, 29121–29122 Piacenza, Italy*Correspondence: campioneelena@hotmail.comReceived: 11 July 2019; Accepted: 15 August 2019; Published: 10 September 2019/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: Curcumin is a compound isolated from turmeric, a plant known for its medicinal use.Recently, there is a growing interest in the medical community in identifying novel, low-cost, safemolecules that may be used in the treatment of inﬂammatory and neoplastic diseases. An increasingamount of evidence suggests that curcumin may represent an e ﬀective agent in the treatment ofseveral skin conditions. We examined the most relevant in vitro and in vivo studies published to dateregarding the use of curcumin in inﬂammatory, neoplastic, and infectious skin diseases, providinginformation on its bioavailability and safety proﬁle. Moreover, we performed a computationalanalysis about curcumin’s interaction towards the major enzymatic targets identiﬁed in the literature.Our results suggest that curcumin may represent a low-cost, well-tolerated, e ﬀective agent in the
treatment of skin diseases. However, bypass of limitations of its in vivo use (low oral bioavailability,metabolism) is essential in order to conduct larger clinical trials that could conﬁrm these observations.The possible use of curcumin in combination with traditional drugs and the formulations of noveldelivery systems represent a very promising ﬁeld for future applicative research.Keywords: curcumin; antioxidants; molecular docking; inﬂammatory skin diseases; psoriasis; atopicdermatitis; iatrogenic dermatitis; wound care; skin aging; inﬂammaging; skin cancer; skin infections1. IntroductionCurcumin is a bright yellow chemical compound isolated from Curcuma longa L. (turmeric) plants(Zingiberaceae) [ 1]. Turmeric has been historically used in herbalism as a traditional medical remedyfor cutaneous and gastrointestinal inﬂammation, weight control, and poor digestion [2–4].Recently, conventional medicine is directing a lot of e ﬀort towards identifying novel, low-cost,
safe molecules that may be used in the treatment of inﬂammatory, neoplastic, and infectious diseases.Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies have examined curcumin’s anti-inﬂammatory, anticancer,and antimicrobial properties, both individually and combined with traditional treatments. This paperaims to provide an overview on the current knowledge regarding curcumin’s e ﬀects on skin conditionsalongside with its bioavailability and safety proﬁle through the analysis of the most relevant studiespublished to date, providing suggestions for further research (Figure 1). Molecular docking studiesdescribing the interaction of curcumin with molecular targets involved in the development of skindisorders are nowadays not available in literature. We therefore complemented our data with originalresults, obtained through molecular docking analysis, regarding curcumin’s binding mode andNutrients 2019 ,11, 2169; doi:10.3390 /nu11092169 www.mdpi.com /journal /nutrients
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 2 of 25interaction towards six major enzymatic targets, indicated in this review as responsible for severaldermatological conditions.Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   2 of 26 docking studies describing the interaction of cu rcumin with molecular targets involved in the development of skin disorders are nowadays not av ailable in literature. We therefore complemented our data with original results, obtained through molecular docking analysis, regarding curcumin’s binding mode and interaction towards six major enzymatic targets, indicated in this review as responsible for several dermatological conditions.   Figure 1. Graphical abstract. 1.1. Bioavailability of Curcumin According to Nutraceutica Bioavailability Classifi cation Scheme (NuBACS), curcumin shows poor bioaccessibility, due to its low solubility in wate r and low stability [5]. Curcumin also undergoes
extensive first-pass metabolism through its glucuron idation and sulfation, with the production of metabolites that have shown to have  significant lower biological activi ties compared to parent curcumin and that are rapidly eliminated [6]. A curcum in-converting enzyme named “NADPH-dependent curcumin/dihydrocurcumin reductase”  (CurA) has been purified from Escherichia Coli , shedding new light on the role of human intestinal microorganism s in the mechanism of curcumin metabolism in vivo [7]. Preclinical and clinical st udies assessed that curcumin is poorly absorbed following oral administration. In rats, only 60% of the dose of curcumin administered orally was adsorbed, with negligible quantities (<20 μg/tissue) detected in liver and kidney from 15 min up to 24 h after administration albeit 38% of the initial dose being detected in the large inte stine and patients taking curcumin orally show plasmatic concentration of the compound at nanomolar levels, with limited
biological effects [8–12]. To overcome this limitatio n, combination with adjuvant substances such as piperine, encapsulation with polyla ctic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) and cyclodextrin (CD), or formulation in liposome, micelles, nanoparticles, nanomicellizin g solid dispersion based on rebaudioside A and dispersion with colloidal submicron-particles ha ve been recently proposed, showing to enhance curcumin bioavailability and therapeutic potential [6,13–18]. We present some significant results induced by curcumin administered in several formul ations below in this re view (Table 1). Ongoing Figure 1. Graphical abstract.1.1. Bioavailability of CurcuminAccording to Nutraceutica Bioavailability Classiﬁcation Scheme (NuBACS), curcumin showspoor bioaccessibility, due to its low solubility in water and low stability [ 5]. Curcumin also undergoesextensive ﬁrst-pass metabolism through its glucuronidation and sulfation, with the production of
metabolites that have shown to have signiﬁcant lower biological activities compared to parent curcuminand that are rapidly eliminated [ 6]. A curcumin-converting enzyme named “NADPH-dependentcurcumin /dihydrocurcumin reductase” (CurA) has been puriﬁed from Escherichia Coli , shedding newlight on the role of human intestinal microorganisms in the mechanism of curcumin metabolismin vivo [7]. Preclinical and clinical studies assessed that curcumin is poorly absorbed followingoral administration. In rats, only 60% of the dose of curcumin administered orally was adsorbed,with negligible quantities ( <20µg/tissue) detected in liver and kidney from 15 min up to 24 h afteradministration albeit 38% of the initial dose being detected in the large intestine and patients takingcurcumin orally show plasmatic concentration of the compound at nanomolar levels, with limitedbiological e ﬀects [ 8–12]. To overcome this limitation, combination with adjuvant substances such as
piperine, encapsulation with polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) and cyclodextrin (CD), or formulation
piperine, encapsulation with polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) and cyclodextrin (CD), or formulationin liposome, micelles, nanoparticles, nanomicellizing solid dispersion based on rebaudioside A anddispersion with colloidal submicron-particles have been recently proposed, showing to enhancecurcumin bioavailability and therapeutic potential [ 6,13–18]. We present some signiﬁcant resultsinduced by curcumin administered in several formulations below in this review (Table 1). Ongoingclinical trials investigating the topical or systemic use of curcumin in skin conditions are listed inTable 2.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 3 of 25Table 1. Formulations of curcumin for oral, topical, or intravenous use investigated in preclinical andclinical studies for enhanced bioavailability listed in this review.Route of Administration Formulation ReferenceOralCurcumin-piperine nanoparticles [6]Curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles [13]CE-complexed curcumin [14]Curcumin-loaded self-nanomicellizing solid dispersion based onRA (RA-Cur)[15]Colloidal Submicron-Particle Curcumin (Theracurmin®) [16]Curcumin-loaded liposomes [6,17]Curcumin micelles [17,18]Lecithin-based formulation (Meriva®) [19]Curcumin nanocapsules [20]TopicalCurcumin-loaded chitosan-alginate sponges [21]Curcumin-loaded oleic acid-based polymeric bandages [22]Curcumin-loaded alginate foams [23]Curcumin-incorporated collagen ﬁlms [24]Hydrogel system containing curcumin micelles [25]Curcumin nano-emulsion [26]Curcumin- β-Cyclodextrin nanoparticles [27]Chrysin-curcumin-loaded nanoﬁbers [28]
Chrysin-curcumin-loaded nanoﬁbers [28]Curcumin-loaded transdermal patches [29]Curcumin nanoparticles [30–32]Curcumin-loaded-liposomes [30,33,34]Curcumin-loaded chitosan nanoparticles impregnated intocollagen-alginate sca ﬀolds[35]IntravenousCurcumin-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles [36]Curcumin-loaded liposomes [37–39]PLGA, polylactic-co-glycolic acid; CE, cyclodextrin; RA, rebaudioside A.Table 2. Ongoing clinical trials with curcumin in skin disorders.Major Outcome MeasuresPain Intensity Measured byVisual Analog Scale (V AS)Change in Erythema 1 Day After UV ExposureChange in Erythema 2 Days After UV ExposureChange in Erythema 1 Day After UV ExposureStudy designRandomized, double-blind, Phase1 clinical trialRandomized, double-blindIntervention model Parallel assignment Parallel assignmentTopical or ingested curcumincontaining productTopical IngestedIntervention /treatmentDrug: TriamcinoloneDrug: Turmeric pasteDietary supplement: Crucera-SGSDietary
Supplement: Meriva 500-SFClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁer NCT03877679 NCT03289832StudyThe E ﬀect of Topical CurcuminVersus Topical Corticosteroid onManagement of Oral LichenPlanus PatientsEﬀect of Orally Delivered Phytochemicals onAging and Inﬂammation in the SkinCondition or disease Oral lichen planus UV-induced skin erythemaIntravenous use of curcumin has been proposed in order to improve curcumin bioavailabilityand increase its e ﬃcacy. Serum curcumin levels after intravenous administration were signiﬁcantlyhigher than the one observed after oral administration in rats [ 36,40]. In animal models, curcumininfusion showed signiﬁcant anticancer e ﬀects without inducing toxicity [ 6,41]. A randomized,placebo-controlled double-blind phase I dose escalation study investigated the pharmacokinetics,safety, and tolerability of short-term intravenous administration of liposomal curcumin in healthy
subjects with good results in terms of bioavailability and safety [ 37]. Pharmacokinetics of curcumin
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 4 of 25infusion seems to depend on co-medication and health status, as highlighted by a recent clinicalstudy [ 38]. However, these interesting albeit limited data must be conﬁrmed by larger clinical trialswith longer follow-up in order to recommend this route of administration.Curcumin showed a good accessibility and bioactivity when administered topically, especiallywhen incorporated in novel formulations such as chitosan-alginate sponges, polymeric bandages,alginate foams, collagen ﬁlms, nano-emulsion, hydrogel, and β-cyclodextrin-curcumin nanoparticlecomplex, making curcumin eligible as a therapeutic agent for the topical treatment of skinconditions [21–27,42]. Investigating the possible interactions between curcumin and other chemicalscommonly used in topical skin treatments may provide useful insights for the development of neweﬀective combination preparations, tailored for di ﬀerent conditions.1.2. Curcumin’s Safety Proﬁle
1.2. Curcumin’s Safety ProﬁleCurcumin is recognized as a safe compound by Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Numerouspreclinical and clinical studies assessed the safety of this compound [ 43–45]. The maximumrecommended dose varies, ranging from a maximum daily intake of 3 mg /kg to 4–10 g [ 46]. In a clinicalstudy, curcumin was not detected in the serum of healthy subjects administered up to 8000 mg /day,and only low levels were detected in two subjects administered 10,000 or 12,000 mg. No harmfuleﬀect was observed in any of the subjects, regarding a daily intake of 12,000 mg as safe in healthyindividuals [47].A good safety proﬁle of curcumin was observed also in patients with cardiovascular risk factorsand patients a ﬀected by high risk conditions or pre-malignant lesions of internal organs takinga dose of curcumin ranging from 500 to 8000 mg /day for 3 months [ 43,48]. This safety has been
observed also in patients with advanced colorectal cancer taking a dose of curcumin ranging from 36to 180 mg /day for up to 4 months, in breast cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy while taking upto 6000 mg /day of curcumin, and advanced pancreatic cancer patients taking 8000 mg /day of curcuminfor 2 months [49–51].Other studies in both healthy subjects and patients a ﬀected by several conditions such as advancedcolorectal cancer, cholangitis and ulcerative colitis reported mild and manageable gastrointestinalsymptoms with a daily intake of up to 8000 mg of curcumin [ 52–55]. Alongside these data, a minorityof patients a ﬀected by primary sclerosing cholangitis taking up to 1400 mg /day of curcumin reportedonly mild symptoms such as headache or nausea [ 56]. Controversially, intractable abdominal painafter assumption of curcumin at a dose of 8000 mg /day has also been reported in patients a ﬀected by
advanced pancreatic cancer taking gemcitabine [ 57]. It may be speculated whether curcumin-inducedCOX inhibition and the subsequent inhibition of prostaglandin (PG) synthesis (see below) plays a rolein the development of gastrointestinal side e ﬀects in patients su ﬀering other gastrointestinal conditions.However, no sound explanation is available to date.Short-term intravenous dosing of liposomal curcumin has been indicated as safe up to a dose of120 mg /m in a clinical trial on healthy subjects, whereas in a dose escalation study on metastatic cancerpatients a dose of 300 mg /m2over 6 h appeared to be the maximum tolerated dosage [ 37,39]. However,changes in red blood cell morphology may represent a dose limiting sign of toxicity, and one case ofhemolysis and one death associated with intravenous curcumin preparation were reported, suggestingthe need for further data regarding the safety and recommended dosages of curcumin administeredintravenously [36,39,58].
intravenously [36,39,58].It is worth mentioning that the majority of studies assessing curcumin safety proﬁle has beenconducted for short periods of time. No sound evidence is available to date regarding the consequences
It is worth mentioning that the majority of studies assessing curcumin safety proﬁle has beenconducted for short periods of time. No sound evidence is available to date regarding the consequencesof long-term use of this compound. Although doses recommended for over-the-counter curcuminare generally lower than the ones in clinical studies mentioned above, supplements containing thiscompound are widely available to the general public and are increasingly popular. In this regard, recentreports of liver diseases related to curcumin assumption drove the medical community’s attention tothe possible liver toxicity of this molecule [ 59]. The exact role of curcumin in the development of these
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 5 of 25conditions still has to be elucidated, and a possible contamination of supplements with lead has beenpostulated. Until further data is available, surveillance is needed, especially in long-term use, in theover-the-counter context and in patients a ﬀected by liver conditions.1.3. Curcumin for the Treatment of PsoriasisPsoriasis (PsO) is a chronic inﬂammatory, multisystemic, and multifactorial disease a ﬀectingabout 3% of the world population. The clinically observed thick, silvery plaques are the result ofuncontrolled proliferation of keratinocytes. The ﬁrst step in psoriasis pathogenesis is the activationof mature and inﬂammatory dendritic cells (DC), leading to hyperproduction of proinﬂammatorymolecules such as cytokines, chemokines and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Cytokines belonging tothe IL-23 /T-helper-(Th)-17 axis and type I interferons (IFNs) play a paramount role, being a target of
several monoclonal antibodies used in the treatment of psoriasis [60].Curcumin is able to suppress the excessive production of TNF- αby activated macrophages [ 61–65].Curcumin has been shown to directly bind to the receptor-binding sites of TNF- αby covalent andnon-covalent interactions, blocking the subsequent TNF-dependent activation of NF- κB [66,67]. It hasbeen also observed that curcumin can inhibit a TNF- αpromoter by its methylation and is able toimpair lipopolysaccharide (LPS) signaling, responsible of the induction of TNF- αproduction, by actingon toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2 and 4 [ 68–70]. Moreover, curcumin is a non-competitive inhibitor ofPhosphorylase kinase (PhK), a serine /threonine-speciﬁc protein kinase. Levels of PhK in human skinsamples taken from patients a ﬀected by untreated active psoriasis, resolving psoriasis undergoingtopical treatment, and non-psoriatic subjects showed to directly correlate to the activity of psoriasis.
In this study, decreased levels of PhK in samples of plaques treated with curcumin 1% alcoholic gelas well as other traditional topical treatment were associated with decreased keratinocyte transferrinreceptor (TRR) expression, severity of parakeratosis, and density of epidermal CD8 +T cells [ 71].These preliminary observations may suggest that agents capable to inhibit PhK activity, such ascurcumin, could be considered suitable candidates the topical treatment of psoriasis [72,73].In animal studies, daily applications of 1% curcumin gel reduced skin psoriasis-like inﬂammationartiﬁcially induced by imiquimod, through the inhibitions of the potassium channels (subtypes Kv1.3)expressed in T cells and the reduction of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-22, and other pro-inﬂammatory cytokinesin ear samples taken from mice [ 74,75]. Clinically, daily applications of a turmeric tonic signiﬁcantlyreduced the cutaneous symptoms and quality of life of patients a ﬀected by scalp psoriasis compared
to the placebo [ 76]. A recent randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial reported theanti-psoriatic e ﬀects of oral administration of Meriva, a novel bioavailable lecithin-based delivery formof curcumin, observing a reduction of cutaneous symptoms together with a decrease of serum levelsof IL-22. Furthermore, the treatment increased the anti-psoriatic e ﬀects of topical steroids in thesepatients when treated in combination [19].Curcumin oral administration (40 mg /kg, for 20 days) resulted in signiﬁcant reduction of theserum levels of IL-2, IL-12, IL-22, IL-23, IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha in psoriatic mice, reducingpsoriasis-associated inﬂammation as well as hyper-proliferation of keratinocytes [ 77]. Clinically,a phase II clinical trial conﬁrmed the e ﬃcacy of oral curcumin on cutaneous symptoms of plaquepsoriasis, reporting an excellent safety proﬁle [ 67]. Interestingly, a double blind, placebo-controlled
randomized clinical trial reported that oral administration of curcumin formulated as nanoparticles
randomized clinical trial reported that oral administration of curcumin formulated as nanoparticlespotentiated the e ﬀectiveness of acitretin in psoriatic patients and resulted in control of their serumcholesterol levels, suggesting a role of this compound as adjuvant treatment in moderate-to-severepsoriasis [78].1.4. Curcumin for the Treatment of Atopic DermatitisAtopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, pruritic inﬂammatory skin disease of unknown etiology,resulting from a complex interplay between genetic, environmental, and immune factors [ 79]. It usuallystarts in early infancy, but also a ﬀects a substantial number of adults. The prevalence of atopic diseases
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 6 of 25has increased abruptly in recent years in most Westernized societies, resulting in considerable researchinto safe, economically viable, and readily manufactured therapies for AD [80].An imbalance in the T cell subsets is crucial in the pathogenesis of AD. The early stages arecharacterized by an abnormal production of cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IL-31 by Th2,whereas in later phases a switch from the initial Th2 response to a Th1 type-immune response isobserved, with excessive release of IL-1, IL-6, TNF- α, IL-12, and IL-18 by recruited monocytes [81].In Asian countries, curcumin has been traditionally used to manage atopic dermatitissymptoms [82].The phytocomponent p-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCA) isolated from Curcuma longa has been shownto modulate the protein kinase C (PKC) theta (PKC θ) pathway in vitro , leading to the inhibition of T-cell
activation [ 83]. In animal study, oral administration of HCA induced a reduction in the production ofproinﬂammatory cytokines by keratinocytes in both the ear tissues and in vitro , improving cutaneoussigns of AD such as dermo-epidermal thickening and inﬂammation in mice [71].Clinically, a combination herbal extract cream (Herbavate®) containing C. longa applied dailyalleviated erythema, scaling, thickening, and itching in patients a ﬀected by eczema [ 84]. However,the design of the study (non-comparative study, lack of control group, high drop-out rate, impossibilityto distinguish between the e ﬀects of turmeric and the other cream components) makes the signiﬁcanceof the results debatable. Further randomized, comparative clinical trials are needed in order to establishthe potential role of curcumin in the treatment of AD.Contact dermatitis and contact urticaria after topical application of curcumin-based creams have
been reported [ 85–87]. Once more, surveillance is advisable in highly reactive patients, such as theones a ﬀected by atopic dermatitis.1.5. Curcumin for the Treatment of Iatrogenic DermatitisIatrogenic dermatitis is a non-speciﬁc term used to indicate a variety of inﬂammatory skinconditions directly attributable to medical procedures or drug administration. Radiation-induceddermatitis developing in patients undergoing radiotherapy sessions and allergic contact dermatitisdue to applied medicaments are typical examples of iatrogenic dermatitis.Several studies propose curcumin as a natural, safe, widely available, and inexpensive treatmentfor the management of iatrogenic dermatitis.In an animal model, daily topical application of curcumin showed to improve epithelial cellsurvival and recovery in irradiated skin, reducing the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and nuclearfactor-kappaB [88].
factor-kappaB [88].In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial oral curcumin administration(6 g/day) during radiotherapy sessions reduced the severity of radiation-induced dermatitis in 30 breastcancer patients [50].Oral administration of curcumin (4 g /day) showed to prevent capecitabine-induced hand-footsyndrome (HFS) in 40 cancer patients undergoing treatment with capecitabine, with no toxicityassociated with curcumin. Interestingly, no correlations between inﬂammatory parameters such asIL-6, TNF- α, neutrophil /lymphocyte index, and HFS severity was found, thus the mechanism behindthis preventive e ﬀect is not fully elucidated [89].In addition, a placebo-controlled study reported that oral administration of curcumin (1 gr /day)combined with piperine for 4 weeks improved sulphur mustard-induced chronic pruritic symptomsand DLQI of 46 patients compared with placebo. The authors observed a signiﬁcant reduction in
the levels of various inﬂammatory markers such as IL-8, hs-CRP CGRP in the patients receivingcurcumin compared with placebo, and a concurrent reduction of substance p(p<0.001) as well assigniﬁcant elevations in serum superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and catalase
curcumin compared with placebo, and a concurrent reduction of substance p(p<0.001) as well assigniﬁcant elevations in serum superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and catalaseactivities, further conﬁrming the well-documented antioxidant activities of curcumin (discussed below).The authors state that the abovementioned e ﬀects may have been inﬂuenced by the association ofcurcumin with piperine, a well-documented bioavailability enhancer [90].
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 7 of 251.6. Curcumin for Wound CareWound treatment represents a therapeutic challenge with signiﬁcant economic impact on healthcaresystems worldwide, with its cost rising sharply [26].Wound healing is a complex, dynamic process that involves a sequence of cellular and molecularevents. It can be divided in a simpliﬁed manner into three phases: (1) hemostasis and inﬂammation,(2) proliferation with formation of granulation tissue, and (3) remodeling, with formation of newepithelium and scarring [91].During the inﬂammatory phase a signiﬁcant number of neutrophils are recruited at the woundedsite, releasing proteases, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and inﬂammatory mediators such as TNF- αand IL-1 [ 92,93]. As mentioned above (see Section 1.3) curcumin is able to reduce inﬂammation throughthe inhibition of nuclear factor κB (NF- κB) and the suppression of TNF- αexpression, as well as through
the impairment of LPS signaling. Moreover, curcumin exerts its anti-inﬂammatory e ﬀects by actingon other signaling pathways, such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR- γ)and myeloid di ﬀerentiation protein 2-TLR 4 co-receptor (TLR4-MD2) [ 94–97]. Excessive oxidativestress plays a major role in prolonged inﬂammation, a signiﬁcant feature in the pathogenesis of chronicnon-healing wound [ 98,99]. In fact, while low levels of ROS are physiologically formed during thephysiologic wound healing process, their excessive production cannot be balanced by the cellularantioxidant system, leading to oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation (LPx), DNA breakage and enzymeinactivation, including free-radical scavenging enzymes, in a self-perpetuating cycle resulting in chronicdisease [ 100]. The reducing potential of its electron-donating groups allows curcumin to restore the
redox balance and suppress transcription factors related to oxidation, while sustaining the productionand activity of antioxidant enzymes and their constituents, such as glutathione (GSH) [ 24,101–105].Moreover, a protective action of curcumin against hydrogen peroxide has been observed in vitro inhuman keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts [106].During the proliferative phase of wound healing, the dermis is invaded by proliferating ﬁbroblastsproducing immature ECM proteins (EDA ﬁbronectin and type III collagen) as well as activating growthfactors such as TGF- β1, leading to reparation of the wounded dermal layer [107–113].Simultaneously, keratinocytes migrate at the wounded site, where they proliferate and di ﬀerentiatein order to restore the overlying epithelium [ 114,115]. A major role in this process is played by hairfollicle stem cells [116,117].Curcumin may exert signiﬁcant action during the proliferative phase [ 118]. In fact, it has been
demonstrated that curcumin is able to reduce the number of membrane matrix metallo-proteinases(MMPs), increase the hydroxyproline and collagen synthesis, and accelerate the maturation ofcollagen ﬁbers [ 24,119]. In addition, curcumin also promotes the di ﬀerentiation of ﬁbroblasts intomyoﬁbroblasts, which marks the beginning of wound contraction, and reduces the epithelizationperiod in wounds [119–124].In animal models, daily curcumin topical application accelerated wound healing in irradiatedmini-pigs, and the application of chrysin-curcumin-loaded nanoﬁbers reduced the levels of IL-6,MMP-2, TIMP-1, TIMP-2, and iNOS gene expression in male rats, resulting in the acceleration of thehealing process of surgical wounds [ 28,88]. Transdermally applied curcumin on surgical wounds onrats produced marked inhibition of H 2O2-induced damage to keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts, whileapplication of curcumin-oligochitosan nanoparticle complex or with application of oligochitosan
coated curcumin-loaded-liposomes resulted in faster healing of surgical wounds in mice comparedwith controls [ 29,30]. In a diabetic rat model, wounds treated with curcumin showed an accelerated
coated curcumin-loaded-liposomes resulted in faster healing of surgical wounds in mice comparedwith controls [ 29,30]. In a diabetic rat model, wounds treated with curcumin showed an acceleratedreepithelization rate compared with untreated controls [ 125]. Treatment with curcumin-loadedpolymeric bandages resulted in signiﬁcantly lower expression of PI3K and pAKT, indicative ofan inhibition of the PI3K /AKT/NFκB axis, reduced LPx levels, and increase in collagen comparedwith controls.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 8 of 25Clinically, patients affected by diabetic wounds treated with curcumin loaded chitosan nanoparticlesimpregnated into collagen-alginate sca ﬀolds reported a signiﬁcantly faster healing process comparedto those treated with patients receiving treatment with placebo sca ﬀold [35].As mentioned above, topical application of curcumin seems to have more pronounced e ﬀectson wound healing compared to its oral administration in the treatment of wounds, owing to higheraccessibility of the drug at the wound site [ 94,125–127]. Many new formulations of curcumin have beendeveloped in order to achieve better topical application at the wound site, such as chitosan-alginatesponges, curcumin-loaded polymeric bandages, alginate foams, collagen ﬁlms, and nano-emulsion andhydrogel [ 26–31]. The incorporation into these formulations resulted in increased curcumin bioactivity,
although no formulation showed a signiﬁcant di ﬀerence in its e ﬀect compared to the others. However,formulation as nanoparticles seems to be of special interest, as it increases curcumin bioavailabilityand half-life and enhances its water dispersibility [ 27,30–32]. Further studies comparing nanoparticleswith other formulations are needed in order to conﬁrm these observations.1.7. Curcumin for the Treatment of Skin Aging: The “Inﬂammaging” IssueHuman aging is a very complex process that occurs in an intricate biological and physiologicalsetting, depending on a complex interaction between genetic, environmental, and stochastic factors.The term “exposome” has been proposed to describe the totality of exposures to which an individual issubjected from conception to death, including both external and internal factors as well as the humanbody’s response to these factors. Speciﬁcally, not clinically evident infections, sun radiations (UVA and
UVB), air pollution, and tobacco smoke have been listed as environmental factors [ 128]. Many changesoccur with aging. Among the most important are changes in immune reactivity associated with celldiﬀerentiation stages and the phenomenon of inﬂammaging, understood as subclinical low-gradeinﬂammation, manifested by elevated levels of proinﬂammatory factors, being both these processesdriven by chronic antigen stimulation [129].Inﬂammaging is considered the basis of most age-related diseases (ARDs). Increased levels ofcytokines such as IL-1,2,6,12,15,18,22,23, TNF- α, and INF have been detected in patients a ﬀected by manyARDs, such as obesity, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and Alzheimer’s disease,together with a decrease of anti-inﬂammatory factors such as IL1-Ra, IL-4, IL-10, and TGF-b [130].Release of these cytokines is primarily induced by chronic antigenic stimulation, and sustained by
the hyperproduction of ROS, also elicited by the inﬂammatory response to the antigenic stimuli. On theother hand, the antioxidant system may be depleted in a setting of chronic inﬂammation, resulting inan imbalance of the redox status and prolonged oxidative stress [131] (Figure 2).In this vicious cycle, pathophysiological changes, tissue injury, and healing proceed simultaneously.Irreversible cellular and molecular damage that is not clinically evident slowly accumulates overdecades, eventually resulting in cutaneous aging and ARDs [132].Long-lived people, especially centenarians, seem to cope with chronic subclinical inﬂammationthrough an anti-inﬂammatory response, called therefore “anti-inﬂammaging” [ 133]. On the basis ofthese observations, e ﬀorts have been recently made in order to identify molecules that can improveour response to subclinical inﬂammation and prevent the consequent cellular damages.
Due to its known anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant e ﬀects, potential topical and systemic use ofcurcumin in the treatment and prevention of skin aging has been examined, especially when related tosun exposure (photoaging) [4].
curcumin in the treatment and prevention of skin aging has been examined, especially when related tosun exposure (photoaging) [4].A clinical study on 28 women in their 30s investigated the use of an herbal combination gelcontaining turmeric, rosemary, and gotu kola (Tricutan®) in improving signs of photoaging, reportinga signiﬁcant improvement in skin ﬁrmness and improvement in subjects’ overall self-evaluations after4 weeks of daily use [134].
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 9 of 25Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   9 of 26  Figure 2. Inflammatory status imbalance leading to inflammaging. In this vicious cycle, pathophysiological changes, tissue injury, and healing proceed simultaneously. Irreversible cellular and molecular damage that is not clinically evident slowly accumulates over decades, eventually resulting in cutaneous aging and ARDs [132].  Long-lived people, especially centenarians, seem to cope with chronic subclinical inflammation through an anti-inflammatory response, called ther efore “anti-inflammaging” [133]. On the basis of these observations, efforts have been recently made  in order to identify molecules that can improve our response to subclinical inflammation an d prevent the consequent cellular damages. Due to its known anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects, potential topical and systemic use of curcumin in the treatment and prevention of skin aging has been examined, especially when
related to sun exposure (photoaging) [4]. A clinical study on 28 women in their 30s investigated the use of an herbal combination gel containing turmeric, rosemary, and gotu kola (Tricutan®) in improving signs of photoaging, reporting a significant improvement in skin  firmness and improvement in subjects’ overall self-evaluations after 4 weeks of daily use [134]. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial on 47 healthy subjects receiving daily hot water extract of Curcuma longa reported a significant inhibition of the increasing in ultraviolet B -induced TNF- α and IL-1 β at the mRNA and protein levels compared to placebo. Moreover, the administration of the compound resulted in a sign ificant increase in hyaluronan production from non-stimulated keratinocytes and in a subsequent increase in the water content in facial skin. Besides confirming its anti-inflammatory effects, these results suggest that curcumin may represent an effective moisturizing agent [135].
The effects of curcumin on collagen synthesis di scussed above (see Section 1.6) are of definite interest regarding the tone and appearance of facial skin. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled st udies on a larger number of patients are warranted in order to further investigate the possib le application of different curcumin formulations in the treatment of skin aging, and whether other ADRs may benefit from its administration.  1.8. Curcumin for the Treatment of Skin Cancer Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most common cancer in humans, including squamous and basal cell carcinoma (SCC and BCC). Although actinic keratoses (AKs) are lesions characterized by a milder degree of dysplasia, they have up to a 20% risk of progression to squamous cell Figure 2. Inﬂammatory status imbalance leading to inﬂammaging.A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial on 47 healthy subjects receiving daily hot
water extract of Curcuma longa reported a signiﬁcant inhibition of the increasing in ultraviolet B-inducedTNF- αand IL-1 βat the mRNA and protein levels compared to placebo. Moreover, the administrationof the compound resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in hyaluronan production from non-stimulatedkeratinocytes and in a subsequent increase in the water content in facial skin. Besides conﬁrming itsanti-inﬂammatory e ﬀects, these results suggest that curcumin may represent an e ﬀective moisturizingagent [135].The e ﬀects of curcumin on collagen synthesis discussed above (see Section 1.6) are of deﬁniteinterest regarding the tone and appearance of facial skin.Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies on a larger number of patients arewarranted in order to further investigate the possible application of di ﬀerent curcumin formulations inthe treatment of skin aging, and whether other ADRs may beneﬁt from its administration.1.8. Curcumin for the Treatment of Skin Cancer
the treatment of skin aging, and whether other ADRs may beneﬁt from its administration.1.8. Curcumin for the Treatment of Skin CancerNon-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most common cancer in humans, including squamousand basal cell carcinoma (SCC and BCC). Although actinic keratoses (AKs) are lesions characterized bya milder degree of dysplasia, they have up to a 20% risk of progression to squamous cell carcinoma,with eradication being mandatory in a ﬀected patients. Mortality from NMSC is low, however,its incidence is high, resulting in a signiﬁcant public health burden. This makes NMSC a suitable targetfor chemoprevention and long-lasting research. The skin of the head and neck accounts for 70%–80% ofskin cancer cases, chronic sun exposure being a major risk factor for the development of NMSC [ 136].Carcinogenesis is a dynamic process that may be divided into two stages: initiation and
promotion. The promotion phase is temporally prolonged and potentially reversible, being thetarget of chemopreventive agents that may prevent the development of an invasive tumor [137].The pro-inﬂammatory microenvironment in which cancer develops, and that the cancer itselfcontributes to produce and maintain, has raised great interest in recent years, representing a potentialtarget for both cancer prevention and treatment.Several studies have highlighted that the cyclooxygenases-1 and -2 enzymes (COX-1 andCOX-2), induced by UV and other factors, play a signiﬁcant role in tumor proliferation [ 138].In particular, up-regulation of COX-2 induces arachidonic acid metabolism resulting in overproduction
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 10 of 25of prostaglandin (PG), which directly inﬂuence cell growth after binding to speciﬁc cell surfacereceptors, including PG E, F, and I classes of receptors [ 139,140]. Up-regulation of both COX-1 andCOX-2 induces vascular epidermal growth factor (VEGF) production, resulting in angiogenesis andtumor proliferation [ 141]. Increased levels of prostaglandin are also induced by the down-regulationof tumor suppressor gene 15-hydroxy-prostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) [142].Topical non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAID) represent e ﬀective and well-toleratedtreatment options for AKs, as they work as nonspeciﬁc COX inhibitors. Our group previouslydemonstrated that local treatment with piroxicam, a NSAID which is active on both COX-1 andCOX-2, is a safe and e ﬀective agent in the treatment of AKs and ﬁeld of cancerization, as it blocks thebiosynthesis of PGs and in 15-PGDH increased expression [143].
Curcumin selectively inhibits COX-2 in a dose and time-dependent manner [ 144]. Curcumin mayexert this e ﬀect by directly targeting COX-2 and PG production and by up-regulating AMP-activatedprotein kinases (AMPK), that leads to a suppression of COX-2 production [ 83]. Moreover, curcumincan also prevent biosynthesis of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) [145].Cancer can be considered as the result of a disruption in the physiological balance betweencellular proliferation and senescence or apoptosis, regulated by the expression of oncogenes andonco-suppressor genes. Pre-clinical studies pointed out that curcumin induces apoptosis in cancercells by acting on several pathways. In fact, curcumin showed to induce apoptosis via activationof p53, one of the most studied tumor suppressor genes [ 8]. Furthermore, curcumin acts on thePI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, causing a remarkable up-regulation of PTEN, which is a tumor suppressor
gene mutated in many types of cancer, and inhibiting the PI3K /AKT axis, which promotes growth andproliferation over di ﬀerentiation [ 8]. Of note, curcumin prevents the activation of NF- κB, a proteincomplex that plays a central role in the survival and resistance of cancer cells [146].Interestingly, curcumin also showed to induce apoptosis in cancer cells via accumulationof ceramide, a bioactive lipid implicated in apoptosis, cell di ﬀerentiation, senescence, migration,and adhesion [ 147]. Moreover, it is able to induce overexpression of TRAIL, one of the most importantapoptosis receptors. TRAIL is up-regulated also by the inhibition of NF-kB, that may in turn beinduced by curcumin [ 148]. Curcumin showed to induce apoptosis in a concentration-dependentmanner in human colon cancer, human myelocytic leukemia, human choriocarcinoma, and melanomacells through the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), a group of mitogen-activated protein
kinases involved in redox reactions and apoptosis induction [ 149–153]. It has been suggested thatup-regulation of JNK by curcumin may enhance the therapeutic e ﬃciency of chemotherapy drugs,but the real beneﬁts of a combination therapy are still a matter of debate [154–156].In spite of its incidence being low, melanoma is the foremost aggressive kind of cutaneous cancer,being extremely resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. To date, uncontrolled sun exposure isregarded as the only modiﬁable risk factor for melanoma [ 4]. Although no solid evidence regardingthe role of speciﬁc nutrients in the prevention of melanoma is available to date, a possible link betweendiet quality and melanoma risk has been postulated [ 157]. Several in vitro studies assessed the e ﬀectsof curcumin on melanoma cells proliferation and viability [ 158–160]. Of note, curcumin showed toaﬀect the growth of melanoma cells selectively, through all the above-mentioned mechanisms that
result in the induction of the apoptotic process. Moreover, curcumin could be able to arrest cell cycle in
result in the induction of the apoptotic process. Moreover, curcumin could be able to arrest cell cycle inG2/M by directly inhibiting cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs) [161].Studies on animal models largely conﬁrmed the e ﬀects of curcumin against melanoma, especiallywhen administrated in formulations that ameliorate curcumin bioavailability, such as nanocapsules [ 20].As mentioned above, attempts to associate curcumin with conventional drugs in order to potentiatetheir e ﬃcacy on melanoma have been made, with promising results [ 162–165]. However, resultsobserved in preclinical models may not be mirrored in clinical studies, due to problems related tothein vivo low bioavailability and metabolism of curcumin, or to the signiﬁcant di ﬀerences existingbetween tumors generated in animal models and human cancer. Bypass of these limitations representsa very promising ﬁeld for future applicative research, paving the way to clinical trials.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 11 of 251.9. Curcumin for the Treatment of Skin InfectionsThe e ﬃcacy of curcumin to control skin infection diseases was also investigated both in vitro andin vivo in animal models. Cutaneous infections may be caused by a wide variety of microorganismsincluding bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites. The most common bacteria responsible for thisillness belong to the genera Corynebacteria ,Propionibacteria , and Staphylococci . These microorganisms,which normally live on the skin as commensals, playing a crucial role in the maintenance of skinhomeostasis, may also cause cutaneous infections, acting as opportunistic pathogens [ 166]. AmongStaphylococcus spp., Staphylococcus aureus is responsible for a wide spectrum of skin infections suchas boils, impetigo, cellulitis, and folliculitis. Staphylococcus epidermidis and Propionibacterium acnesare also part of the human skin microbiota and both play a direct role in the development of acne
vulgaris. In most cases primary skin infections are not invasive diseases in immunocompetentindividuals. However, because of the increasing number of microorganisms resistant to multipledrugs, skin bacterial infections can remain extremely di ﬃcult to treat. Some staphylococcical strainshave developed resistance to both naturally and semisynthetic beta-lactamase-resistant penicillins(i.e., oxacillin, methicillin, and dicloxacillin). Propionibacterium acnes is naturally resistant to someantibiotics such as 5-nitroimidazole, aminoglycosides, sulfonamides, and mupirocin, although itis generally susceptible to a numerous type of antibiotic drugs. Over the last years resistance ofPropionibacterium acnes to antibiotic therapies has also gradually increased becoming a worldwideconcern, with maximal resistance for erythromycin and clindamycin and less frequent resistances totetracycline, in parallel with the most common topical administration of macrolides [ 167–169]. Beside
the emergence of acquired resistance in bacteria against the current antibiotics used in clinical setting,another main concern is the overall variation of the human skin microbiota, related to the emergenceof resistant microbial species induced by the selective pressure exerted by antibiotic agents [ 170].This issue should limit topical and /or systemic antibiotics therapies for long term in the managementof skin diseases such as acne vulgaris. Thus, novel therapeutic approaches are required to treat skininfectious diseases. In the last years researchers have focused their attention on the development onplant derived natural products, as alternative or complementary option to traditional medicine. Indeed,the bioactive aromatic compounds obtained from some of the medicinal herbs have been shown topossess potential antimicrobial properties. In this scenario, the antimicrobial activity of curcumin has
been extensively investigated due to its large uses and safety proﬁle even at high doses tested in clinicaltrials [ 170].In vitro studies demonstrated that S. aureus is one of the Gram-positive strains susceptibleto the inhibitory e ﬀect of curcumin. Further, the curcumin e ﬃcacy has also been shown againstmethicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) either alone or in association with conventional antibiotics [ 170].A signiﬁcant dose dependent microbicidal activity in vitro against both S. aureus and P . acnes wasobtained by blue light activated curcumin. This microbicidal property of light irradiated curcumincould be attributed to the bacterial cell membrane disruption mediated by vanillin, a curcuminphotolytic degradation product [ 171]. Additionally, as demonstrated for the ﬁrst time by Almeida et al.,curcumin, acting as a photosensitizer, enhanced the bactericidal e ﬀect of photodynamic therapy against
MSRA in a murine model of intradermal infections [ 172]. As the blue light safety proﬁle in mammalian
MSRA in a murine model of intradermal infections [ 172]. As the blue light safety proﬁle in mammaliancells has been proven, the photolytic treatment of curcumin could be used in the future to eradicatebacterial skin infections caused by multi drug resistant strains of S. aureus and P . acnes . Moreover,an improved antibacterial activity in vitro against both macrolide-sensitive and resistant strains ofP . acnes was also obtained by liposomal gel formulations containing curcumin combined with lauricacid [ 33]. These results were supported by preclinical studies showing that curcumin co-applied withlauric acid in liposomal gel, in a rat model of acne vulgaris, signiﬁcantly reduced the comedones countand the inﬂammatory cytokine production such as TNF-alpha and IL-1-beta [ 34]. Additional in vivostudies showed that myristic acid acts in synergistic way with curcumin, loaded in the microemulsion
carrier, in inhibiting S. epidermidis growth. These results suggest the potential use of curcumin-loadedmicroemulsions as alternative therapy in S. epidermidis -associated diseases like acne vulgaris [ 34].Beside to bacteria, several genera of fungi may be responsible for superﬁcial and cutaneous mycoses.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 12 of 25Particularly, dermatophytes represent the most common fungal pathogens involved in skin infections.Among dermatophytic fungal pathogens, Trychophyton rubrum has become the most frequent speciesworldwide, causing mainly tinea pedis and tinea unguium [ 173]. Over the last years, like bacteria,fungi have also been developing resistance to conventional antimycotic drugs. In addition, due to lownumber and toxicity of the antifungal agents currently in use, the treatment of skin mycotic infectionsis often di ﬃcult. Therefore, there is an urgent necessity to develop novel antifungal molecules able totarget speciﬁc cellular and or molecular mechanisms involved in fungal pathogenicity, to control theseillnesses. In this context, curcumin encapsulated in nanoparticles administered after photodynamictherapy has been shown to completely inhibit the growth of T. rubrum in vitro , through the release of
reactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen species (RNS), which play an important role in inducing fungaldeath by apoptosis [ 174]. Altogether this experimental evidence suggests that curcumin alone orcombined with phototherapy may be a potential and very promising candidate in treating bacterialand fungal skin diseases, overcoming the multi-drug resistance of pathogens.1.10. Molecular Docking Analysis Highlights the Role of Curcumin in the Control of Skin DisordersMolecular docking is a computational tool able to predict the binding mode of a ligand with aprotein of known three-dimensional structure. Docking can be used to perform virtual screening on largelibraries of compounds, rank the results, and propose structural hypotheses of how the ligands inhibit thetarget, which is invaluable in the research of novel inhibitory compounds [ 175]. A variety of moleculardocking studies have been applied to demonstrate the role of the curcumin molecule in targeting a
selection of proteins actively involved in various pathologies unrelated to skin disorders. A moleculardocking analysis has been performed on diketone form of curcumin molecule with acetylcholinesterase(AChE), indicating that this molecule exhibits a large binding a ﬃnity, and suggesting the use ofcurcumin to inhibit AChE and balance the level of acetylcholine as an alternative to the presentAlzheimer’s disease treatments [ 176]. Focusing on the e ﬀects of phytochemicals on some importantocular disorders (Eales, Diabetic Retinopathy, Uveitis, Age related Macular Disorder, Central RetinalVein Occlusion), virtual screenings identiﬁed the potentiality of ginkgolide, D-pinitol, gugglesterones,berberine, and curcumin molecules against the above-mentioned ocular disorders [ 177]. Curcuminanalogues have also been evaluated for COX-2 inhibition and anti-inﬂammatory activity. Moleculardocking studies show that these designed analogues signiﬁcantly enhance their COX-2 selectivity,
suggesting the route to the design of novel inhibitors [ 178]. Subsequently, molecular docking wascarried out to evaluate the binding e ﬃciency of curcumin with peroxisome proliferator-activatedreceptor gamma (PPAR γ). The experimentally validated results demonstrate a preventive role ofcurcumin on diet induced insulin resistance in rats by ameliorating the altered levels of metabolicchanges [ 179]. Molecular docking was also performed to evaluate the interaction of curcumin withJAK2, an important upstream kinase that phosphorylates STAT3. The obtained results, supportedby experimental evidence, indicate that curcumin is able to exert anti-tumor activity through theinhibition of the STAT3 signaling pathway [ 180]. Recently a study aimed at understanding the bindingof curcumin and its analogues to di ﬀerent PDE-4 subtypes, has been carried out. Docking analysishas been employed to design curcumin derivatives with increased anti-inﬂammatory activity [ 181].
Concluding, several studies demonstrate that the activity of Sortase A, a bacterial surface protein from
Concluding, several studies demonstrate that the activity of Sortase A, a bacterial surface protein fromS. aureus and Streptococcus mutans , can be inhibited by curcumin and its analogues [182–184].Molecular docking studies describing the interaction of curcumin with molecular targets involvedin the development of skin disorders are nowadays not available in the literature. To overcome thislimitation, we used protein-ligand molecular docking to evaluate binding mode and interaction energyof the curcumin towards six major enzymatic targets, indicated in this review as responsible for most ofskin disorders. The docking simulations were executed using the AutoDock Vina 1.1.2 program, throughthe AutoDock /Vina PyMOL plugin (http: //wwwuser.gwdg.de /~{}dseelig /adplugin.html) [ 185,186].The curcumin 3D structure (Figure 3), in the form of an SDF ﬁle, was obtained from the PubChemcompound database (https: //pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, compound CID: 969516).
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 13 of 25Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 26 by ameliorating the altered levels of metabolic changes [179]. Molecular docking was also performed to evaluate the interaction of curcumin with JAK2, an important upstream kinase that phosphorylates STAT3. The obtained results, supported by experiment al evidence, indicate that curcumin is able to exert anti-tumor activity through the inhibition of the STAT3 signaling pathway [180]. Recently a study aimed at understanding the binding of curcumin and its analogues to different PDE-4 subtypes, has been carried out. Docking analysis has been employed to design curcumin derivatives with increased anti-inflammatory activity [181]. Concluding, several studies demonstrate that the activity of Sortase A, a bacterial surface protein from S. aureus  and Streptococcus mutans , can be inhibited by curcumin and its analogues [182–184].
curcumin and its analogues [182–184].  Molecular docking studies describing the interaction of curcumin with molecular targets involved in the development of skin disorders ar e nowadays not available in the literature. To overcome this limitation, we used protein-ligand molecular docking to evaluate binding mode and interaction energy of the curcumin towards six major enzymatic targets, indicated in this review as responsible for most of skin disorders. The dock ing simulations were executed using the AutoDock Vina 1.1.2 program, through the AutoDock/Vina PyMOL plugin (http://wwwuser.gwdg.de/~dseelig/adplugin.html) [185,186]. The curcumin 3D structure (Figure 3), in the form of an SDF file, was obtain ed from the PubChem compound database (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.go v, compound CID: 969516).   Figure 3. Stick representation of the keto form of th e curcumin molecule. The red, grey, and white
colors indicate the oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. A black circle indicates the center of the symmetric molecule, while the 4-hydr oxy-3-methoxyphenyl, present in each of the two compound halves, is enclosed by a dotted line. This image was generated using the program PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, USA). Crystal structures of nu cleotide phosphodiesterases-1 (PDE-1; PDB ID: 4NPW), protein kinase B (AKT; PDB ID: 6HHF), protein kinase C (PKC) theta (PKC θ; PDB ID: 5F9E), serine/threonine-specific protein kinase (PhK; PDB ID: 2Y7J), cyclooxygenase -2 (COX-2; PDB ID: 5F1A), and phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K; PDB ID: 4WAF), have been used as receptors for the molecular docking simulations [187–192]. Each chosen structure displays a co-cry stallized compound (Table 3), which was re-docked as a test using the same simulation parameters. The side chains belonging to the active sites were
considered rotatable to improve mobility of the rece ptors during the simulations. The dimensions of the docking box were tailored depending on the active site typology and structure. The AutoDock/Vina program selects, for each docking simulation, 10 ligand poses representing the cluster centroids of all the evaluated solutions. Each docking simulation run takes about 20’ (elapsed real time) on a dedicated AMD Ryzen 7 1700X CPU workstation. Figure 3. Stick representation of the keto form of the curcumin molecule. The red, grey, and whitecolors indicate the oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. A black circle indicates thecenter of the symmetric molecule, while the 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl, present in each of the twocompound halves, is enclosed by a dotted line. This image was generated using the program PyMOL(The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.0 Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, USA).
Crystal structures of nucleotide phosphodiesterases-1 (PDE-1; PDB ID: 4NPW), proteinkinase B (AKT; PDB ID: 6HHF), protein kinase C (PKC) theta (PKC θ; PDB ID: 5F9E),serine /threonine-speciﬁc protein kinase (PhK; PDB ID: 2Y7J), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2; PDB ID:
kinase B (AKT; PDB ID: 6HHF), protein kinase C (PKC) theta (PKC θ; PDB ID: 5F9E),serine /threonine-speciﬁc protein kinase (PhK; PDB ID: 2Y7J), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2; PDB ID:5F1A), and phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K; PDB ID: 4WAF), have been used as receptors for themolecular docking simulations [ 187–192]. Each chosen structure displays a co-crystallized compound(Table 3), which was re-docked as a test using the same simulation parameters. The side chainsbelonging to the active sites were considered rotatable to improve mobility of the receptors during thesimulations. The dimensions of the docking box were tailored depending on the active site typologyand structure. The AutoDock /Vina program selects, for each docking simulation, 10 ligand posesrepresenting the cluster centroids of all the evaluated solutions. Each docking simulation run takesabout 20’ (elapsed real time) on a dedicated AMD Ryzen 7 1700X CPU workstation.
Curcumin was docked in the active site of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns described in this review. In all these receptorsthe molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal /mol, suggesting apossible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDBﬁles were re-docked using the same simulation conditions, they display energies that are comparablewith those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular, the curcumin molecule docked in the active sitesis fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts and hydrogen bonds established with the active siteresidues (Figures 4 and 5).Chemically , curcumin is a diarylheptanoid (IUPAC name: (1E,6E)-1,7-Bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)hepta-1,6-diene-3,5-dione), a tautomeric compound existing in enolic form in organic solvents or
as a keto form in water. The two halves of this highly symmetric compound are able to dispose ina wide range of conformations due to the rotatable bonds located in the center of the molecule(Figure 3). As a consequence, curcumin is able to arrange the two substituted phenol rings(i.e., the 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl) to establish both hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions.These results show that the curcumin has a high ligand-potentiality for a wide range of macromolecules,making us hypothesize that it may interact with many other enzymes or proteins which were notconsidered in this simulation analysis.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 14 of 25Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results.Receptor Name(PDB ID)Co-CrystallizedCompound NameCo-CrystallizedCompound StructureCo-CrystallizedCompoundDocking Energy∆G(kcal /mol)CurcuminDocking Energy∆G (kcal /mol)PDE1 (4NPW)Inhibitor19A((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate
−8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2 and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5). −9.4 −10.1AKT (6HHF) BorussertibNutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name
Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2 and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB
files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5).  −14.5 −9.8PKCΘ(5F9E)1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-oneNutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-
(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4
AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2 and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active
site residues (Figures 4 and 5). −11.9 −9.6PhK (2Y7J) SunitinibNutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2 and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the
molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5).  −8.4 −8.4COX-2 (5F1A) SalicylateNutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1
yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2 and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites
is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5).  −6.6 −8.4
is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5).  −6.6 −8.4PI3K (4WAF)Tetrahydropyrazolo[1,5-A] pyrazineNutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   14 of 26 Table 3. Molecular docking simulations results. Receptor Name (PDB ID) Co-Crystallized Compound Name Co-Crystallized Compound Structure Co-Crystallized Compound Docking Energy ΔG  (kcal/mol) Curcumin Docking Energy ΔG (kcal/mol) PDE1 (4NPW) Inhibitor 19A ((7,8-dimethoxy-N-[(2S)-1-(3-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)propan-2-yl]quinazolin-4-amine))  −9.4 −10.1 AKT (6HHF) Borussertib  −14.5 −9.8 PKCΘ (5F9E) 1-Benzyl-2,2-dimethyl-7-(2-oxo-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-1-yl)-3H-quinazolin-4-one  −11.9 −9.6 PhK (2Y7J) Sunitinib  −8.4 −8.4 COX-2 (5F1A) Salicylate  −6.6 −8.4 PI3K (4WAF) Tetrahydropyrazolo [1,5-A] pyrazine  −9.2 −7.6 Curcumin was docked in the active site  of six enzymes (i.e., PDE1, AKT, PKC Θ, PhK, COX-2
and PI3K), which are involved in several patterns de scribed in this review. In all these receptors the molecule shows interaction energies that ranges between −10.0 and −8.0 kcal/mol, suggesting a possible inhibitory role (Table 1). Moreover, when the co-crystallized inhibitors detected in the PDB files were re-docked using the same simulation cond itions, they display energies that are comparable with those evaluated for the curcumin. In particular , the curcumin molecule docked in the active sites is fully stabilized by several hydrophobic contacts  and hydrogen bonds established with the active site residues (Figures 4 and 5). −9.2 −7.6Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   15 of 26  Figure 4. Schematic view of the best molecular docking complexes between curcumin and ( A) PDE1 (4NPW), ( B) AKT (6HHF), ( C) PKCΘ (5F9E), ( D) PhK (2Y7J), ( E) COX-2 (5F1A), and ( F) PI3K (4WAF).
The residues interacting through hy drogen bonds (green dashed lines) are shown in ball-and-stick, while the residues in contact with  the ligand are indicated by circle sections with rays. This was produced using the LigPlot+ software (Laskowski  R.A., Swindells M.B. LigPlot+: multiple ligand-protein interaction diagrams for drug discov ery. (2011) J. Chem. Inf. Model. 51, 2778–2786.).  Figure 4. Schematic view of the best molecular docking complexes between curcumin and ( A) PDE1(4NPW), ( B) AKT (6HHF), ( C) PKCΘ(5F9E), ( D) PhK (2Y7J), ( E) COX-2 (5F1A), and ( F) PI3K (4WAF).The residues interacting through hydrogen bonds (green dashed lines) are shown in ball-and-stick, whilethe residues in contact with the ligand are indicated by circle sections with rays. This was producedusing the LigPlot +software (Laskowski R.A., Swindells M.B. LigPlot +: multiple ligand-proteininteraction diagrams for drug discovery. (2011) J. Chem. Inf. Model. 51, 2778–2786.).
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 15 of 25Nutrients 2019 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   16 of 26  Figure 5. Molecular view of best docking complexes between curcumin and ( A) PDE1 (4NPW), ( B) AKT (6HHF), ( C) PKCΘ (5F9E), ( D) PhK (2Y7J), ( E) COX-2 (5F1A), and ( F) PI3K (4WAF). The β-strands are represented by blue arrows, while the α-helices and the loops ar e shown as red spirals and light grey wires, respectively. The curcumin, host ed in the active site, is indicated by stick model colored by atom type. This picture was genera ted using the program Chimera (Pettersen E.F., Goddard T.D., Huang C.C., Couch G. S., Greenbla tt D.M., Meng E.C. and Ferrin T.E. (2004) UCSF Chimera—A visualization system for exploratory research and an alysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1605–1612.). Chemically, curcumin is a diarylheptanoid (IUPAC name: (1E,6E)-1,7-Bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl) hepta-1,6-diene-3,5-dione), a taut omeric compound existing in enolic form in
Figure 5. Molecular view of best docking complexes between curcumin and ( A) PDE1 (4NPW), ( B) AKT(6HHF), ( C) PKCΘ(5F9E), ( D) PhK (2Y7J), ( E) COX-2 (5F1A), and ( F) PI3K (4WAF). The β-strands arerepresented by blue arrows, while the α-helices and the loops are shown as red spirals and light greywires, respectively. The curcumin, hosted in the active site, is indicated by stick model colored by atomtype. This picture was generated using the program Chimera (Pettersen E.F., Goddard T.D., HuangC.C., Couch G. S., Greenblatt D.M., Meng E.C. and Ferrin T.E. (2004) UCSF Chimera—A visualizationsystem for exploratory research and analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1605–1612.).2. ConclusionsTurmeric is a plant known by its medicinal use, dating back to 4000 years ago in the Vedic culturein India and is widely used in herbal and complementary medicine.A growing amount of evidence conﬁrms that curcumin might modulate those phenomena
involved in inﬂammatory, proliferative, and infectious disorders of the skin.
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 16 of 25To current knowledge, curcumin is a low-cost, well-tolerated agent. However, due to the functionalpleiotropy of this molecule resulting in a large spectrum of actions that are still not fully understood,surveillance is advisable, especially in its over-the-counter use. The simulation results conﬁrm thelarge conformational adaptability of the curcumin compound, indicating a wide range of unknownpossible interactors and suggesting the route for the discovery of new targets.Bypass of limitations related to curcumin in vivo use, such as low oral bioavailability andmetabolism, and larger experience with its intravenous administration, would pave the way to largerclinical studies that could provide clinicians solid data regarding curcumin safety and the possibleclinical beneﬁts of curcumin-containing products to skin health. The possible use of curcumin in
combination with traditional drugs and the formulations of novel delivery systems represent a verypromising ﬁeld for future applicative research.Funding: This research received no external funding.Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank Unifarco Biomedical for unconditional support in the publicationof this paper.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors report no conﬂicts of interest in this work.References1. Farzaei, M.H.; Zobeiri, M.; Parvizi, F.; El-Senduny, F.F.; Marmouzi, I.; Coy-Barrera, E.; Naseri, R.; Nabavi, S.M.;Rahimi, R.; Abdollahi, M. Curcumin in Liver Diseases: A Systematic Review of the Cellular Mechanisms ofOxidative Stress and Clinical Perspective. Nutrients 2018 ,10, 855. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Signh Khasla, K.P .; Tierra, M. The Way of Ayurvedic Herbs ; Lotus Press: Twin Lakes, WI, USA, 2008.3. Skenderi, G. Herbal Vade Mecum Rutherford ; Herbacy Press: Rutherford, NJ, USA, 2003.
4. Vaughn, A.R.; Branum, A.; Sivamani, R.K. E ﬀects of Turmeric ( Curcuma longa ) on Skin Health: A SystematicReview of the Clinical Evidence. Phyther. Res. 2016 ,30, 1243–1264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. McClements, D.J.; Li, F.; Xiao, H. The Nutraceutical Bioavailability Classiﬁcation Scheme: ClassifyingNutraceuticals According to Factors Limiting their Oral Bioavailability. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2015 ,6,299–327. [CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Prasad, S.; Tyagi, A.K.; Aggarwal, B.B. Recent developments in delivery, bioavailability, absorption andmetabolism of curcumin: The golden pigment from golden spice. Cancer Res. Treat. 2014 ,46, 2–18. [CrossRef][PubMed]7. Hassaninasab, A.; Hashimoto, Y.; Tomita-Yokotani, K.; Kobayashi, M. Discovery of the curcumin metabolicpathway involving a unique enzyme in an intestinal microorganism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011 ,108,6615–6620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6615–6620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Ravindranath, V .; Chandrasekhara, N. Absorption and tissue distribution of curcumin in rats. Toxicology1980 ,16, 259–265. [CrossRef]9. Nabavi, S.M.; Russo, G.L.; Tedesco, I.; Daglia, M.; Orhan, I.E.; Nabavi, S.F.; Bishayee, A.; Venkata, K.C.N.;Abdollahi, M.; Hajheydari, Z. Curcumin and Melanoma: From Chemistry to Medicine. Nutr. Cancer 2018 ,70,164–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]10. Aggarwal, B.B.; Sung, B. Pharmacological basis for the role of curcumin in chronic diseases: An age-oldspice with modern targets. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2009 ,30, 85–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]11. Xie, X.; Tao, Q.; Zou, Y.; Zhang, F.; Guo, M.; Wang, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhou, Q.; Yu, S. PLGA Nanoparticles Improvethe Oral Bioavailability of Curcumin in Rats: Characterizations and Mechanisms. J. Agric. Food Chem.2011 ,59, 9280–9289. [CrossRef]12. Yang, C.; Su, X.; Liu, A.; Zhang, L.; Yu, A.; Xi, Y.; Zhai, G. Advances in clinical study of curcumin.
Curr. Pharm. Des. 2013 ,19, 1966–1973.13. Anand, P .; Nair, H.B.; Sung, B.; Kunnumakkara, A.B.; Yadav, V .R.; Tekmal, R.R.; Aggarwal, B.B. RETRACTED:Design of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles formulation with enhanced cellular uptake, and increased
Design of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles formulation with enhanced cellular uptake, and increasedbioactivity in vitro and superior bioavailability in vivo .Biochem. Pharmacol. 2010 ,79, 330–338. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 17 of 2514. Yadav, V .R.; Prasad, S.; Kannappan, R.; Ravindran, J.; Chaturvedi, MM.; Vaahtera, L.; Parkkinen, J.;Aggarwal, B.B. Cyclodextrin-complexed curcumin exhibits anti-inﬂammatory and antiproliferative activitiessuperior to those of curcumin through higher cellular uptake. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2010 ,80, 1021–1032.[CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Hou, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, F.; Sun, F.; Xin, M.; Li, M.; Li, J.; Wu, X. Novel self-nanomicellizing solid dispersionbased on rebaudioside A: A potential nanoplatform for oral delivery of curcumin. Int. J. Nanomed. 2019 ,14,557–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]16. Sunagawa, Y.; Hirano, S.; Katanasaka, Y.; Miyazaki, Y.; Funamoto, M.; Okamura, N.; Hojo, Y.; Suzuki, H.;Doi, O.; Yokoji, T.; et al. Colloidal Submicron-Particle Curcumin Exhibits High Absorption E ﬃciency—ADouble-Blind, 3-Way Crossover Study—. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. (Tokyo) 2015 ,61, 37–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Patel, S.S.; Acharya, A.; Ray, R.S.; Agrawal, R.; Raghuwanshi, R.; Jain, P . Cellular and molecular mechanismsof curcumin in prevention and treatment of disease. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019 , 1–53. [CrossRef][PubMed]18. Improved Oral Bioavailability of Curcumin Incorporated into Micelles 2016. (ClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁer:NCT01982734). Available online: https: //clinicaltrials.gov /ct2/show /NCT01982734?cond =curcumin&rank =2(accessed on 13 November 2013).19. Antiga, E.; Bonciolini, V .; Volpi, W.; Del Bianco, E.; Caproni, M. Oral Curcumin (Meriva) Is E ﬀective asan Adjuvant Treatment and Is Able to Reduce IL-22 Serum Levels in Patients with Psoriasis Vulgaris.Biomed. Res. Int. 2015 ,2015 , 283634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]20. Mazzarino, L.; Silva, L.F.; Curta, J.C.; Licinio, M.A.; Costa, A.; Pacheco, L.K.; Siquiera, J.M.; Montanari, J.;Romero, E.; Assreuy, J.; et al. Curcumin-loaded lipid and polymeric nanocapsules stabilized by nonionic
surfactants: An in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity on B16-F10 melanoma and macrophage uptakecomparative study. J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 2011 ,7, 406–414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]21. Dai, M.; Zheng, X.; Xu, X.; Kong, X.; Li, X.; Guo, G.; Luo, F.; Zhao, X.; Wei, Y.Q.; Qian, Z. Chitosan-alginatesponge: Preparation and application in curcumin delivery for dermal wound healing in rat. J. Biomed.Biotechnol. 2009 ,2009 , 595126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Mohanty, C.; Das, M.; Sahoo, S.K. Sustained Wound Healing Activity of Curcumin Loaded Oleic Acid BasedPolymeric Bandage in a Rat Model. Mol. Pharm. 2012 ,9, 2801–2811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Hegge, A.B.; Andersen, T.; Melvik, J.E.; Bruzell, E.; Kristensen, S.; Tønnesen, H.H. Formulation and bacterialphototoxicity of curcumin loaded alginate foams for wound treatment applications: Studies on curcuminand curcuminoides XLII. J. Pharm. Sci. 2011 ,100, 174–185. [CrossRef]
24. Gopinath, D.; Ahmed, M.R.; Gomathi, K.; Chitra, K.; Sehgal, P .K.; Jayakumar, R. Dermal wound healingprocesses with curcumin incorporated collagen ﬁlms. Biomaterials 2004 ,25, 1911–1917. [CrossRef]25. Gong, C.; Wu, Q.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, D.; Luo, F.; Zhao, X.; Wei, Y.; Qian, Z. A biodegradable hydrogel systemcontaining curcumin encapsulated in micelles for cutaneous wound healing. Biomaterials 2013 ,34, 6377–6387.[CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Mohanty, C.; Sahoo, S.K. Curcumin and its topical formulations for wound healing applications. Drug Discov.Today 2017 ,22, 1582–1592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]27. Rachmawati, H.; Edityaningrum, C.A.; Mauludin, R. Molecular Inclusion Complex ofCurcumin– β-Cyclodextrin Nanoparticle to Enhance Curcumin Skin Permeability from Hydrophilic MatrixGel. AAPS PharmSciTech 2013 ,14, 1303–1312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Mohammadi, Z.; Sharif Zak, M.; Majidi, H.; Mostafavi, E.; Barati, M.; Lotﬁmehr, H.; Ghaseminasab, K.;
Pazoki-Toroudi, H.; Webster, T.J.; Akbarzadeh, A. The e ﬀect of chrysin–curcumin-loaded nanoﬁbres on
Pazoki-Toroudi, H.; Webster, T.J.; Akbarzadeh, A. The e ﬀect of chrysin–curcumin-loaded nanoﬁbres onthe wound-healing process in male rats. Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2019 ,47, 1642–1652. [CrossRef][PubMed]29. Gadekar, R.; Saurabh, M.; Thakur, G.; Saurabh, A. Study of formulation, characterisation and wound healingpotential of transdermal patches of curcumin. Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 2012 ,5, 225–230.30. Nguyen, M.-H.; Vu, N.B.; Nguyen, T.H.; Le, H.S.; Le, H.T.; Tran, T.T.; Le, X.C.; Le, V .T.; Nguyen, T.T.;Bui, C.B.; et al. In vivo comparison of wound healing and scar treatment e ﬀect between curcumin—Oligochitosan nanoparticle complex and oligochitosan-coated curcumin-loaded-liposome. J. Microencapsul.2019 ,36, 156–168. [CrossRef]31. Anand, P .; Kunnumakkara, A.B.; Newman, R.A.; Aggarwal, B.B. Bioavailability of curcumin: Problems andpromises. Mol. Pharm. 2007 ,4, 807–818. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 18 of 2532. Lee, W.-H.; Loo, C.Y.; Young, P .M.; Traini, D.; Mason, R.S.; Rohanizadeh, R. Recent advances in curcuminnanoformulation for cancer therapy. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 2014 ,11, 1183–1201. [CrossRef]33. Madan, S.; Nehate, C.; barman, T.K.; Rathore, A.S.; Koul, V . Design, preparation, and evaluation of liposomalgel formulations for treatment of acne: In vitro and in vivo studies. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2019 ,45, 395–404.[CrossRef]34. Liu, C.H.; Huang, H.Y. Antimicrobial activity of curcumin-loaded myristic acid microemulsions againstStaphylococcus epidermidis. Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Tokyo) 2012 ,60, 1118–1124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Karri, V .V .; Kappusamy, G.; Talluri, S.V .; Mannemala, S.S.; Kollipara, R.; Wadhwani, A.D.; Mulukutla, S.;Saju, K.R.; Malayandi, R. Curcumin loaded chitosan nanoparticles impregnated into collagen-alginatescaﬀolds for diabetic wound healing. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2016 ,93, 1519–1529. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Sun, J.; Bi, C.; Chan, H.M.; Sun, S.; Zhang, Q.; Zheng, Y. Curcumin-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles haveprolonged in vitro antitumour activity, cellular uptake and improved in vivo bioavailability. Colloids Surf.B Biointerfaces 2013 ,111, 367–375. [CrossRef] [PubMed]37. Storka, A.; Vcelar, B.; Klickovic, U.; Gouya, G.; Weisshaar, S.; Aschauer, S.; Bolger, G.; Helson, L.;Wolzt, M. Safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of liposomal curcumin in healthy humans. Int. J.Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015 ,53, 54–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Bolger, G.T.; Licollari, A.; Tan, A.; Greil, R.; Vcelar, B.; Greil-Ressler, S.; Weiss, L.; Schönlieb, C.; Magnesm, T.;Radl, B.; et al. Pharmacokinetics of liposomal curcumin (Lipocurc™) infusion: E ﬀect of co-medication incancer patients and comparison with healthy individuals. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2019 ,83, 265–275.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]39. Greil, R.; Greil-Ressler, S.; Weiss, L.; Schönlieb, C.; Magnes, T.; Radl, B.; Bolger, G.T.; Vcelar, B.; Sordillo, P .P .A phase 1 dose-escalation study on the safety, tolerability and activity of liposomal curcumin (Lipocurc™)in patients with locally advanced or metastatic cancer. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2018 ,82, 695–706.[CrossRef] [PubMed]40. Yang, K.-Y.; Lin, L.-C.; Tseng, T.-Y.; Wang, S.-C.; Tsai, T.-H. Oral bioavailability of curcumin in rat and theherbal analysis from Curcuma longa by LC–MS /MS. J. Chromatogr. B 2007 ,853, 183–189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]41. Ranjan, A.P .; Mukerjee, A.; Gdowski, A.; Helson, L.; Bouchard, A.; Majeed, M.; Vishwanatha, J.K.Curcumin-ER Prolonged Subcutaneous Delivery for the Treatment of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. J. Biomed.Nanotechnol. 2016 ,12, 679–688. [CrossRef]42. Akbik, D.; Ghadiri, M.; Chrzanowski, W.; Rohanizadeh, R. Curcumin as a wound healing agent. Life Sci.2014 ,116, 1–7. [CrossRef]
2014 ,116, 1–7. [CrossRef]43. Cheng, A.L.; Hsu, C.H.; Lin, J.K.; Hsu, M.M.; Ho, Y.F.; Shen, T.S.; Ko, J.Y.; Lin, J.T.; Lin, B.R.;Ming-Shiang, W.; et al. Phase I clinical trial of curcumin, a chemopreventive agent, in patients withhigh-risk or pre-malignant lesions. Anticancer Res. 2001 ,21, 2895–2900.44. Prasad, S.; Gupta, S.C.; Tyagi, A.K.; Aggarwal, B.B. Curcumin, a component of golden spice: From bedsideto bench and back. Biotechnol. Adv. 2014 ,32, 1053–1064. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Rahimnia, A.-R.; Panahi, Y.; Alishiri, G.; Sharaﬁ, M.; Sahebkar, A. Impact of Supplementation withCurcuminoids on Systemic Inﬂammation in Patients with Knee Osteoarthritis: Findings from a RandomizedDouble-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial. Drug Res. (Stuttg) 2015 ,65, 521–525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Kocaadam, B.; ¸ Sanlier, N. Curcumin, an active component of turmeric ( Curcuma longa ), and its e ﬀects onhealth. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017 ,57, 2889–2895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Lao, C.D.; Ru ﬃn, M.T., 4th; Normolle, D.; Heath, D.D.; Murray, S.I.; Bailey, J.M.; Boggs, M.E.; Crowell, J.;
health. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017 ,57, 2889–2895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]47. Lao, C.D.; Ru ﬃn, M.T., 4th; Normolle, D.; Heath, D.D.; Murray, S.I.; Bailey, J.M.; Boggs, M.E.; Crowell, J.;Rock, C.L.; Brenner, D.E. Dose escalation of a curcuminoid formulation. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.2006 ,6, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Qin, S.; Huang, L.; Gong, J.; Shen, S.; Huang, J.; Ren, H.; Hu, H. E ﬃcacy and safety of turmeric and curcuminin lowering blood lipid levels in patients with cardiovascular risk factors: A meta-analysis of randomizedcontrolled trials. Nutr. J. 2017 ,16, 68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]49. Sharma, R.A.; McLelland, H.R.; Hill, K.A.; Ireson, C.R.; Euden, S.A.; Manson, M.M.; Pirmohamed, M.;Marnett, L.J.; Gesher, A.J.; Steward, W.P . Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic study of oral Curcumaextract in patients with colorectal cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2001 ,7, 1894–1900. [PubMed]
50. Ryan, J.L.; Heckler, C.E.; Ling, M.; Katz, A.; Williams, J.P .; Pentland, A.P .; Morrow, G.R. Curcumin forRadiation Dermatitis: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial of Thirty BreastCancer Patients. Radiat. Res. 2013 ,180, 34–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 19 of 2551. Dhillon, N.; Aggarwal, B.B.; Newman, R.A.; Wol ﬀ, R.A.; Kunnumakkara, A.B.; Abbruzzese, J.L.; Ng, C.S.;Badmaev, V .; Kurzrock, R. Phase II trial of curcumin in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer.Clin. Cancer Res. 2008 ,14, 4491–4499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Sharma, R.A.; Euden, S.A.; Platton, S.L.; Cooke, D.N.; Shafayat, A.; Hewitt, H.R.; Marczylo, T.H.; Morgan, B.;Hemingway, D.; Plummer, S.M.; et al. Phase I Clinical Trial of Oral Curcumin: Biomarkers of SystemicActivity and Compliance. Clin. Cancer Res. 2004 ,10, 6847–6854. [CrossRef]53. Hsu, C.-H.; Cheng, A.-L. Clinical studies with curcumin. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2007 ,595, 471–480.54. Hanai, H.; Iida, T.; Takeuchi, K.; Watanabe, F.; Maruyama, Y.; Andoh, A.; Tsujikawa, T.; Fujiyama, Y.;Mitsuyama, K.; Sata, M.; et al. Curcumin maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis: Randomized, multicenter,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2006 ,4, 1502–1506. [CrossRef] [PubMed]55. Soleimani, V .; Sahebkar, A.; Hosseinzadeh, H. Turmeric ( Curcuma longa ) and its major constituent (curcumin)as nontoxic and safe substances: Review. Phyther. Res. 2018 ,32, 985–995. [CrossRef] [PubMed]56. Eaton, J.E.; Nelson, K.M.; Gossard, A.A.; Carey, E.J.; Tabibian, J.H.; Lindor, K.D.; LaRusso, N.F. E ﬃcacyand safety of curcumin in primary sclerosing cholangitis: An open label pilot study. Scand. J. Gastroenterol.2019 ,54, 633–639. [CrossRef] [PubMed]57. Epelbaum, R.; Scha ﬀer, M.; Vizel, B.; Badmaev, V .; Bar-Sela, G. Curcumin and Gemcitabine in Patients withAdvanced Pancreatic Cancer. Nutr. Cancer 2010 ,62, 1137–1141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]58. Lasoﬀ, D.R.; Cantrell, F.L.; Ly, B.T. Death associated with intravenous turmeric (Curcumin) preparation.Clin. Toxicol. 2018 ,56, 384–385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Lukefahr, A.L.; McEvoy, S.; Alfafara, C.; Funk, J.L. Drug-induced autoimmune hepatitis associated withturmeric dietary supplement use. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 ,2018 , bcr-2018-224611. [CrossRef] [PubMed]60. Krueger, J.G.; Brunner, P .M. Interleukin-17 alters the biology of many cell types involved in the genesis ofpsoriasis, systemic inﬂammation and associated comorbidities. Exp. Dermatol. 2018 ,27, 115–123. [CrossRef][PubMed]61. Abe, Y.; Hashimoto, S.; Horie, T. Curcumin inhibition of inﬂammatory cytokine production by humanperipheral blood monocytes and alveolar macrophages. Pharmacol. Res. 1999 ,39, 41–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]62. Lee, H.S.; Jung, K.K.; Cho, J.Y.; Rhee, M.H.; Hong, S.; Kwon, M.; Kim, S.H.; Kang, S.Y. Neuroprotective e ﬀectof curcumin is mainly mediated by blockade of microglial cell activation. Pharmazie 2007 ,62, 937–942.63. Jain, S.K.; Rains, J.; Croad, J.; Larson, B.; Jones, K. Curcumin supplementation lowers TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-8,
and MCP-1 secretion in high glucose-treated cultured monocytes and blood levels of TNF-alpha, IL-6, MCP-1,glucose, and glycosylated hemoglobin in diabetic rats. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2009 ,11, 241–249. [CrossRef]64. Wang, S.L.; Li, Y.; Wen, Y.; Chen, Y.F.; Na, L.X.; Li, S.T.; Sun, C.-H. Curcumin, a potential inhibitor ofup-regulation of TNF-alpha and IL-6 induced by palmitate in 3T3-L1 adipocytes through NF-kappaB andJNK pathway. Biomed. Environ. Sci. 2009 ,22, 32–39. [CrossRef]65. Aggarwal, B.B.; Gupta, S.C.; Sung, B. Curcumin: An orally bioavailable blocker of TNF and otherpro-inﬂammatory biomarkers. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2013 ,169, 1672–1692. [CrossRef] [PubMed]66. Gupta, S.C.; Prasad, S.; Kim, J.H.; Patchva, S.; Webb, L.J.; Priyadarsini, I.K.; Aggarwal, B.B. Multitargetingby curcumin as revealed by molecular interaction studies. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2011 ,28, 1937–1955. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]67. Singh, S.; Aggarwal, B.B. Activation of transcription factor NF-kappa B is suppressed by curcumin(diferuloylmethane) [corrected]. J. Biol. Chem. 1995 ,270, 24995–25000. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Singh, S.; Aggarwal, B.B. Activation of transcription factor NF-kappa B is suppressed by curcumin(diferuloylmethane) [corrected]. J. Biol. Chem. 1995 ,270, 24995–25000. [CrossRef] [PubMed]68. Balasubramanyam, K.; Varier, R.A.; Altaf, M.; Swaminathan, V .; Siddappa, N.B.; Ranga, U.; Kundu, T.K.Curcumin, a novel p300 /CREB-binding protein-speciﬁc inhibitor of acetyltransferase, represses theacetylation of histone /nonhistone proteins and histone acetyltransferase-dependent chromatin transcription.J. Biol. Chem. 2004 ,279, 51163–51171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]69. Reuter, S.; Gupta, S.C.; Park, B.; Goel, A.; Aggarwal, B.B. Epigenetic changes induced by curcumin and othernatural compounds. Genes. Nutr. 2011 ,6, 93–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]70. Tu, C.T.; Han, B.; Yao, Q.Y.; Zhang, Y.A.; Liu, H.C.; Zhang, S.C. Curcumin attenuates ConcanavalinA-induced liver injury in mice by inhibition of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, TLR4 and TLR9 expression.
Int. Immunopharmacol. 2012 ,12, 151–157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]71. Heng, M.C.; Song, M.K.; Harker, J.; Heng, M.K. Drug-induced suppression of phosphorylase kinaseactivity correlates with resolution of psoriasis as assessed by clinical, histological and immunohistochemicalparameters. Br. J. Dermatol. 2000 ,143, 937–949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 20 of 2572. Gupta, S.C.; Patchva, S.; Aggarwal, B.B. Therapeutic roles of curcumin: Lessons learned from clinical trials.AAPS J. 2013 ,15, 195–218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]73. Thangapazham, R.L.; Sharma, A.; Maheshwari, R.K. Beneﬁcial role of curcumin in skin diseases. In TheMolecular Targets and Therapeutic Uses of Curcumin in Health and Disease ; Aggarwal, B.B., Surh, Y.-J., Shishodia, S.,Eds.; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2007; pp. 343–357.74. Kang, D.; Li, B.; Luo, L.; Jiang, W.; Lu, Q.; Rong, M.; Lai, R. Curcumin shows excellent therapeutic e ﬀect onpsoriasis in mouse model. Biochimie 2016 ,123, 73–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]75. Sun, J.; Zhao, Y.; Hu, J. Curcumin inhibits imiquimod-induced psoriasis-like inﬂammation by inhibitingIL-1beta and IL-6 production in mice. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e67078. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Bahraini, P .; Rajabi, M.; Mansouri, P .; Saraﬁan, G.; Chalangari, R.; Azizian, Z. Turmeric tonic as a treatment in
scalp psoriasis: A randomized placebo-control clinical trial. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2018 ,17, 461–466. [CrossRef][PubMed]77. Kurd, S.K.; Smith, N.; VanVoorhees, A.; Troxel, A.B.; Badmaev, V .; Seykora, J.T.; Gelfand, J.M. Oral curcuminin the treatment of moderate to severe psoriasis vulgaris: A prospective clinical trial. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol.2008 ,58, 625–631. [CrossRef] [PubMed]78. Bilia, A.R.; Bergonzi, M.C.; Isacchi, B.; Antiga, E.; Caproni, M. Curcumin nanoparticles potentiate therapeuticeﬀectiveness of acitrein in moderate-to-severe psoriasis patients and control serum cholesterol levels. J. Pharm.Pharmacol. 2018 ,70, 919–928. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Grammatikos, A.P . The genetic and environmental basis of atopic diseases. Ann. Med. 2008 ,40, 482–495.[CrossRef] [PubMed]80. Lee, H.-S.; Choi, E.J.; Lee, K.S.; Kim, H.R.; Na, B.R.; Kwon, M.S.; Jeong, G.S.; Choi, H.G.; Choi, E.Y.; Jun, C.D.
Oral Administration of p-Hydroxycinnamic Acid Attenuates Atopic Dermatitis by Downregulating Th1 andTh2 Cytokine Production and Keratinocyte Activation. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0150952. [CrossRef] [PubMed]81. Novak, N.; Bieber, T.; Leung, D.Y.M. Immune mechanisms leading to atopic dermatitis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.2003 ,112, S128–S139. [CrossRef]82. Gupta, S.C.; Kismali, G.; Aggarwal, B.B. Curcumin, a component of turmeric: From farm to pharmacy.Biofactors 2013 ,39, 2–13. [CrossRef]83. Lee, H.S.; Kim, Y.D.; Na, B.R.; Kim, H.R.; Choi, E.J.; Han, W.C.; Choid, H.-K.; Leed, S.-H.; Juna, C.-D.Phytocomponent p-Hydroxycinnamic acid inhibits T-cell activation by modulation of protein kinaseC-θ-dependent pathway. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2012 ,12, 131–138. [CrossRef]84. Rawal, R.C.; Shah, B.J.; Jayaraaman, A.M.; Jaiswal, V . Clinical evaluation of an Indian polyherbal topicalformulation in the management of eczema. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 2009 ,15, 669–672. [CrossRef]
85. Calapai, G.; Miroddi, M.; Minciullo, P .L.; Caputi, A.P .; Gangemi, S.; Schmidt, R.J. Contact dermatitisas an adverse reaction to some topically used European herbal medicinal products—Part 1: Achilleamillefolium-Curcuma longa .Contact Dermat. 2014 ,71, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]86. Lopez-Villafuerte, L.; Clores, K.H.M. Contact dermatitis caused by turmeric in a massage oil. Contact Dermat.2016 ,75, 52–53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]87. Liddle, M.; Hull, C.; Liu, C.; Powell, D. Contact urticaria from curcumin. Dermat. Contact Atopic. Occup. Drug.2006 ,17, 196–197. [CrossRef]88. Kim, J.; Park, S.; Jeon, B.S.; Jang, W.S.; Lee, S.J.; Son, Y.; Rhim, K.J.; Lee, S.I.; Lee, S.S. Therapeutic e ﬀect oftopical application of curcumin during treatment of radiation burns in a mini-pig model. J. Vet. Sci. 2016 ,17,435–444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Scontre, V .A.; Martins, J.C.; de Melo Sette, C.V .; Mutti, H.; Cubero, D.; Fonseca, F.; Del Giglio, A. Curcuma
longa (Turmeric) for Prevention of Capecitabine-Induced Hand-Foot Syndrome: A Pilot Study. J. Diet. Suppl.2018 ,15, 606–612. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
longa (Turmeric) for Prevention of Capecitabine-Induced Hand-Foot Syndrome: A Pilot Study. J. Diet. Suppl.2018 ,15, 606–612. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Panahi, Y.; Sahebkar, A.; Amiri, M.; Davoudi, S.M.; Beiraghdar, F.; Hoseininejad, S.L.; Kolivand, M.Improvement of sulphur mustard-induced chronic pruritus, quality of life and antioxidant status bycurcumin: Results of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Br. J. Nutr. 2012 ,108, 1272–1279.[CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Velnar, T.; Bailey, T.; Smrkolj, V . The wound healing process: An overview of the cellular and molecularmechanisms. J. Int. Med. Res. 2009 ,37, 1528–1542. [CrossRef]92. Olczyk, P .; Mencner, L.; Komosinska-Vassev, K. The role of the extracellular matrix components in cutaneouswound healing. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014 ,2014 , 747584. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 21 of 2593. Schultz, G.S.; Ladwig, G.; Wysocki, A. Extracellular matrix: Review of its roles in acute and chronic wounds.World Wide Wounds 2005 ,2005 , 1–18.94. Merrell, J.G.; McLaughlin, S.W.; Tie, L.; Laurencin, C.T.; Chen, A.F.; Nair, L.S. Curcumin-loadedpoly(epsilon-caprolactone) nanoﬁbres: Diabetic wound dressing with anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatoryproperties. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 2009 ,36, 1149–1156. [CrossRef]95. Antoine, F.; Girard, D. Curcumin increases gelatinase activity in human neutrophils by a p38 mitogen-activatedprotein kinase (MAPK)-independent mechanism. J. Immunotoxicol. 2015 ,12, 188–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]96. Li, H.Y.; Yang, M.; Li, Z.; Meng, Z. Curcumin inhibits angiotensin II-induced inﬂammation and proliferationof rat vascular smooth muscle cells by elevating PPAR- γactivity and reducing oxidative stress. Int. J.Mol. Med. 2017 ,39, 1307–1316. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Zhang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Wu, J.; Bai, B.; Chen, H.; Xiao, Z.; Chen, L.; Zhao, Y.; Lum, H.; Wang, Y.; et al. New MD2inhibitors derived from curcumin with improved anti-inﬂammatory activity. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2018 ,148,291–305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]98. Dissemond, J.; Goos, M.; Wagner, S.N. The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis and therapy of chronicwounds. Hautarzt 2002 ,53, 718–723. [CrossRef] [PubMed]99. Rosique, R.G.; Rosique, M.J.; Farina Junior, J. Curbing inﬂammation in skin wound healing: A review. Int. J.Inﬂam. 2015 ,2015 , 316235. [CrossRef] [PubMed]100. Matés, J.M.; Segura, J.A.; Alonso, F.J.; M árquez, J. Roles of dioxins and heavy metals in cancer and neurologicaldiseases using ROS-mediated mechanisms. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010 ,49, 1328–1341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]101. Zheng, Q.T.; Yang, Z.H.; Yu, L.Y.; Ren, Y.Y.; Huang, Q.X.; Liu, Q.; Ma, X.Y.; Chen, Z.K.; Wang, Z.B.; Zheng, X.
Synthesis and antioxidant activity of curcumin analogs. J. Asian Nat. Prod. Res. 2017 ,19, 489–503. [CrossRef]102. Tapia, E.; S ánchez-Lozada, L.G.; Garc ía-Niño, W.R.; Garc ía, E.; Cerecedo, A.; Garc ía-Arroyo, F.E.; Osorio, H.;Arellano, A.; Crist óbal-Garc ía, M.; Loredo, M.L.; et al. Curcumin prevents maleate-induced nephrotoxicity:Relation to hemodynamic alterations, oxidative stress, mitochondrial oxygen consumption and activity ofrespiratory complex I. Free Radic. Res. 2014 ,48, 1342–1354. [CrossRef]103. Reddy, A.C.; Lokesh, B.R. E ﬀect of dietary turmeric ( Curcuma longa ) on iron-induced lipid peroxidation inthe rat liver. Food Chem. Toxicol. 1994 ,32, 279–283. [CrossRef]104. Subudhi, U.; Chainy, G.B. Expression of hepatic antioxidant genes in l-thyroxine-induced hyperthyroid rats:Regulation by vitamin E and curcumin. Chem. Biol. Interact. 2010 ,183, 304–316. [CrossRef]
105. Dai, C.; Tang, S.; Li, D.; Zhao, K.; Xiao, X. Curcumin attenuates quinocetone-induced oxidative stress andgenotoxicity in human hepatocyte L02 cells. Toxicol. Mech. Methods. 2015 ,25, 340–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Phan, T.T.; See, P .; Lee, S.T.; Chan, S.Y. Protective e ﬀects of curcumin against oxidative damage on skin cellsin vitro: Its implication for wound healing. J. Trauma 2001 ,51, 927–931. [CrossRef] [PubMed]107. Bielefeld, K.A.; Amini-Nik, S.; Alman, B.A. Cutaneous wound healing: Recruiting developmental pathwaysfor regeneration. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2013 ,70, 2059–2081. [CrossRef] [PubMed]108. Martin, P . Wound healing-aiming for perfect skin regeneration. Science 1997 ,276, 75–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]109. Yamada, K.M.; Clark, R.A.F. Provisional matrix. In The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair 2 ;Clark, R.A.F., Ed.; Plenum Press: New York, NY, USA, 1996; pp. 51–82.
110. Ffrench-Constant, C.; Van de Water, L.; Dvorak, H.F.; Hynes, R.O. Reappearance of an embryonic patternof ﬁbronectin splicing during wound healing in the adult rat. J. Cell Biol. 1989 ,109, 903–914. [CrossRef][PubMed]
of ﬁbronectin splicing during wound healing in the adult rat. J. Cell Biol. 1989 ,109, 903–914. [CrossRef][PubMed]111. Clark, R.A.F. Wound repair: Overview and general considerations. In The Molecular and Cellular Biology ofWound Repair 2 ; Clark, R.A.F., Ed.; Plenum Press: New York, NY, USA, 1996; pp. 3–35.112. Leask, A.; Abraham, D.J. TGF-beta signaling and the ﬁbrotic response. FASEB J. 2004 ,18, 816–827. [CrossRef][PubMed]113. Clark, R.A. Fibronectin matrix deposition and ﬁbronectin receptor expression in healing and normal skin.J. Investig. Dermatol. 1990 ,94(Suppl. S6), 128S–134S. [CrossRef]114. Gurtner, G.C.; Werner, S.; Barrandon, Y.; Longaker, M.T. Wound repair and regeneration. Nature 2008 ,453,314–321. [CrossRef]115. O’Toole, E.A. Extracellular matrix and keratinocyte migration. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2001 ,26, 525–530.[CrossRef]116. Watt, F.M.; Jensen, K.B. Epidermal stem cell diversity and quiescence. EMBO Mol. Med. 2009 ,1, 260–267.[CrossRef]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 22 of 25117. Blanpain, C.; Fuchs, E. Epidermal homeostasis: A balancing act of stem cells in the skin. Nat. Rev. Mol.Cell Biol. 2009 ,10, 207–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]118. Barchitta, M.; Maugeri, A.; Favara, G.; Magnano San Lio, R.; Evola, G.; Agodi, A.; Basile, G. Nutrition andWound Healing: An Overview Focusing on the Beneﬁcial E ﬀects of Curcumin. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 1119.[CrossRef] [PubMed]119. Alman, B.A.; Kelley, S.P .; Nam, D. Heal thyself: Using endogenous regeneration to repair bone. Tissue Eng.Part B Rev. 2011 ,17, 431–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]120. Zhang, Y.E. Non-Smad pathways in TGF-beta signaling. Cell Res. 2009 ,19, 128–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]121. Foitzik, K.; Paus, R.; Doetschman, T.; Dotto, G.P . The TGF-beta2 isoform is both a required and su ﬃcientinducer of murine hair follicle morphogenesis. Dev. Biol. 1999 ,212, 278–289. [CrossRef]
122. Han, G.; Li, A.G.; Liang, Y.Y.; Owens, P .; He, W.; Lu, S.; Yoshimatsu, Y.; Wang, D.; Ten Dijke, P .; Lin, X.; et al.Smad7-induced beta-catenin degradation alters epidermal appendage development. Dev. Cell 2006 ,11,301–312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]123. Shah, M.; Foreman, D.M.; Ferguson, M.W. Neutralisation of TGF-beta 1 and TGF-beta 2 or exogenousaddition of TGF-beta 3 to cutaneous rat wounds reduces scarring. J. Cell Sci. 1995 ,108 Pt 3 , 985–1002.124. Puolakkainen, P .A.; Reed, M.J.; Gombotz, W.R.; Twardzik, D.R.; Abrass, I.B.; Sage, H.E. Acceleration ofwound healing in aged rats by topical application of transforming growth factor-beta(1). Wound Repair Regen.1995 ,3, 330–339. [CrossRef]125. Sidhu, G.S.; Mani, H.; Gaddipati, J.P .; Singh, A.K.; Seth, P .; Banaudha, K.K.; Patnaik, G.K.; Maheshwari, R.K.Curcumin enhances wound healing in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats and genetically diabetic mice.Wound Repair Regen. 1999 ,7, 362–374. [CrossRef]
Wound Repair Regen. 1999 ,7, 362–374. [CrossRef]126. Sidhu, G.S.; Singh, A.K.; Thaloor, D.; Banaudha, K.K.; Patnaik, G.K.; Srimal, R.C.; Maheshwari, R.K.Enhancement of wound healing by curcumin in animals. Wound Repair Regen. 1998 ,6, 167–177. [CrossRef]127. Mani, H.; Sidhu, G.S.; Kumari, R.; Gaddipati, J.P .; Seth, P .; Maheshwari, R.K. Curcumin di ﬀerentially regulatesTGF-beta1, its receptors and nitric oxide synthase during impaired wound healing. Biofactors 2002 ,16, 29–43.[CrossRef] [PubMed]128. Krutmann, J.; Bouloc, A.; Sore, G.; Bernard, B.A.; Passeron, T. The skin aging exposome. J. Dermatol. Sci.2017 ,85, 152–161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]129. Fülöp, T.; Larbi, A.; Witkowski, J.M. Human Inﬂammaging. Gerontology 2019 ,65, 495–504. [CrossRef][PubMed]130. Minciullo, P .L.; Catalano, A.; Mandra ﬃno, G.; Casciaro, M.; Crucitti, A.; Maltese, G.; Morabito, N.; Lasco, A.;Gangemi, S.; Basile, G. Inﬂammaging and Anti-Inﬂammaging: The Role of Cytokines in Extreme Longevity.
Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp. (Warsz) 2016 ,64, 111–126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]131. Baylis, D.; Bartlett, D.B.; Patel, H.P .; Roberts, H.C. Understanding how we age: Insights into inﬂammaging.Longev. Heal. 2013 ,2, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]132. Wagener, F.; Carels, C.; Lundvig, D. Targeting the Redox Balance in Inﬂammatory Skin Conditions. Int. J.Mol. Sci. 2013 ,14, 9126–9167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]133. Franceschi, C.; Capri, M.; Monti, D.; Giunta, S.; Olivieri, F.; Sevini, F.; Panourgia, M.P .; Invidia, L.; Celani, L.;Scurti, M.; et al. Inﬂammaging and anti-inﬂammaging: A systemic perspective on aging and longevityemerged from studies in humans. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2007 ,128, 92–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]134. Sommerfeld, B. Randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, split-face study on the clinical e ﬃcacy ofTricutan®on skin ﬁrmness. Phytomedicine 2007 ,14, 711–715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Asada, K.; Ohara, T.; Muroyama, K.; Yamamoto, Y.; Murosaki, S. E ﬀects of hot water extract of Curcumalonga on human epidermal keratinocytes in vitro and skin conditions in healthy participants: A randomized,
longa on human epidermal keratinocytes in vitro and skin conditions in healthy participants: A randomized,double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2019 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]136. Gloster, H.M., Jr.; Brodland, D.G. The epidemiology of skin cancer. Dermatol. Surg. 1996 ,22, 217–226.[CrossRef] [PubMed]137. Becker, K.; Dosch, J.; Gregel, C.M.; Martin, B.A.; Kaina, B. Targeted expression of humanO(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) in transgenic mice protects against tumor initiationin two-stage skin carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 1996 ,56, 3244–3249. [PubMed]138. An, K.P .; Athar, M.; Tang, X.; Katiyar, S.K.; Russo, J.; Beech, J.; Aszterbaum, M.; Kopelovich, L.; Epstein, E.H., Jr.;Mukhtar; et al. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression in murine and human nonmelanoma skin cancers: Implicationsfor therapeutic approaches. Photochem. Photobiol. 2002 ,76, 73–80. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 23 of 25139. Hata, A.N.; Breyer, R.M. Pharmacology and signaling of prostaglandin receptors: Multiple roles ininﬂammation and immune modulation. Pharmacol. Ther. 2004 ,103, 147–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]140. Tober, K.L.; Thomas-Ahner, J.M.; Maruyama, T.; Oberyszyn, T.M. Possible cross-regulation of the E prostanoidreceptors. Mol. Carcinog. 2007 ,46, 711–715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]141. Park, W.S.; Lee, H.K.; Lee, J.Y.; Yoo, N.J.; Kim, C.S.; Kim, S.H. p53 mutations in solar keratoses. Hum. Pathol.1996 ,27, 1180–1184. [CrossRef]142. Müller-Decker, K. Cyclooxygenase-dependent signaling is causally linked to non-melanoma skincarcinogenesis: Pharmacological, genetic, and clinical evidence. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2011 ,30, 343–361.[CrossRef] [PubMed]143. Babino, G.; Diluvio, L.; Bianchi, L.; Orlandi, A.; Di Prete, M.; Chimenti, S.; Milani, M.; Campione, E. Long-term
use of a new topical formulation containing piroxicam 0.8% and sunscreen: E ﬃcacy and tolerability onactinic keratosis. A proof of concept study. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 2016 ,32, 1345–1349. [CrossRef] [PubMed]144. Goel, A.; Boland, C.R.; Chauhan, D.P . Speciﬁc inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression by dietarycurcumin in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 2001 ,172, 111–118. [CrossRef]145. Koeberle, A.; Northo ﬀ, H.; Werz, O. Curcumin blocks prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis through direct inhibitionof the microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase-1. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2009 ,8, 2348–2355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]146. Karin, M. NF-B as a Critical Link Between Inﬂammation and Cancer. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2009 ,1, a000141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]147. Moussavi, M.; Assi, K.; G ómez-Muñoz, A.; Salh, B. Curcumin mediates ceramide generation via the de novopathway in colon cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 2006 ,27, 1636–1644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Farhood, B.; Mortezaee, K.; Goradel, N.H.; Khanlarkhani, N.; Salehi, E.; Nashtaei, M.S.; Najaﬁ, M.; Sahebkar, A.Curcumin as an anti-inﬂammatory agent: Implications to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. J. Cell. Physiol.2019 ,234, 5728–5740. [CrossRef]149. Collett, G.P .; Campbell, F.C. Curcumin induces c-jun N-terminal kinase-dependent apoptosis in HCT116human colon cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 2004 ,25, 2183–2189. [CrossRef]150. Yang, C.-W.; Chang, C.L.; Lee, H.C.; Chi, C.W.; Pan, J.P .; Yang, W.C. Curcumin induces the apoptosis of humanmonocytic leukemia THP-1 cells via the activation of JNK /ERK Pathways. BMC Complement. Altern. Med.2012 ,12, 22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]151. Yu, T.; Ji, J.; Guo, Y. MST1 activation by curcumin mediates JNK activation, Foxo3a nuclear translocation andapoptosis in melanoma cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2013 ,441, 53–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Lim, W.; Jeong, M.; Bazer, F.W.; Song, G. Curcumin Suppresses Proliferation and Migration and InducesApoptosis on Human Placental Choriocarcinoma Cells via ERK1 /2 and SAPK /JNK MAPK Signaling Pathways.Biol. Reprod. 2016 ,95, 83. [CrossRef] [PubMed]153. Bush, J.A.; Cheung, K.J.; Li, G. Curcumin induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells through a Fasreceptor /caspase-8 pathway independent of p53. Exp. Cell Res. 2001 ,271, 305–314. [CrossRef]154. Chen, P .; Li, J.; Jiang, H.-G.; Lan, T.; Chen, Y.-C. Curcumin reverses cisplatin resistance in cisplatin-resistantlung caner cells by inhibiting FA /BRCA pathway. Tumor Biol. 2015 ,36, 3591–3599. [CrossRef]155. Mortezaee, K.; Salehi, E.; Mirtavoos-Mahyari, H.; Motevaseli, E.; Nayaﬁ, M.; Farhood, B.; Rosegren, R.J.;Sahebkar, A. Mechanisms of apoptosis modulation by curcumin: Implications for cancer therapy. J. Cell.Physiol. 2019 ,234, 12537–12550. [CrossRef]
Physiol. 2019 ,234, 12537–12550. [CrossRef]156. Somasundaram, S.; Edumnd, N.A.; Moore, D.T.; Small, G.W.; Shi, Y.Y.; Orlowski, R.Z. Dietary curcumininhibits chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in models of human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2002 ,62, 3868–3875.
inhibits chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in models of human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2002 ,62, 3868–3875.157. Malagoli, C.; Malavolti, M.; Agnoli, C.; Crespi, C.M.; Fiorentini, C.; Farnetani, F.; Longo, C.; Ricci, C.;Albertini, G.; Lanzoni, A.; et al. Diet Quality and Risk of Melanoma in an Italian Population. J. Nutr. 2015 ,145,1800–1807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]158. Marin, Y.E.; Wall, B.A.; Wang, S.; Namkoong, J.; Martino, J.J.; Suh, J.; Lee, H.J.; Rabson, A.B.; Yang, C.S.;Chen, S.; et al. Curcumin downregulates the constitutive activity of NF-kappaB and induces apoptosis innovel mouse melanoma cells. Melanoma Res 2007 ,17, 274–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]159. Lu, C.; Song, E.; Hu, D.N.; Chen, M.; Xue, C.; Rosen, R.; McCormick, S.A. Curcumin induces cell death inhuman uveal melanoma cells through mitochondrial pathway. Curr. Eye Res. 2010 ,35, 352–360. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 24 of 25160. Bill, M.A.; Bakan, C.; Benson, D.M., Jr.; Fuchs, J.; Young, G.; Lesinski, G.B. Curcumin induces proapoptoticeﬀects against human melanoma cells and modulates the cellular response to immunotherapeutic cytokines.Mol. Cancer Ther. 2009 ,8, 2726–2735. [CrossRef] [PubMed]161. Qiu, Y.; Yu, T.; Wang, W.; Pan, K.; Shi, D.; Sun, H. Curcumin-induced melanoma cell death is associated withmitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) opening. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014 ,448,15–21. [CrossRef]162. Yu, T.; Li, J.; Sun, H. C6 ceramide potentiates curcumininduced cell death and apoptosis in melanoma celllines in vitro. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2010 ,66, 999–1003. [CrossRef] [PubMed]163. Odot, J.; Albert, P .; Carlier, A.; Tarpin, M.; Devy, J.; Madoule, C. In vitro and in vivo anti-tumoral e ﬀect ofcurcumin against melanoma cells. Int. J. Cancer 2004 ,111, 381–387. [CrossRef]
164. Chatterjee, S.J.; Pandey, S. Chemo-resistant melanoma sensitized by tamoxifen to low dose curcumintreatment through induction of apoptosis and autophagy. Cancer Biol. Ther. 2011 ,11, 216–228. [CrossRef]165. Buss, S.; Dobra, J.; Goerg, K.; Ho ﬀmann, S.; Kippenberger, S.; Kaufmann, R.; Hofmann, M.; Bernd, A. Visiblelight is a better co-inducer of apoptosis for curcumin-treated human melanoma cells than UV .A. PLoS ONE2013 ,8, e79748. [CrossRef]166. Grice, E.A.; Kong, H.H.; Conlan, S.; Deming, C.B.; Davis, J.; Young, A.C.; Bou ﬀard, G.G.; Blakesley, R.W.;Murray, P .R.; Green, E.D.; et al. Topographical and temporal diversity of the human skin microbiome. Science2009 ,324, 1190–1992. [CrossRef]167. Del Rosso, J.Q. Topical and oral antibiotics for acne vulgaris. Semin. Cutan. Med. Surg. 2016 ,35, 57–61.[CrossRef] [PubMed]168. Dessinioti, C.; Katsambas, A. Propionibacterium acnes and antimicrobial resistance in acne. Clin. Dermatol.2017 ,35, 163–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2017 ,35, 163–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]169. Dreno, B. Bacteriological resistance in acne: A call to action. Eur. J. Dermatol. 2016 ,26, 127–132. [CrossRef][PubMed]170. Moghadamtousi, S.Z.; Kadir, H.A.; Hassandarvish, P .; Tajik, H.; Abubakar, S.; Zandi, K.A. Review onAntibacterial, Antiviral and Antifungal Activity of Curcumin. BioMed Res. Int. 2014 ,2014 , 186864. [PubMed]171. Yang, M.Y.; Chang, K.C.; Chen, L.Y.; Hu, A. Low-dose blue light irradiation enhances the antimicrobialactivities of curcumin against Propionibacterium acnes. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B. 2018 ,189, 21–28. [CrossRef]172. Almeida, P .P .; Pereira, I.S.; Rodrigues, K.B.; Leal, L.S.; Marques, A.S.; Rosa, L.P .; da Silva, F.C.; da Silva, R.A.A.Photodynamic therapy controls of Staphylococcus aureus intradermal infection in mice. Lasers Med. Sci.2017 ,32, 1337–1342. [CrossRef]173. Andrews, M.D.; Burns, M. Common Tinea Infections in Children. Am. Fam. Physician 2008 ,77, 1415–1420.
174. Baltzar, L.M.; Krausz, A.E.; Souza, A.C.; Adler, B.L.; Landriscina, A.; Musaev, T.; Nosanchhuk, J.D.;Friedman, A.J. Trychophyton rubrum is inhibited by free and nanoparticles encapsulated curcumin byinduction of nitrosative stress after photodynamic activation. PLoS ONE 2015 ,10, e0120179.175. Morris, G.M.; Lim-Wilby, M. Molecular docking. Methods Mol. Biol. 2008 ,443, 365–382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]176. Renuga Parameswari, A.; Rajalakshmi, G.; Kumaradhas, P . A combined molecular docking and charge densityanalysis is a new approach for medicinal research to understand drug-receptor interaction: Curcumin-AChEmodel. Chem. Biol. Interact. 2015 ,225, 21–31. [CrossRef]177. Srivastava, P .; Tiwari, A. A New Insight of Herbal Promises Against Ocular Disorders: An OcculoinformaticsApproach. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2016 ,16, 634–654. [CrossRef] [PubMed]178. Sohilait, M.R.; Pranowo, H.D.; Haryadi, W. Molecular docking analysis of curcumin analogues with COX-2.
Bioinformation 2017 ,13, 356–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]179. Jayakumar, V .; Ahmed, S.S.; Ebenezar, K.K. Multivariate analysis and molecular interaction of curcumin
Bioinformation 2017 ,13, 356–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]179. Jayakumar, V .; Ahmed, S.S.; Ebenezar, K.K. Multivariate analysis and molecular interaction of curcuminwith PPAR γin high fructose diet induced insulin resistance in rats. Springerplus 2016 ,5, 1732. [CrossRef][PubMed]180. Liu, Y.; Wang, X.; Zeng, S.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, J.; Zhang, X.; Chen, X.; Yang, W.; Yang, Y.; Dong, Z.; et al. Thenatural polyphenol curcumin induces apoptosis by suppressing STAT3 signaling in esophageal squamouscell carcinoma. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 2018 ,37, 303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]181. Yi, Y.X.; Gaurav, A.; Akowuah, G.A. Docking Studies of Curcumin and Analogues with VariousPhosphodiesterase 4 Subtypes. Curr. Drug Discov. Technol. 2018 ,15, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2019 ,11, 2169 25 of 25182. Niu, X.; Gao, Y.; Yu, Y.; Yang, Y.; Wang, G.; Sun, L.; Wang, H. Molecular Modelling reveals the inhibitionmechanism and structure-activity relationship of curcumin and its analogues to Staphylococcal aureusSortase A. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 2019 ,37, 1220–1230. [CrossRef]183. Hu, P .; Huang, P .; Chen, W.M. Curcumin inhibits the Sortase A activity of the Streptococcus mutans UA159.Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2013 ,171, 396–402. [CrossRef]184. Hu, P .; Huang, P .; Chen, M.W. Curcumin reduces Streptococcus mutans bioﬁlm formation by inhibitingsortase A activity. Arch. Oral. Biol. 2013 ,58, 1343–1348. [CrossRef]185. Trott, O.; Olson, A.J. AutoDock Vina: Improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoringfunction, e ﬃcient optimization, and multithreading. J. Comput. Chem. 2010 ,31, 455–461. [CrossRef]186. Seeliger, D.; de Groot, B.L. Ligand docking and binding site analysis with PyMOL and Autodock /Vina.
J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 2010 ,24, 417–422. [CrossRef]187. Humphrey, J.M.; Yang, E.; am Ende, W.C.; Arnold, E.P .; Head, J.L.; Jenkinson, S.; Lebel, L.A.; Liras, S.;Pandit, J.; Samas, B.; et al. Small-molecule phosphodiesterase probes: Discovery of potent and selectiveCNS-penetrable quinazoline inhibitors of PDE1. Med. Chem. Comm. 2014 ,9, 1290–1296. [CrossRef]188. Weisner, J.; Landel, I.; Reintjes, C.; Uhlenbrock, N.; Trajkovic-Arsic, M.; Dienstbier, N.; Hardick, J.; Ladigan, S.;Lindemann, M.; Smith, S.; et al. Preclinical E ﬃcacy of Covalent-Allosteric AKT Inhibitor Borussertib inCombination with Trametinib in KRAS-Mutant Pancreatic and Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Res. 2019 ,79,2367–2378. [CrossRef] [PubMed]189. Katoh, T.; Takai, T.; Yukawa, T.; Tsukamoto, T.; Watanabe, E.; Mototani, H.; Arita, T.; Hayashi, H.;Nakagawa, H.; Klein, M.G.; et al. Discovery and optimization of 1,7-disubstituted-2,2-dimethyl-
2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones as potent and selective PKC θinhibitors. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2016 ,24,2466–2475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]190. Muniz, J.R.C.; Shrestha, A.; Savitsky, P .; Wang, J.; Rellos, P .; Fedorov, O.; Burgess-Brown, N.; Brenner, B.;Berridge, G.; Elkins, J.M.; et al. Structure of Human Phosphorylase Kinase, Gamma 2. Available online:https: //www.rcsb.org /structure /2y7j (accessed on 10 September 2019).191. Lucido, M.J.; Orlando, B.J.; Vecchio, A.J.; Malkowski, M.G. Crystal Structure of Aspirin-Acetylated HumanCyclooxygenase-2: Insight into the Formation of Products with Reversed Stereochemistry. Biochemistry2016 ,55, 1226–1238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]192. Barsanti, P .A.; Aversa, R.J.; Jin, X.; Pan, Y.; Lu, Y.; Elling, R.; Jain, R.; Knapp, M.; Lan, J.; Lin, X.; et al.Structure-Based Drug Design of Novel Potent and Selective Tetrahydropyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrazines as ATRInhibitors. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 2014 ,6, 37–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
