Citation: Di Sotto, A.; Gullì, M.;Percaccio, E.; Vitalone, A.; Mazzanti,G.; Di Giacomo, S. Efﬁcacy and Safetyof Oral Green Tea Preparations inSkin Ailments: A Systematic Reviewof Clinical Studies. Nutrients 2022 ,14,3149. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14153149Academic Editor: Chongde SunReceived: 15 July 2022Accepted: 28 July 2022Published: 30 July 2022Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).nutrientsReviewEfﬁcacy and Safety of Oral Green Tea Preparations in SkinAilments: A Systematic Review of Clinical StudiesAntonella Di Sotto * , Marco Gull ì, Ester Percaccio, Annabella Vitalone , Gabriela Mazzantiand Silvia Di Giacomo
, Gabriela Mazzantiand Silvia Di GiacomoDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology “V . Erspamer”, Sapienza University of Rome, P .le Aldo Moro 5,00185 Rome, Italy; marco.gulli@uniroma1.it (M.G.); ester.percaccio@uniroma1.it (E.P .);annabella.vitalone@uniroma1.it (A.V .); gabriela.mazzanti@uniroma1.it (G.M.);silvia.digiacomo@uniroma1.it (S.D.G.)*Correspondence: antonella.disotto@uniroma1.itAbstract: Green-tea-based products and their polyphenols, especially epigallocatechin-3-gallate, haveattracted great attention over the years as possible nutraceuticals, due to their promising bioactivities,especially antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory, which could be exploited in several diseases, includingskin ailments. In this context, the present study aimed at reviewing clinical evidence about thebeneﬁts of the oral administration of green tea preparations and its polyphenols to relieve skin
disorders, to point out the current knowledge, and to suggest possible novel strategies to effectivelyexploit the properties of green tea, also managing safety risks. To this end, a systematic review of theexisting literature was carried out, using the PRISMA method. Few studies, including ﬁve focused onUV-induced erythema and skin alterations, three on photoaging, two on antioxidant skin defenses,and one on acne and genodermatosis, were retrieved. Despite several beneﬁts, clinical evidence onlysupports the use of oral green tea preparations to protect skin from damage induced by ultravioletradiation; in other cases, conﬂicting results and methodological limits of clinical trials do not allowone to clarify their efﬁcacy. Therefore, their application as adjuvant or alternative sunscreen-protectiveinterventions could be encouraged, in compliance with the safety recommendations.
Keywords: Camellia sinensis ; polyphenols; catechins; epigallocatechin-3-gallate; skin; acne; clinical trials;PRISMA; photoaging; safety concerns; efficacy1. IntroductionOriginating from China, tea has a long history of use that spread across numerouscountries, over thousands of years. Nowadays, it represents one of the most popularbeverages in the world, being consumed far ahead of other drinks, such as wine, beer,and coffee, and second only to water [ 1]. It is estimated that an average of about 120 mLof tea is consumed by a person per day, with higher amounts (about 540 mL per day) inGreat Britain, which represents one of the largest consumers worldwide [ 1]. This interestarises from its nutritional and healing properties, which stimulate research to exploit teafor nutraceutical and pharmaceutical purposes [2].The tea plant ( Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze; Fam. Theaceae) originated in Southeast
Asia over 4000 years ago and is currently produced in over 35 countries: its leaves areprocessed by various techniques to obtain ﬁve commonly recognized tea types, includingwhite, green, oolong, black, and pu-erh teas. The processing of tea leaves is based on some
processed by various techniques to obtain ﬁve commonly recognized tea types, includingwhite, green, oolong, black, and pu-erh teas. The processing of tea leaves is based on somemajor steps, including withering, rolling, fermentation, and drying [ 3]; among them, thedegree and nature of fermentation lead to a different chemical composition of processedleaves, which, in turn, can result in speciﬁc nutritional and healing properties of derivedbeverages [ 4]. Although black tea is the most consumed worldwide, green tea has attractedgreat attention over the years, not only as a beverage, being especially used in East Asia, butNutrients 2022 ,14, 3149. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14153149 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 2 of 21also as extracts for its promising nutraceutical properties, which increased its popularityand market demand [3,4].Green tea is obtained by heating the fresh leaves of C. sinensis in order to inactiveoxidative enzymes (i.e., polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase), which are ubiquitously dis-tributed in tea leaves, thus preventing oxidation of polyphenolic components [ 3]; thereafter,they are subjected to rolling and drying to obtain the ﬁnal tea product (Figure 1). Differentheating methodologies, including steaming (around 100◦C) and roasting or pan-ﬁring(around 300◦C), are applied to obtain Japanese and Chinese green teas, respectively [ 3].Lacking fermentation preserves high levels of tea polyphenols, especially catechins (about60−80% of total amount), and of the amino acid L-theanine, which contribute to the typicalastringency, umami, and sweetness aftertaste of green tea [ 1]. Catechins’ amount can
achieve up to 30% of dry weight of green tea, such as fresh tea leaves, but can be decreaseddue to high-temperature heating or drying steps [3].Nutrients 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 24   Asia, but also as extracts for its promising nutraceutical properties, which increased its popularity and market demand [3,4] . Green tea is obtained by heating the fresh leaves of C. sinensis  in order to inactive oxidative enzymes (i.e., polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase), which are ubiquitously dis-tributed in tea leaves, thus preventing oxidation of polyphenolic components [3]; thereaf-ter, they are subjected to rolling and drying to obtain the final tea product (Figure 1). Dif-ferent heating methodologies, including steaming (around 100 ° C) and roasting or pan -firing (around 300 ° C), are applied to obtain Japanese and Chinese gree n teas, respectively [3]. Lacking fermentation preserves high levels of tea polyphenols, especially catechins
(about 60−80% of total amount), and of the amino acid L -theanine, which contribute to the typical astringency, umami, and sweetness aftertaste of green tea [1]. Catechins ’ amount can achieve up to 30% of dry weight of green tea, such as  fresh tea leaves, but can be decreased due to high -temperature heating or drying steps [3].  Figure 1. Phases of green tea processing.  The flavanols catechin (C), epicatechin (EC), and epigallocatechin (EGC), and their gallic acid derivatives, i.e., epicatechin -3-gallate (ECG) and epigallocatechin -3-gallate (EGCG), are the major representative green tea polyphenols (GTP) (Figure 2) [1]. The pres-ence of several hydroxyl groups in their chemical structure, which could interact with reactive oxidizing species, is a key feature of their antioxidant activity [5]. Along with catechins, green tea contains a range of other bioactive compounds, inc luding methylxan-
thines, especially caffeine, polysaccharides, amino acids (i.e., GABA and L -theanine), pig-ments, and saponins [4]. Figure 1. Phases of green tea processing.The ﬂavanols catechin (C), epicatechin (EC), and epigallocatechin (EGC), and their gal-lic acid derivatives, i.e., epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG) and epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG),are the major representative green tea polyphenols (GTP) (Figure 2) [ 1]. The presence ofseveral hydroxyl groups in their chemical structure, which could interact with reactiveoxidizing species, is a key feature of their antioxidant activity [ 5]. Along with catechins,green tea contains a range of other bioactive compounds, including methylxanthines, espe-cially caffeine, polysaccharides, amino acids (i.e., GABA and L-theanine), pigments, andsaponins [4].
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 3 of 21Nutrients 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 24    Figure 2. Chemical structures of major tea polyphenols, drawn by ACD/ChemSketch 2018.1.1 software.  Green tea consumption ha s been associated with a reduced risk of cardiovascular diseases in population studies: these benefits seem to arise from the ability of GTP to re-duce blood lipids, oxidative stress and inflammation, and to enhance cardiomyocyte and endothelial function [6]. Moreover, green tea supplementation has been reported to im-prove glycemic control in diabetic patients and healthy subjects and to prevent lipid ac-cumulation, leading to an increased glycolipid metabolism [7]. A reduction in oxidative stress and inflamm ation seem to mediate the hepatoprotective and neuroprotective effects of green tea and to attenuate symptoms of chronic gut diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease [7]. Polyphenols are usually recognized to be responsible for the remarkable antioxida nt
properties of green tea [8], which led to an interest in its health benefits as a nutraceutical and preventive strategy for cardiovascular, metabolic, inflammatory , and degenerative diseases [4,9,10] . Owing to the presence of multiple hydroxylic groups in their chemical structure, these compounds can reduce and quench reactive oxygen species (ROS) and chelate metal ions. GTP can also stimulate endogenous antioxidant defen ses, through the activation of the nuclear factor erythroid 2 -related factor (Nrf2) pathway and regulate pro -inflammatory and anti -inflammatory signaling and factors, such as NF -κB, TNF -α, Toll -like receptors , and COX -2 [7,11–14]. Immunomodulatory, genoprotective , and chemopre-ventive effects, mainly ascribed to the pro -oxidant and anti -proliferative activities of GTP, have been reported too [7,12] . Among GTP, EGCG is the most extensively studied for several possible pharmaco-
logical applications, due to its abundance (about 65% of total catechins) and outstanding antioxidant power [11]. EGC G has been reported as able to rescue cognitive deficits in animal models of Alzheimer ’s disease, through anti -inflammatory and antioxidant mech-anisms , and to prevent the formation of Aβ1 -42 oligomers [15]. Accordingly, it exhibited a multitargeted chemopreventive activity in different cancer models, preventing both the development and recurrence of cancer; the effect was found mediated by pleiotropic mechanisms, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory  and detoxifying effects, cell cycle and epigenetic modulation, stimulation of apoptosis, and inhibition of angiogenesis [9]. Furthermore, EGCG induced chemosensitization in all stages of breast and prostate can-cer, by receptor -mediated mechanisms; indeed, it antagonized androgen action and de-creased androgen receptor (AR) expression in hormone -responsive prostate cancer cells
Figure 2. Chemical structures of major tea polyphenols, drawn by ACD/ChemSketch 2018.1.1 software.Green tea consumption has been associated with a reduced risk of cardiovasculardiseases in population studies: these beneﬁts seem to arise from the ability of GTP toreduce blood lipids, oxidative stress and inﬂammation, and to enhance cardiomyocyteand endothelial function [ 6]. Moreover, green tea supplementation has been reported toimprove glycemic control in diabetic patients and healthy subjects and to prevent lipidaccumulation, leading to an increased glycolipid metabolism [ 7]. A reduction in oxidativestress and inﬂammation seem to mediate the hepatoprotective and neuroprotective effectsof green tea and to attenuate symptoms of chronic gut diseases, such as inﬂammatorybowel disease [7].Polyphenols are usually recognized to be responsible for the remarkable antioxidantproperties of green tea [ 8], which led to an interest in its health beneﬁts as a nutraceutical
and preventive strategy for cardiovascular, metabolic, inﬂammatory, and degenerative
properties of green tea [ 8], which led to an interest in its health beneﬁts as a nutraceuticaland preventive strategy for cardiovascular, metabolic, inﬂammatory, and degenerativediseases [ 4,9,10]. Owing to the presence of multiple hydroxylic groups in their chemicalstructure, these compounds can reduce and quench reactive oxygen species (ROS) andchelate metal ions. GTP can also stimulate endogenous antioxidant defenses, through theactivation of the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2) pathway and regulate pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory signaling and factors, such as NF- κB, TNF- α, Toll-likereceptors, and COX-2 [ 7,11–14]. Immunomodulatory, genoprotective, and chemopreventiveeffects, mainly ascribed to the pro-oxidant and anti-proliferative activities of GTP , havebeen reported too [7,12].Among GTP , EGCG is the most extensively studied for several possible pharmacological
applications, due to its abundance (about 65% of total catechins) and outstanding antioxidantpower [ 11]. EGCG has been reported as able to rescue cognitive deficits in animal models ofAlzheimer’s disease, through anti-inflammatory and antioxidant mechanisms, and to preventthe formation of A β1-42 oligomers [ 15]. Accordingly , it exhibited a multitargeted chemopre-ventive activity in different cancer models, preventing both the development and recurrenceof cancer; the effect was found mediated by pleiotropic mechanisms, including antioxidant,anti-inflammatory and detoxifying effects, cell cycle and epigenetic modulation, stimulationof apoptosis, and inhibition of angiogenesis [ 9]. Furthermore, EGCG induced chemosensitiza-tion in all stages of breast and prostate cancer, by receptor-mediated mechanisms; indeed, itantagonized androgen action and decreased androgen receptor (AR) expression in hormone-
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 4 of 21responsive prostate cancer cells [ 16]. Meanwhile, it sensitized hormone-responsive breastcancer cells to drugs targeting steroid receptors [17].In recent years, many studies have suggested beneﬁcial properties of both topicaland systemic application of green tea to ameliorate skin illness (Figure 3). Preclinicalstudies highlighted the ability of green tea polyphenols to protect skin towards UV-induceddamage and immunosuppression [ 2]. Moreover, GTPs have been shown to possess an-timelanogenic properties, mediated by tyrosinase inhibition, and antiphotoaging andantiwrinkle ones [ 18], likely ascribed to their antioxidant power and to the ability to stimu-late collagen and elastin production, while hindering degrading enzymes [ 19]. EGCG hasalso been found endowed with chemopreventive effects against UV-induced skin cancerin animal models [ 20]; furthermore, it activates skin cells in wound healing, likely due
to its angiogenetic and antiﬁbrotic properties, leading to tissue remodeling [ 21]. Otherstudies [ 22] also reported that green tea extracts were able to decrease lipogenesis in se-bocytes, to promote sebocytes apoptosis, and to inhibit both growth and inﬂammatoryprocesses associated with Propionebacterium acnes infection, thus suggesting an interestin the treatment of acne. Preliminary evidence suggested a possible interest in GTP asantileishmanial strategies too; however, further studies are needed to conﬁrm its efﬁcacy,clinically and in animal models [23].Nutrients 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 24   [16]. Meanwhile, it sensitized hormone -responsive breast cancer cells to drugs targeting steroid receptors [17]. In recent years, many s tudies have suggested beneficial properties of both topical and systemic application of green tea to ameliorate skin illness (Figure 3). Preclinical studies high-
lighted the ability of green tea polyphenols to protect skin towards UV -induced damage and immu nosuppression [2]. Moreover, GTP s have been shown to possess antimelanogenic prop-erties, mediated by tyrosinase inhibition, and antiphotoaging and antiwrinkle ones [18], likely ascribed to their antioxidant power and to the ability to stimulate collagen an d elastin produc-tion, while hindering degrading enzymes [19]. EGCG has  also been found endowed with chemopreventive effects against UV -induced skin cancer in animal models [20]; furthermore, it activates skin cells in wound healing, likely due to its angio genetic and antifibrotic proper-ties, leading to tissue remodeling [21]. Other studies [22] also reported that green tea extracts were able to decrease lipogenesis in sebocytes, to promote sebocytes apoptosis , and to inhibit both growth and inflammatory pro cesses associated with Propionebacterium acnes  infection,
thus suggesting an interest in the treatment of acne. Preliminary evidence suggested a possible interest in GTP as antileishmanial strategies too; however, further studies are needed to con-firm its efficacy , clinically and  in animal models [23].  Figure 3. Mechanisms accounting for the healing properties of green tea extracts and polyphenols in skin ailments.  Preclinical evidence highlighted that both green tea extracts and catechins, especially EGCG, were endowed with multiple bioactivities, including antioxidant, anti -inflamma-tory, immunomodulatory, genoprotective, chemopreventive, skin regenerative , and an-tilipogenic ones, which could be involved in their healing effects in skin. Particularly, an-tioxidant properties have been found mediated by radical scavenging mechanisms, along with an increase in endogenous antioxidant defenses , likely due to the activatio n of the inhibition of the Nrf2 cascade. Anti -inflammatory activity arises from the inhibition of
enzymes involved in  prostanoid biosynthesis, especially cyclooxygenase 2, downregula-
inhibition of the Nrf2 cascade. Anti -inflammatory activity arises from the inhibition of enzymes involved in  prostanoid biosynthesis, especially cyclooxygenase 2, downregula-tion of Nf -kB cascade, modulation of cytokine secretion and of skin cell a ctivation, and increased expression of Tollip protein, which , in turn , block Toll -like receptor signaling. Figure 3. Mechanisms accounting for the healing properties of green tea extracts and polyphenols inskin ailments.Preclinical evidence highlighted that both green tea extracts and catechins, especiallyEGCG, were endowed with multiple bioactivities, including antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory,immunomodulatory, genoprotective, chemopreventive, skin regenerative, and antilipogenicones, which could be involved in their healing effects in skin. Particularly, antioxidantproperties have been found mediated by radical scavenging mechanisms, along with an
increase in endogenous antioxidant defenses, likely due to the activation of the inhibitionof the Nrf2 cascade. Anti-inﬂammatory activity arises from the inhibition of enzymesinvolved in prostanoid biosynthesis, especially cyclooxygenase 2, downregulation of Nf-kBcascade, modulation of cytokine secretion and of skin cell activation, and increased expres-sion of Tollip protein, which, in turn, block Toll-like receptor signaling. Green tea extractsreduce immune cell inﬁltration in damaged skin, which denotes immunomodulatory ef-
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 5 of 21fects, along with the ability to block DNA damage and to modulate apoptosis, leading togenoprotective and chemopreventive effects. Some evidence also displayed their ability topromote sebocyte apoptosis and to block pathways (i.e., MLPK-SREBP-1, PI3K, and mTOR)involved in sebum production. At last, skin-regenerative effects, associated with the abilityof green tea phytocomplexes to stimulate elastin and ﬁbronectin production, to control thecollagen synthesis, and to improve local blood reperfusion were reported too.A major limit in the exploitation of green tea and GTP beneﬁts in nutraceutical andcosmetic ﬁelds is their low bioavailability, which led studies to develop alternative adminis-tration routes and formulations, such as hydrogels or nanoparticles. Particularly, the use ofEGCG is limited by lack of stability, especially at high temperatures, which favor its degra-
dation due to oxidation or epimerization to gallocatechin gallate (GCG) [ 13]. In addition,there are safety concerns about the possible liver toxicity of green tea preparations, in whichEGCG seems to be involved, although the true mechanisms remain to be clariﬁed [ 24,25].This evidence suggests the need to clarify the true ratio between health beneﬁts and safetyissues of green tea consumption, to exploit its healing properties but avoiding unpleasantadverse effects. In this context, the present study was aimed at reviewing clinical evidenceabout the beneﬁts of the oral administration of green tea preparations and its polyphenolsto relieve skin disorders, in order to point out the current knowledge and suggest possiblenovel strategies to effectively exploit the properties of green tea, also managing safety risks.2. MethodologyTo perform the study, a systematic review of the existing literature in PubMed, Scopus,
and Web of Science databases was carried out, using PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items forSystematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis) method [ 26]. Literature from a 20-year period wasconsidered in May 2022, using the following keywords: “oral green tea”, “tea polyphenols”,“skin”, “erythema”, “dermatosis”, “acne”, “ Camelia sinensis ”, and their combination throughthe Boolean logical operators. Moreover, clinical trials and randomized clinical trials, inwhich green tea preparations and green tea polyphenols were administered orally, wereselected. Preclinical studies, papers focused on other substances or where green tea wasadministered topically were excluded. The searches were ﬁltered to include only paperswritten in English.3. ResultsOur literature searching highlighted the presence of a total of 109 published papersfocused on clinical trials evaluating the healing properties of green tea preparations and
green tea polyphenols in skin diseases (Figure 4). Among the identiﬁed studies, 17 paperswere removed for being studies other than clinical trials, while 29 were replicated. Out of63 eligible papers, based on selection criteria, a further 35 papers were excluded: speciﬁcally,3 were focused on other substances than green tea and in 32, green tea was administeredtopically. We reviewed 28 papers, among which 3 reports were not retrieved, 2 were deletedsince the beneﬁt of green tea on skin was just hypothesized, and 11 evaluated the healingproperties of green tea on systems other than skin. Based on the PRISMA analysis, atotal of 12 studies was included in the systematic review. The major studied conditionswere photoaging and UV-induced erythema [ 27–34]; moreover, some studies evaluatedthe beneﬁts of different green tea extracts in the treatment of acne, genodermatosis, andin improving antioxidant defenses, skin texture, and integrity in healthy subjects [ 35–38].
Usually, decaffeinated green tea preparations were used and compliance of the enrolledsubjects was monitored through measuring biochemical parameters. Details on the selectedstudies are described below and resumed in Table 1.
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 6 of 21Nutrients 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 24   biochemical parameters. Details on the selected studies are described below and resumed in Table 1 .    Figure 4. Study selection by PRISMA flow diagram of clinical studies investigating efficacy and safety of oral green tea preparation in skin  diseases.        Figure 4. Study selection by PRISMA ﬂow diagram of clinical studies investigating efﬁcacy andsafety of oral green tea preparation in skin diseases.
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 7 of 21Table 1. Clinical trials on the effects of green tea polyphenols in skin diseases.Authors, Year[Ref.]StudyDesignParticipants/N. (Years)Treatment(Dosage)DurationProduct/Composition Endpoints Outcomes Adverse EventsPhotoagingChiu et al., 2005[27]R, DB, PCModerate photoaging/40 healthy womenGreen tea supplement (300 mg)plus 10% green tea cream twicedaily8 weeksUndeﬁned decaffeinated greentea extract/38% EGCG, 14%ECG, 7% EC, 6% EGC, 4% GCG,1% C, <0.5% caffeineEvaluation of clinical andhistological parameters ofskin photoagingImproved skin elasticityLocal irritation due to 10%green tea creamJanjua et al., 2009[28]R, DB, PCModerate to advancedphotoaging/56(25–75)Green tea supplement (250 mg)daily2 yearsUndeﬁned decaffeinated greentea extract/70% catechins (38%EGCG, 14% ECG, 7% EC, 6%EGC, 4% GCG, 1% C) and<0.5% caffeineClinical and histologicalparameters of skinphotoagingLacking effectsLike placebo nonseriousevents. 2 cases of
events. 2 cases ofnonrelated serious events(i.e., appendicitis andretinal detachment)Granger et al., 2020[29]Open prospectiveand monocentricModerate photoaging/30(40–65)Multicomponent foodsupplement/one capsule twicedaily12 weeksVitAoX ultra®formula/50 mgCamellia sinensis L. Kuntzeextract, 480 mg Polypodiumleucotomos Poir, 10.1 mg Vitisvinifera L. extract, 40 mgvitamin C, 12 mg vitamin E,5µg vitamin D3, 41.5 µgselenium (sodium selenite),800µg vitamin A, 8 mglycopene and 8 mg luteinper capsuleMinimal erythemal dose(MED), antioxidantcapacity, skin parametersof aging and treatmenttolerability↑MED, improvedantioxidant capacity andaging parameters2 cases of not clearlyrelated ailments (i.e., slightstomach burns, digestivedifﬁculties)UV-induced erythemaHeinrich et al., 2011[30]R, DB, PCHealthy/60 (40–65)Green tea beverage/1 L daily(1402 mg GTC)12 weeksBeverage/1402 mg totalcatechins (70% EGCG, 17%ECG, 7.1% EC, 3.1% GCG, 1.6%C, 0.6% CG, 0.4% EGC, 0.2%
C, 0.6% CG, 0.4% EGC, 0.2%GC) and 119 mg ascorbicacid per LPhotoprotection(reddening), skin functionand structure, skin bloodﬂow and catechinserum levels↓UV-induced erythemaImproved skin texture andstructure↑Microcirculation andcatechin serum levelsLacking dataR, DB, PCHealthy/15 (40–65; 5 people perdose-treatment)Decaffeinatedgreen tea extract(500 mg capsule)/0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 gdaily 12 weeksSunphenol 90 decaffeinated (SP90 DCF-T)/66.5% totalcatechins (51% EGCG, 8% EC,4% EGC, 2.3% GC, 1.2% C)Skin blood ﬂow andcatechin serum levelsTransient but notdose-dependent alterationof blood ﬂow and ↑epicatechin serum levelsLacking dataRhodes et al., 2013[31]Open interventionstudyHealthy/16Oral green tea supplement plusvitamin C/1350 mg green teaextract (corresponding to 540 mgcatechins) plus 50 mg vitamin Cdaily 12 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract(450 mg per capsule)/40%catechins (40% EGCG, 27%EGC, 14% ECG, 6.9% EC, 6.9%GC, 2.5% GCG, 1.2% C, 0.2%
GC, 2.5% GCG, 1.2% C, 0.2%GA, 0.2% CG)UV skin sensitivity ↓UV-induced erythema4 cases of mild nausea afteringestionFarrar et al., 2015[32]R, DB, PCHealthy male and female/50 (18–65)Oral green tea supplement plusvitamin C/2700 mg green tea extract(corre-sponding to 1080 mgcatechins) plus 10 mg vita-min Cdaily 12 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract(450 mg per capsule)/40%catechins (16% EGCG, 11%EGC, 14% ECG, 6.9% EC, 6.9%GC, 2.5% GCG, 1.2% C, 0.2%GA, 0.2% CG)UVR-inducedinﬂammationLacking effects Mild nausea after ingestion
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 8 of 21Table 1. Cont.Authors, Year[Ref.]StudyDesignParticipants/N. (Years)Treatment(Dosage)DurationProduct/Composition Endpoints Outcomes Adverse EventsFarrar et al., 2018[33]R, DB, PCHealthy male and female/50 (18–65)Oral green tea supplement plusvitamin C/2700 mg green tea extract(corre-sponding to 1080 mgcatechins) plus 10 mg vita-min Cdaily12 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract(450 mg per capsule)/as for [32]UVR-inducedinﬂammationLacking effects Lacking dataCharoenchon et al.,2022[34]R, DB, PCHealthy/50 (18–65)Oral green tea supplement plusvitamin C/2700 mg green tea extract(corre-sponding to 1080 mgcatechins) plus 10 mg vita-min Cdaily12 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract(450 mg per gelatin capsule)/asfor [31]UVR-inducedinﬂammationUVR protection to ﬁbulin-5 Lacking dataAcneLu et al., 2016[35]R, DB, PCWomen carrying moderateto severe acne80 (25–45)Decaffeinated green teaextract/1500 mg daily4 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract
4 weeksUndeﬁned green tea extract(500 mg per capsule)/90%catechins (57% EGCG, 16%ECG, 8% EGC, 5% EC, 4% GCG,GC) and <0.07% caffeineInﬂammatory lesioncounts↓nose, perioral, and chinlesionsTotal lesionunaffectedOne case of mildconstipation and two withabdominal discomfortGenodermatosisChiaverini et al., 2016[36]R, DB, PC,crossoverRDEBpatients/17 (19.4±16.2 SD)Green tea extract/400 to 800 mgdaily based on body weight4 monthsPolyphenon E®green teaextract (200 mg percapsule)/65% EGCG,9% EC, 6%ECG, 4% EGC, 4% GCG, 0.2%CG, 0.2% GC, 1.1% C,0.7% caffeinImprovement of RDEB Lacking effectsSome cases ofgastroenteritis, vomiting,odynophagia, esophagealblister and pain,constipation, pruritus,asthenia and bronchitisSkin integrity and antioxidant defensesChiu et al., 2016[37]R, DB, PCcrossoverHealthysubjects/44 (25–80)Green tea supplement plusmilk/2 packs daily6 months treatment+ 6 months placeboGTPM (green tea polyphenolmilk)/131.4±9.2 mg TPaand
milk)/131.4±9.2 mg TPaand91.7b±0.5 mg TF per mgdry extractSkin integrity in relation tooxidative status↑skin integrity and texture↑antioxidant index↓lipid peroxidationLacking dataMegow et al., 2017[38]R, PCHealthy male and female/37 (20–55)Freshly prepared green teabeverages/600 mL daily(corresponding to 6 g tea leaves)2 weeksBenifuuki and Yabukita teas(lacking chemicalcharacterization)Skin radical scavengingactivity↑Skin radical scavengingactivitySymptoms of illness(usually common cold)R, Randomized; DB, Double-Blind; PC, Placebo-Controlled; GTC, Green Tea Catechins; ↑, Increase;↓, Reduction; RDEB, Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa; EGCG,Epigallocatechin gallate; EGC, Epigallocatechin; ECG, Epicatechin gallate; EC, epicatechin; GC, gallocatechin; GCG, gallocatechin gallate; C, catechin; GA, gallic acid; CG, catechin
gallate; GTPM (green tea poly-phenol milk.aTP , total phenolics expressed as gallic acid equivalents.bTF, total ﬂavonoids expressed as quercetin equivalents.
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 9 of 213.1. PhotoagingPhotoaging is a type of premature skin aging induced by extrinsic factors, mainlysolar radiation, including ultraviolet (UV), visible, and infrared light; more recent evidencealso highlighted the contribution of air pollutants to the process, promoting oxidativedamage and skin inﬂammation [ 39,40]. Fine rhytides, telangiectasias, dyschromias, solarlentigines, leathery skin texture, decreased elasticity, and increased susceptibility are typicalsigns of photoaging [ 40,41]. Moreover, skin damage can increase the risk of cell degener-ation and cancer development [ 39]. Regarding mechanisms accounting for photoaging,UV irradiation is known to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to markedoxidative stress, which impairs the skin functional and regenerative potential. Moreover,activation of photoaging triggers cellular senescence and inﬂammation, a condition known
as inﬂammaging, and progressively suppresses the skin immune system, increasing suscep-tibility to infection, degenerative processes, and cancer [ 42,43]. Molecular targets, includingepidermal growth factor (EGF), keratinocyte growth factor, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α,and interleukin (IL)-1, are activated by UV radiation, thus, stimulating the transcriptionfactor AP-1, which blocks the synthesis of collagen, while promoting transcription of matrixmetalloproteinase (MMP) genes, which in turn triggers imperfect tissue repair and dermaldamage [ 44]. After repeated exposure to sun, dermal damage is accumulated, resulting inwrinkles and photoaging signs [44].Several studies outlined the role of dietary intake in terms of antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory agents to prevent both chronological and solar aging; among them, polyphe-nols have been highlighted as promising agents in skin health maintenance, due to their
antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, and regenerative abilities, likely mediated by the regulationof signaling cascades (e.g., Nrf2, NF- κB), matrix metalloproteinases, and cytokines [ 45].This evidence supported the interest in green tea extracts and polyphenols as possiblestrategies to counteract photoaging.In a double-blinded, randomized pilot study, Chiu et al. [ 27] studied the efﬁcacy ofan oral green tea preparation in forty healthy women with moderate photoaging (grade2 to 3 according to Glogau’s classiﬁcation) and with Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I to III [ 46].Particularly, 300 mg of the green tea supplement was taken orally twice a day for 8 weeks,and a 10% green tea extract cream was applied twice a day on the face and arms too. Clinicaland histological analysis showed signiﬁcant improvements in the tissue elasticity of treatedspecimens but not in clinical grading of photoaging with respect to the placebo group; rather
an irritating effect, likely due to the 10% green tea extract cream, was reported. The authorssuggested that the 10% green tea concentration is too high and scantily tolerated by skin;therefore, lower amounts should be considered. Moreover, they concluded that, althoughgreen tea polyphenols are claimed to protect human skin from photoaging, a 2-monthtopical and oral supplementation is not sufﬁcient to achieve clinically visible improvementson the skin. Some limitations of the study, including short duration of the treatment andthe combination of both oral and topical green tea administration, which hinders clarifyinghow the protective and regenerative properties of green tea can be exploited, have beendiscussed: some beneﬁts could require prolonged treatment, thus, being not evaluableunder the experimental conditions of this study. Another issue to be considered is thephytochemical composition of the green tea extract, which was characterized only for
the catechin content, i.e., 38% EGCG and 14% ECG, along with minor amounts of otherﬂavanols (Table 1); although they have been mainly associated with the bioactivities of
the catechin content, i.e., 38% EGCG and 14% ECG, along with minor amounts of otherﬂavanols (Table 1); although they have been mainly associated with the bioactivities ofgreen tea, the contribution of other components should be considered too. This representsan important limit of almost all the selected trials, which should be mentioned in orderto clarify the possible subtle interactions occurring in the green tea phytocomplex andresponsible for its bioactivities. Consequently, an improved standardization for greentea extracts, focused on catechins and other contained compounds, as well as higherreproducibility in healing effects, could be achieved.The antiphotoaging effects of green tea were also examined by Janjua et al. [ 28] in adouble-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial, involving 56 women (aged 25 to
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 10 of 2175), who received a 2-year oral supplementation with a green tea extract. The extract wasproduced by a two-step extraction of tea leaves, using hot (70◦C) water and then ethyl acetateas solvents, and then spray drying the extract and obtain a decaffeinated (<1.3 mg/250 mgextract) powder. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) revealed the presenceof about 70% catechins, 38% of which was EGCG and 14% ECG, with lower than 10% ofother flavanols [ 28]. The recruited women had a facial II (moderate) to III (advanced) Glogaugrade of photoaging and type I to III Fitzpatrick skin [ 46]. They received a daily treatmentwith one capsule, containing 250 mg of green tea extract or placebo: green tea extract dosagecorresponded to approximately seven Asian-sized cups of green tea. At zero time and after6, 12, and 24 months, women were monitored by blinded certified dermatologists and skin
histology was evaluated based on 4 mm punch biopsies. Clinical and histological results didnot show differences in the photoaging parameters across time points in green-tea-treatedsubjects, with respect to those receiving placebo. However, a lowering in overall solar damageat 6 months, and in erythema and telangiectasias at 12 months in the green-tea-treated group,but not in placebo, was found. No differences were observed at the 24-month time point. Theauthors supposed that the registered improvements could be due to changes in sun exposureand activities of involved people, conditioned by their involvement in the study . At any rate,this issue is not supported by evidence, since a sun exposure diary of women was lacking.Another limit discussed by the authors is the lacking evaluation of skin pore size: increasedpore size can be induced by sun destruction of elastin and collagen, leading to elasticity
loss, but can be prevented by green tea polyphenols, thanks to their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Further larger studies are needed to clarify the true antiphotoagingbenefits of green tea and to define the best conditions to exploit them.At last, it is interesting to consider that the studied extract was enriched in catechins,one-third of which was EGCG, and used under a prolonged 2-year treatment, according toChiu et al. [ 27]. This suggests that, despite the claimed crucial role of catechins as bioactivecompounds of green tea, their higher concentration did not improve the antiphotoagingproperties. Therefore, other unknown compounds could contribute or lead to the healingeffects of green tea; future clarifying studies are recommended.More recently, Granger et al. [ 29] evaluated the antiphotoaging and photoprotectiveefﬁcacy and tolerability of a multicomponent food supplement (VitAoX ultra®), containing
10% of an unspeciﬁed green tea extract in combination with vitamins A, C, D3, E, selenium,lycopene, lutein, polypodium, and grape extracts, in a 12-week open, prospective, andmonocentric clinical study. The study enrolled 30 participants with Fitzpatrick skin typeI–III and clinical signs of chronological aging and/or photoaging, which received onecapsule of the food supplement (VitAoX ultra®) daily for 12 weeks [ 29]. Treatment resultedin enhanced skin resistance to UV injury, as shown by the increased minimal erythemadose (MED), deﬁned as the lowest dose producing visually discernible erythema; moreover,skin antioxidant capacity and skin parameters (i.e., moisturization, elasticity, radiance, andcolor of dark spots) markedly improved.Despite these healing effects being ascribed to the antioxidant power of the product,the true contribution of green tea extract cannot be inferred, since the beneﬁts could be a
result of the interactions of multiple components. A further issue to be highlighted is theunknown composition of the green tea extract, along with those of the other extracts, which
result of the interactions of multiple components. A further issue to be highlighted is theunknown composition of the green tea extract, along with those of the other extracts, whichnot only limits the reproducibility of the study but also does not allow one to deﬁne thepossible bioactive compounds. Using standardized and chemically characterized extractsshould be a prerequisite for clinical studies, since it is essential to ensure reproducibility inthe outcomes.3.2. UV-Induced ErythemaUltraviolet (UV) solar radiation (about 6.8% of total radiation) is acknowledged to beresponsible for various skin damage, since it can damage lipidic sheets and protein, thus,impairing its water-impermeable barrier function [ 47]. Indeed, although severity dependson genetic factors, age, nutrition, and exposure, UV radiation causes skin inﬂammation,
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 11 of 21DNA damage, and alterations to lipids and proteins, leading to erythema, photoaging, skinlesions, dermatosis, and cancer [ 48,49]. UVB (280–315 nm) and UVA (315–400 nm) radiationis more dangerous than UVC (<280 nm), which is absorbed in the stratosphere. UVB radia-tion directly affects DNA integrity, by forming covalent links between adjacent pyrimidinebases (photodimers), thus forming cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and pyrimidine-6,4-pyrimidone photoproducts; by contrast, UVA (315–400 nm) produces indirect genotoxicity,due to the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which, in turn, damage DNA andother biomolecules [50].Several natural compounds, especially ﬂavonoids, ﬂavanols, and carotenoids, havebeen found endowed with photoprotective effects, likely due to their antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory, and immunomodulatory properties [ 51]. In line with this evidence, some
clinical trials have been carried out to evaluate the clinical efﬁcacy of oral preparations ofgreen tea to prevent skin damage induced by UV radiation.Heinrich et al. [ 30] investigated the effects of repetitive intakes of a green tea beverageson skin resilience to UV radiation, along with improvements in texture and microcirculation,in a double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial, involving a total of 45 females (40–65 years old)with type II Fitzpatrick skin [ 46]. Particularly, 30 subjects received an oral administrationof a green tea beverage (1 L daily, corresponding to 1402 mg total tea catechins, half ofwhich was ECGC) or a control beverage (containing a non-nutritive sweetener, ascorbicacid, and quinine hydrochloride to mime the bitter taste of green tea) for 12 weeks. Beforestarting the study, back and scapular regions of women were irradiated with 1.25 MED(minimal erythemal doses), using a blue-light solar simulator. At baseline (zero time) and
after 6 and 12 weeks, blood samples were drawn to measure the blood ﬂavanol levels andskin variables (i.e., elasticity, structure and texture, hydration, reddening) were evaluated.A signiﬁcant 16 to 25% lowering of UV-induced erythema, along with increasedplasma levels of EGCG, followed by EGC, EC, and ECG, were highlighted in the greentea group, with respect to the control; moreover, skin elasticity, hydration, texture, andstructure were improved, thus, suggesting the ability of the treatment to protect skin againstUV injury and to boost its functions. These beneﬁts were associated with an increase inblood ﬂow and oxygen delivery to the skin, which can result in improved nutrient andoxygen supply to it, improving the skin condition and appearance.These benefits were also confirmed, in a second short-term randomized, double-blindedtrial by Heinrich et al. [ 30], involving 15 female volunteers not included in the previous one,
divided into subgroups, which received a single dose of 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 g of a green tea SP90 DCF-T extract (formulated in capsules containing 0.5 g extract). At HPLC analysis, the extractwas found concentrated in catechins, of which at least 50% was EGCG. At 30 min after theSP 90 DCF-T extract administration, a transient but not dose-dependent alteration in bloodflow occurred and levels of serum epicatechin were enhanced. According to previous evidence,the authors suggested that the known abilities of polyphenols and flavanols to absorb UVlight and to counteract oxidative stress, inflammation, and DNA damage [ 52] represent themajor mechanisms accounting for their photoprotective effects and can contribute to the healingeffects of green tea preparations against UV radiation damage. The extent of UV protection bygreen tea is comparable to that reported for polyphenol-based cocoa extracts [ 53]; however, the
specific contribution of green tea flavanols remains to be clarified. Altogether, Heinrich et al. [ 30]highlighted the ability of both beverage and extract from green tea to produce protective effects
highlighted the ability of both beverage and extract from green tea to produce protective effectson skin from UV injury and to support skin structure and function.In line with these findings, Rhodes and colleagues [ 31] performed a pilot open uncon-trolled study, in which they studied the photoprotective effects, mediated by a reduction inpro-inflammatory eicosanoid production, of a green tea extract (containing 40% catechins,40.3% of which was EGCG while 27.4% was EGC and 14.4% ECG). Three capsules containingthe green tea extract were administered orally, in association with two capsules of vitaminC (total 1350 mg tea green extract, corresponding to 540 mg catechins, plus 50 mg vitaminC daily), to sixteen white healthy subjects with sun-reactive skin type I–II for 12 weeks. Asdeclared by the authors, vitamin C was needed to stabilize green tea polyphenols in the
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 12 of 21gut lumen [ 54], without an impact on UV-R erythema [ 55]. UV damage skin erythema wasinduced by a solar simulator (source of UVB and UV A radiation); compliance was measuredby the analysis of polyphenols in urine samples, collected during treatment.The results showed that the treatment suppressed UV-induced erythema and skininﬂammation; indeed, a lowering in the rise of proinﬂammatory factors, i.e., 12-HETEeicosanoid and PGE 2,was found. Skin biopsy samples also highlighted increased levels ofcatechins in tissue, thus, suggesting a possible involvement of these compounds in the heal-ing effects of green tea; however, the contribution of other phytochemicals in the mixture,along with that of vitamin C, cannot be excluded. Rhodes et al. [ 31] also showed the abilityof green tea supplementation to regulate the UV-induced release of lipoxygenase metaboliteand leukocyte chemoattractant 12-HETE, alongside cutaneous leukocyte inﬁltration; this
last effect was also reported after topical application of green tea preparations. Owing to thepivotal role of UV radiation in skin cancer development, likely acting as a genotoxic agent,and considering the oncogenic role of 12-HETE and its overexpression in many cancers,including skin cancers, the ability of green tea supplementation to affect its biosynthesissuggests a possible chemopreventive interest, which deserves further conﬁrmation studies.In line with the previous promising evidence, the research group in [ 32] carried out afurther 12-week double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, involving fifty healthywhite adults (both male and female; aged 18–65 years), carrying I to II Fitzpatrick sun-reactiveskin types, to evaluate the photoprotective effects of green tea preparations. Recruited subjectsreceived a twice daily treatment with three gelatin capsules of a green tea supplement (total
2700 mg green tea extract, containing 40% catechins (corresponding to 1080 mg), 16.13%of which was EGCG, while 10.96% and 5.78% were EGC and ECG, respectively) plus twogelatin capsules of vitamin C (100 mg), or placebo gelatin capsules with maltodextrin, for12 weeks. Unexpectedly, they found lacking effects of the combined treatment of green teaextract/vitamin C on the skin erythema, dermal leukocytic infiltration, and inflammatoryresponse induced by UV exposure. The differences were discussed by the authors, highlightingsome limitations of the previous pilot study, especially the enrollment of nearly all females,with possible sex-specific effects and the inability to measure effects unrelated to green teasupplementation; therefore, Farrar et al. [ 32] suggested the need for further studies to betterelucidate the healing effects of green tea extracts and catechins.In a following double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study [ 33], the photo-
protective effects of the green tea extract/vitamin C supplementation were evaluated inhealthy adults, with Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I and II, against a high-proinﬂammatoryUV dose (3×minimal erythema dose MED), emitted by a solar simulator (5% UVB, 95%UVA). Particularly, ﬁfty subjects (13 males and 37 females; 18–65 years of age) took a1080 mg green tea extract (equivalent to 5 cups of green tea beverage) with 100 mg vitaminC daily, or placebo (i.e., maltodextrin), for 12 weeks. The rate of cyclobutane pyrimidinedimers (CPD) in skin, which is typical DNA damage induced by UV radiation, was mea-sured by immunohistochemical staining analysis. Results highlighted neither difference inUV-induced DNA-damage (in term of CPD) between green tea and placebo groups, norwithin groups at baseline and post-supplementation. However, the presence of epigal-locatechin glucuronide in urine conﬁrmed the compliance of the recruited subjects. The
authors discuss these conﬂicting results, with respect to the evidence of genoprotective
locatechin glucuronide in urine conﬁrmed the compliance of the recruited subjects. Theauthors discuss these conﬂicting results, with respect to the evidence of genoprotectiveeffects of green tea treatments in topical human studies [ 56]; however, they suggest thathigher local skin concentrations, with respect to that achieved after ingestion, could beresponsible for the different outcomes and remark the need for more studies to elucidatethe best conditions and features to exploit the possible beneﬁts of green tea preparationsagainst UV radiation damage.Despite the negative results of Farrar et al. [ 32,33], a recent systematic review ofthe literature followed by a metanalysis by Kapoor et al. [ 57] showed that oral greentea supplementation, both low and high doses, signiﬁcantly protects against low-doseultraviolet-radiation-induced erythema response, with less efﬁcacy against high-intensity
UV . Topical sunscreens, which are effective for a ﬁnite time, require frequent application
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 13 of 21and do not protect cutaneous immunity; oral supplementation can provide a constant lowlevel of photoprotection to the entire body surface and strengthen the skin’s tolerance toUV radiation damage; therefore, it can be exploited as adjuvant or alternative sunscreen-protective intervention.These beneﬁts were conﬁrmed by a recently published double-blind randomizedclinical trial by Charoenchon et al. [ 34], evaluating the ability of the treatment green extractplus vitamin C against changes in the dermal collagen and elastic ﬁber systems, followingexposure to solar-simulated radiation (SSR). Particularly, 50 healthy white adults (aged18–65 years), carrying Fitzpatrick skin types I–II, took a total daily dose of 1080 mg green teaextract and vitamin C 100 mg, as gelatine capsules, or placebo (i.e., maltodextin), and wereexposed to SSR for 12 weeks; compliance of the subjects was conﬁrmed by measuring the
urine levels of catechins. The results highlighted that green tea supplementation protectedﬁbulin-5, and potentially ﬁbulin-2, against SSR-induced changes in the components ofdermal collagen and elastic ﬁber in human skin; these effects could be ascribed to theability of epigallocatechin gallate to attenuate elastic ﬁber degradation by matrix metallo-proteinase [ 58], while the contribution of vitamin C seems unlikely based on the availableevidence [ 59]. These ﬁndings strengthen the need for future studies to evaluate the possibleprotective role of green tea supplementation on human skin against repeated suberythemalUV-R exposure.3.3. Acne TreatmentAcne vulgaris is a skin disorder developed as a consequence of multiple factors, includ-ing hormonal changes, stage of life, nutrition, medications, exposure to pollutants, climaticfactors, and infections [ 60]. It is typical of adolescence, although it can be manifested during
other life stages, such as neonatal and late acne. Key factors in the development of acneare an increased or altered sebum production by piliferous glands (hyperseborrhea anddysseborrhea), changes in keratinization, skin inﬂammation, and infection of piliferousglands by Propionibacterium acnes ; moreover, changes in hormone secretion, particularlyandrogens, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor-1, play a centrale role too [ 61,62]. Thecommon treatment of acne often includes combinations of oral and topical antimicrobialsand retinoid drugs, hormonal agents, along with chemical peeling and laser therapy; how-ever, relevant side effects, such as microbial resistance, cheilitis, and teratogenicity, havebeen reported, leading to the need to discover alternative therapeutic strategies [ 63]. Fromthis perspective, green tea preparations for both topical and systemic administration ap-peared promising strategies due to their antimicrobial, anti-inﬂammatory, antioxidant, and
regenerative properties.Our literature searching revealed the presence of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, which investigated the efficacy and safety of an oral preparation con-taining a decaffeinated green tea extract (GTE) in women carrying post-adolescent acne [ 35].GTE extract (provided by Tea Research and Extension Station, Taoyuan County , Taiwan) wasstandardized to contain about 57% EGCG and 16% ECG, with minor levels of other catechins,administered by capsules (i.e., 500 mg extract per capsule). To perform the study , 80 subjectswere randomly assigned to two groups, receiving 1500 mg of GTE or placebo (cellulose) dailyfor 4 weeks, and monitored for inflammatory lesions associated to acne at zero time and at theend of treatment. A significant lowering in the number of acne lesions on the nose, perioralarea, and chin—but not in the total lesions—was highlighted in the GTE group after 4 weeks of
treatment, thus, suggesting possible benefits of green tea intake in acne control [ 35]. However,
area, and chin—but not in the total lesions—was highlighted in the GTE group after 4 weeks oftreatment, thus, suggesting possible benefits of green tea intake in acne control [ 35]. However,some limitations of the study , including the small sample of recruited women and the largevariance in lesion counts, weaken the clinical evidence.Despite limited evidence in support of the oral use of green tea for acne, other studieshighlighted the efficacy of topical formulations containing green tea extracts (2% lotion or 3%emulsion alone or with other treatments, ointment) to relief acne lesions, with only minor sideeffects [ 64–68]. Yoon et al. [ 22] also reported significant benefits in 35 acne patients after 1%and 5% EGCG topical treatment for 8 weeks. Similarly , Waranuch et al. [ 69] highlighted the
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 14 of 21antiacne and antiblotch efficacy of a hydrogel, containing a combination of Aloe barbadensisleaf extract, Garcinia mangostana peel extract, and Camellia sinensis leaf extract (50:25:1), withrespect to a 1% clindamycin gel. However, these studies had a limited methodological quality ,due to a low number of enrolled subjects, control groups, or lacking randomization. Therefore,novel high-quality studies are expected to clarify the interest in green tea and its polyphenolsas anti-acne oral treatments.3.4. GenodermatosisGenodermatosis refers to alterations in skin function associated with genetic mutations,some of which are caused by nonsense mutations that trigger the production of truncatedor non-functional proteins. Among them, recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa(RDEB) is a rare genodermatosis characterized by mutations in the COL7A1 gene, whichleads to disorders of collagen production and skin fragility, increasing the risk of wounds
and scarring [ 70]. Usually, treatments are mainly symptomatic, with no cure [ 70]: thisstrengthens the interest in alternative strategies, such as nutraceuticals or natural substances,to improve health status and life quality in patients. Chiaverini et al. [ 36] carried out amulticenter, randomized, crossover, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, in whichthe efﬁcacy and safety of a green tea extract was evaluated in 17 RDEB patients after a4-month oral treatment. Although not detailed by Chiaverini et al. [ 36], the product usedin the clinical study (Clinical Trial Register NCT00951964) was a standardized green teaextract (Polyphenon E®), containing about 65% EGCG, along with minor levels of othercatechins [ 71]. Recruited subjects received the treatment (corresponding to 400 to 800 mgEGCG daily, on the basis of the patient’s weight) or a placebo. Despite a slightly increasedwound healing and lowered frequency of new blisters, the treatment did not produce
relevant beneﬁts in RDEB patients with respect to the placebo. These conﬂicting resultsare discussed by the authors in light of the study limitations, especially the low numberof enrolled subjects, along with differences in the severity of phenotype and sensibilityto treatment. Therefore, they suggest the need for a future international randomized,double-blinded, and placebo-controlled trial, with a targeted subpopulation to clarify thepossible beneﬁts of green tea preparation in genodermatosis.3.5. Skin Integrity and Antioxidant DefensesThe major function of human skin is to protect from exogenous injuries, includingmechanical damage, chemicals, pathogens, and radiation; moreover, it regulates the ex-cretion of metabolic waste and homeostasis of body temperature [ 72]. Acting as a barrier,it is directly exposed to the injury of many chemical, physical, and biological toxicants,especially free radicals, UV radiation, and environmental pollutants, which often induce
oxidative stress and damage of polyunsaturated fatty acids, leading to altered function anddiseases, such as acne, psoriasis, and aging. Maintenance of skin homeostasis is guaranteedby the presence of antioxidant skin defenses and regenerative abilities, which could beimpaired during marked oxidative stress and injury. Therefore, boosting skin defenses,especially its modulating antioxidant status and integrity, through using nutraceuticals,dermatological protective agents, and dietary supplements, could represent a suitablestrategy to activate skin resilience and prevent the development of diseases.Chiu et al. [ 37] carried out a randomized, crossover, double-blind, placebo-controlledclinical trial, involving 44 volunteers (25 to 80 years old), who consumed 240 mL of mineralwater mixed with either green tea preparation or placebo (two packs daily at morningand evening) every day for 6 months and vice versa, with one month of washout. Green
water mixed with either green tea preparation or placebo (two packs daily at morningand evening) every day for 6 months and vice versa, with one month of washout. Greentea packs contained an undeﬁned green tea preparation with milk powder (named greentea polyphenol milk or GTPM), skim milk, whey protein, lactoferrin isolated from soy,and other supplements (e.g., maltodextrin, vegetable oil, sugar, minerals, vitamins, andcarrageenan), while the placebo packs contained all the ingredients except for green tea.GTPM supplementation was found to ameliorate skin texture and integrity, to lowerskin wrinkles and roughness in elderly subjects, and to increase total phenolic content in
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 15 of 21plasma, antioxidant index, and enzyme activities, with respect to the placebo group. Theseﬁndings suggested that milk proteins increased the absorption of polyphenols, leading toincreased plasma levels and improved antioxidant capacity, which likely contribute to theskin quality amelioration. Results of other studies agree with the increased polyphenolabsorption triggered by milk [ 73,74], although opposite results are reported too [ 75,76].Despite limitations in this pilot study, due to lacking information about green tea extractand its catechin content, along with those declared by the authors, i.e., limited numberof recruited subjects, lacking GTP (green tea preparation without milk) control group,and determination of catechin plasma levels, the results suggest an interest in green teapreparation combined with milk to stimulate antioxidant defenses and improve skin quality.
Increased skin radical scavenging properties after the consumption of Japanese Beni-fuuki and Yabukita green teas were also highlighted by Megow et al. [ 38] in a randomizedclinal trial involving thirty-two participants. Subjects were asked to consume three cups(total 600 mL) per day of either Benifuuki tea or Yabukita tea, or water (control group),for 2 weeks. At the end of the study, analysis by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)spectroscopy was made to monitor the antioxidant status of human skin after oral greentea administration and to compare the cutaneous radical scavenging effects of Benifuukiand Yabukita teas. The results revealed that the skin radical scavenging properties, withrespect to the control, were increased by 28 and 29% in the Yabukita and Benifuuki greentea groups, respectively, without changes in total carotenoid content. Although methylatedcatechins of Benifuuki tea are reported to be more bioavailable, no difference in the out-
comes of the Yabukita and Benifuuki tea groups was highlighted. The role of green teapolyphenols and their metabolites in the potentiation of antioxidant skin power remainsto be clariﬁed in future studies. Another issue to be considered is the lowered effect ofgreen tea supplementation in subjects affected by illness during the study; this could be aresult of an impairment in cutaneous antioxidants due to illness, as previously reported.However, as discussed by authors, the lacking monitoring of catechin levels in blood orurine enables one to exclude that non-responder subjects were noncompliant.Altogether, results of the study by Megow et al. [ 38], highlighting the ability of orallyadministered green tea to improve the skin antioxidant status, suggests its possible useful-ness in the prevention of oxidative-based skin injury and diseases, such as premature skinaging, skin cancer, psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, and acne. However, owing to limitations in
the available studies, i.e., lack of blinding of the control group, small sample size, and shortduration, larger high-quality trials are needed in conﬁrmation.3.6. Safety EvaluationSelected clinical trials usually highlighted that oral green tea preparations, admin-istered usually for 8 to 16 weeks, were well tolerated with minor ailments. This is alsoconﬁrmed in the 2-year treatment reported by Janjua et al. [ 28], which highlighted similarnonserious adverse events in green tea and placebo groups, among which, upper respi-ratory tract infection followed by loose stools and other minor gastrointestinal ailmentswere the most common. Two cases of serious adverse events, including appendicitis andretinal detachment, occurred during treatment with green tea preparation but the causalityrelationship remains unclear [ 28]. However, the available literature did not support theassociation of green tea ingestion with these adverse effects; by contrast, regarding retinal
detachment, some preclinical evidence suggests the possible protective role of green tea
association of green tea ingestion with these adverse effects; by contrast, regarding retinaldetachment, some preclinical evidence suggests the possible protective role of green teapolyphenols against cellular toxicity of the retina [77].Similarly, the ailments reported by two subjects involved in the study of Grangeret al. [ 29], i.e., slight stomach burns and difﬁculties of digesting the product, were notclearly related to the green tea supplementation. Chiu et al. [ 27] did not describe speciﬁcside effects due to oral treatment with green tea; conversely, irritation and sun sensitivitywere caused by topical application of the 10% green tea cream, thus, suggesting that itrepresents a too great concentration, which is to be avoided. Occasional mild nauseaafter ingestion was also reported by Rhodes et al. [31] and Farrar et al. [32] after ingestion
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 16 of 21of the green tea supplements, although it was usually well tolerated by all the otherrecruited subjects. Accordingly, Lu et al. [ 35] registered one subject who developed mildconstipation and two others with abdominal discomfort after treatment, but without facialailments and major adverse effects in all the involved subjects. A good tolerability was alsoreported for the green tea Polyphenon E®extract, although some cases of gastroenteritis,vomiting, odynophagia, esophageal blister and pain, constipation, pruritus, asthenia, andbronchitis were reported [ 36]. Similarly, Mengow et al. [ 38] highlighted symptoms ofillness (usually common cold) in some of the subjects receiving Yabukita and Benifuukigreen tea beverages. Conversely, tolerability data in the studies by Heinrich et al. [ 30],Farrar et al. [ 33], Charoenchon et al. [ 34], and Chiu et al. [ 37] were lacking. This evidence
strengthens the need to clarify the causality relationships of the mild and occasional adverseeffects occurring in clinical trials, especially gastro-intestinal ailments, and the use of oralgreen tea preparations. To this end, speciﬁc pharmaco-toxicological and phytochemicalevaluations should be encouraged in order to understand the mechanisms of action andthe contribution of green tea phytochemicals.Despite the generally good tolerability of green tea oral preparations used in theselected clinical trials, green tea is the hub of a lively debate on pros and cons of its use asa dietary supplement, due to well-documented case reports of adverse events, especiallyhepatotoxicity, associated with the consumption of green tea beverages and supplements,alone or in combination with other products. Liver damage usually occurred when theproducts were taken for weight loss, although some cases in which the supplement was
used to counteract hair loss and for improving well-being have been reported too [ 24,25].Accordingly, two recent hepatotoxicity cases associated with green tea consumption havebeen reported too [ 78]. The suspected products often were characterized by a differentcatechin composition and sometimes EGCG high-concentrated extracts were used; in manycases, green tea preparations were taken in combination with other components, includingbotanicals, pure phytochemicals, vitamins, amino acids, and others. The duration of treat-ment was variable from days to more than 1 year; similarly, adverse reactions (sometimessevere, requiring hospitalization and liver transplantation) occurred quickly or after along-term exposure [ 24,25]. The causality assessment highlighted a probable or possiblerelationship between green tea consumption and hepatic adverse reaction, although themechanisms of hepatotoxicity remain unclear and the contribution of other factors, such
as genetic features, individual susceptibility, idiosyncrasy, and concomitant use of otherproducts, seems to play a pivotal role in adverse reaction development [ 24,25]. Among thepossible contributing factors, some evidence highlighted that fasting signiﬁcantly increasesthe bioavailability of catechins, especially that of EGCG, likely leading to saturation ofﬁrst-pass elimination mechanisms and toxicity development. Based on these ﬁndings, theUnited States Pharmacopeia (USP) monograph on “Powdered Decaffeinated Green TeaExtract” includes the following cautionary labeling requirement: “Do not take on an emptystomach. Take with food. Do not use if you have a liver problem and discontinue use and consulta healthcare practitioner if you develop symptoms of liver trouble, such as abdominal pain, darkurine, or jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes).” [25]. Accordingly, the European Food SafetyAuthority (EFSA) declared that, based on clinical studies, EGCG levels equal or above
800 mg daily can affect liver function; however, considering that sometimes hepatotoxicity
Authority (EFSA) declared that, based on clinical studies, EGCG levels equal or above800 mg daily can affect liver function; however, considering that sometimes hepatotoxicityoccurred at lower doses, a true safe EGCG dose cannot be established [ 79]. Therefore, it isimportant to follow the recommendations by Mazzanti et al. [ 24], i.e., using high-qualitystandardized green tea extracts (lacking risk of contamination, adulteration, and misidenti-ﬁcation), to avoid multiple co-administration, since green tea components can affect bothmetabolic and excretion processes of drugs, with an increased risk of interactions andtoxicity, and to discourage green tea use in subjects with liver ailments or with impairedliver functions, and further, when a greater susceptibility to adverse reactions could beexpected [ 24]. Furthermore, more speciﬁc pharmaco-toxicological studies should be encour-aged to clarify the currently unknown toxicity mechanisms and to likely identify possible
high-susceptible people [ 24]. At last, the supervision of qualiﬁed healthcare professionals
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 17 of 21should be recommended, in order to promptly highlight possible sensitive subjects at riskof adverse effects [24].4. Conclusions and Future PerspectivesGreen tea preparation and its polyphenols have attracted great attention over the yearsas possible nutraceutical agents due to their promising antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory,chemopreventive, and immunomodulatory properties, which could be exploited for severaldiseases, including skin ailments. Preclinical studies suggested that in some skin disorders,such us UV-induced erythema, acne, or photoaging, these properties, along with regen-erative and genoprotective effects, could be advantageous to relieve skin integrity andtexture and to stimulate endogenous defenses [ 80], thus, leading to tissue regeneration anddamage repair.Nevertheless, the available clinical trials focused on oral green tea preparations are only
few: we selected a total of 12 studies, among which 5 focused on UV-induced erythema andskin alterations, 3 on photoaging, 2 on antioxidant skin defenses, while only 1 study for acneand genodermatosis. These trials highlighted several benefits of green tea preparations inskin ailments, usually ascribed to the ability of green tea polyphenols to counteract oxidativestress and inflammation induced by exogenous stimuli, to promote tissue regeneration andendogenous skin antioxidant defenses, and to modulate immune system infiltration.On the basis of these ﬁndings, we can conclude that the evidence supports the useof oral green tea preparations to protect skin from damage induced by low-dose ultra-violet radiation; however, a higher than 2-month supplementation seems to be neededfor clinically visible improvements on the skin. Therefore, application of oral green teapreparations as adjuvant or alternative sunscreen-protective interventions could be en-
couraged, in compliance with the safety recommendations. The other studied conditionsprovide only preliminary evidence due to conﬂicting results, as shown in photoaging, orlimited low-quality studies, as highlighted in the cases of acne, genodermatosis, and forthe boosting effects on antioxidant status and skin integrity.The major limits of the selected studies are small sample size of enrolled subjects,short duration of the study, combination of both oral and topical green tea administrations,combination of green tea with other products, and lacking or scant standardization of greentea extract. In this respect, it should be remarked that usually, the authors refer to greentea polyphenols, green tea catechins, or even to EGCG, while they used a green tea extract,usually containing 40% to 70% catechins.Although catechins are considered the major bioactive compounds in green tea, thecontribution of other components cannot be excluded. This is an important issue to be
considered since the fraction of unknown compounds can contribute both positively andnegatively to the whole effects, and their uncontrolled variation in the tested extracts couldcontribute to achieving conﬂicting outcomes. Therefore, an improved standardization anda much more complete phytochemical characterization of green tea extracts could representa future strategy to improve reproducibility of the green tea healing effects, in order toeffectively exploit them in therapy. In support, EGCG-enriched extracts were found noteffective after a long-term treatment [28].Many clinical studies also highlighted the clinical beneﬁts of topical green tea prepara-tions, such as ointments, creams, gels, and lotions (containing usually 2% to 15% green teaextracts) [ 13,14,81,82]; these studies were excluded from this systematic review, since theydid not accomplish the inclusion criteria. Particularly, a bath therapy based on a 5% solution
of green tea extract produced beneﬁts in patients with atopic dermatitis associated with
did not accomplish the inclusion criteria. Particularly, a bath therapy based on a 5% solutionof green tea extract produced beneﬁts in patients with atopic dermatitis associated withMalassezia sympodialis infection [ 82]; moreover, a 2% green tea lotion decreased inﬂamma-tory lesions in acne subjects [ 14]. Polyphenon®E formulations (15–10%) have been reportedas efﬁcacious for treating external anogenital warts (EGWs), which are non-malignant skintumors associated with human papillomavirus infection, and for preventing recurrence [ 81];accordingly, topical treatment with a sinecatechins 10% ointment (VeregenTM) was effectiveto treat recalcitrant facial warts without surgery [83].
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 18 of 21Promising evidence also suggested UV-protective effects of topical green tea formulations,skin wound repair, and chemopreventive benefits in skin cancer [ 21,84–88]. However, noclinical benefits were found for a topical sinecatechin 10% ointment (V eregen®) in the treatmentof superficial basal cell carcinoma [ 89]. Other studies also reported synergistic or additive skinbenefits of topical green tea preparations in combination with other herbal extracts, such aslotus, ginkgo, and capsicum, although the true contribution of each component in the mixturewas not clarified [90–92].Notwithstanding this promising evidence, topical treatments are limited due to a ﬁnite-time efﬁcacy, thermal instability, especially for sunscreen formulations, need for frequentapplications, and a lack of protective effects on cutaneous immunity. Conversely, oralsupplementation can provide complete and lasting effects, achieving constant outcomes
and also boosting endogenous skin defenses; therefore, they could be exploited for severalskin ailments, such as photoprotection, cancer chemoprevention, improvement in skin’sresilience and integrity, and for treating skin diseases (i.e., atopic dermatitis, warts, acne).Further studies should be encouraged in order to strengthen the clinical evidence about thebeneﬁts of oral green tea preparations in dermatological diseases and to clarify the safetyrisks and tolerability.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.D.S., G.M., A.V . and S.D.G.; data curation, A.D.S., M.G.,E.P . and S.D.G.; formal analysis, A.D.S., M.G., E.P . and S.D.G.; investigation, A.D.S., M.G., E.P . andS.D.G.; methodology, A.D.S.; project administration, A.D.S.; resources, A.D.S., M.G., E.P ., G.M., A.V .and S.D.G.; Software, A.D.S., M.G., E.P ., G.M., A.V . and S.D.G.; supervision, A.D.S. and S.D.G.;Visualization, A.D.S. and S.D.G. Writing—original draft, M.G., E.P ., S.D.G. and A.D.S.; Writing—
review and editing, A.D.S. and S.D.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version ofthe manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Sun, M.F.; Jiang, C.L.; Kong, Y.S.; Luo, J.L.; Yin, P .; Guo, G.Y. Recent advances in analytical methods for determination ofpolyphenols in tea: A comprehensive review. Foods 2022 ,11, 1425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Oyetakin White, P .; Tribout, H.; Baron, E. Protective mechanisms of green tea polyphenols in skin. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2012 ,2012 , 560682.3. Wong, M.; Sirisena, S.; Ng, K. Phytochemical proﬁle of differently processed tea: A review. J. Food Sci. 2022 ,87, 1925–1942.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]4. Bag, S.; Mondal, A.; Majumder, A.; Banik, A. Tea and its phytochemicals: Hidden health beneﬁts & modulation of signalingcascade by phytochemicals. Food Chem. 2022 ,371, 131098. [PubMed]5. Senanayake, S.N. Green tea extract: Chemistry, antioxidant properties and food applications: A review. J. Funct. Foods 2013 ,5,1529–1541. [CrossRef]6. Cao, S.Y.; Zhao, C.N.; Gan, R.Y.; Xu, X.Y.; Wei, X.L.; Corke, H.; Atanasov, A.G.; Li, H.B. Effects and mechanisms of tea and itsbioactive compounds for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases: An updated review. Antioxidants 2019 ,8, 166.[CrossRef]7. Tang, G.Y.; Meng, X.; Gan, R.Y.; Zhao, C.N.; Liu, Q.; Feng, Y.B.; Li, S.; Wei, X.L.; Atanasov, A.G.; Corke, H.; et al. Health functionsand related molecular mechanisms of tea components: An update review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 6196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Liczbi ´ nski, P .; Bukowska, B. Tea and coffee polyphenols and their biological properties based on the latest in vitro investigations.Ind. Crops Prod. 2022 ,175, 114265. [CrossRef]
8. Liczbi ´ nski, P .; Bukowska, B. Tea and coffee polyphenols and their biological properties based on the latest in vitro investigations.Ind. Crops Prod. 2022 ,175, 114265. [CrossRef]9. Li, F.; Qasim, S.; Li, D.; Dou, Q.P . Updated review on green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin-3-gallate as a cancer epigeneticregulator. Semin. Cancer Biol. 2022 ,83, 335–352. [CrossRef]10. Martinez Pomier, K.; Ahmed, R.; Melacini, G. Catechins as tools to understand the molecular basis of neurodegeneration.Molecules 2020 ,25, 3571. [CrossRef]11. Yang, C.S.; Chen, T.; Ho, C.T. Redox and other biological activities of tea catechins that may affect health: Mechanisms andunresolved issues. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2022 ,70, 7887–7889. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 19 of 2112. Zink, A.; Traidl-Hoffmann, C. Green tea in dermatology-myths and facts. J. Dtsch. Dermatol. 2015 ,13, 768–775. [CrossRef]13. Frasheri, L.; Schielein, M.C.; Tizek, L.; Mikschl, P .; Biedermann, T.; Zink, A. Great green tea ingredient? A narrative literaturereview on epigallocatechin gallate and its biophysical properties for topical use in dermatology. Phytother. Res. 2020 ,34, 2170–2179.[CrossRef] [PubMed]14. Saric, S.; Notay, M.; Sivamani, R.K. Green tea and other tea polyphenols: Effects on sebum production and acne vulgaris.Antioxidants 2016 ,6, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]15. Fukutomi, R.; Ohishi, T.; Koyama, Y.; Pervin, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Isemura, M. Beneﬁcial effects of epigallocatechin-3-O-gallate,chlorogenic acid, resveratrol, and curcumin on neurodegenerative diseases. Molecules 2021 ,26, 415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Miyata, Y.; Shida, Y.; Hakariya, T.; Sakai, H. Anti-cancer effects of green tea polyphenols against prostate cancer. Molecules 2019 ,24, 193. [CrossRef]17. Li, M.J.; Yin, Y .C.; Wang, J.; Jiang, Y .F. Green tea compounds in breast cancer prevention and treatment. World J. Clin. Oncol. 2014 ,5, 520.[CrossRef]18. Roh, E.; Kim, J.E.; Kwon, J.Y.; Park, J.S.; Bode, A.M.; Dong, Z.; Lee, K.W. Molecular mechanisms of green tea polyphenols withprotective effects against skin photoaging. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017 ,57, 1631–1637. [CrossRef]19. Prasanth, M.I.; Sivamaruthi, B.S.; Chaiyasut, C.; Tencomnao, T. A Review of the role of green tea ( Camellia sinensis ) in antiphotoag-ing, stress resistance, neuroprotection, and autophagy. Nutrients 2019 ,11, 474. [CrossRef]20. Conney, A.H.; Wang, Z.Y.; Huang, M.T.; Ho, C.T.; Yang, C.S. Inhibitory effect of green tea on tumorigenesis by chemicals andultraviolet light. Prev. Med. 1992 ,21, 361–369. [CrossRef]
21. Xu, F.W.; Lv, Y.L.; Zhong, Y.F.; Xue, Y.N.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, L.Y.; Hu, X.; Tan, W.Q. Beneﬁcial effects of green tea EGCG on skinwound healing: A comprehensive review. Molecules 2021 ,26, 6123. [CrossRef]22. Yoon, J.Y.; Kwon, H.H.; Min, S.U.; Thiboutot, D.M.; Suh, D.H. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate improves acne in humans by modulatingintracellular molecular targets and inhibiting P Acnes. .J. Investig. Dermatol. 2013 ,133, 429–440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Feily, A.; Saki, J.; Maraghi, S.; Moosavi, Z.; Khademvatan, S.; Siahpoosh, A. In vitro activity of green tea extract against Leishmaniamajor promastigotes. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2012 ,50, 233–236. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Mazzanti, G.; Di Sotto, A.; Vitalone, A. Hepatotoxicity of green tea: An update. Arch. Toxicol. 2015 ,89, 1175–1191. [CrossRef][PubMed]25. Oketch-Rabah, H.A.; Roe, A.L.; Rider, C.V .; Bonkovsky, H.L.; Giancaspro, G.I.; Navarro, V .; Paine, M.F.; Betz, J.M.; Marles, R.J.;
Casper, S.; et al. United States Pharmacopeia (USP) comprehensive review of the hepatotoxicity of green tea extracts. Toxicol. Rep.2020 ,7, 386–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Welch, V .; Petticrew, M.; Petkovic, J.; Moher, D.; Waters, E.; White, H.; Tugwell, P . Extending the PRISMA statement to equity- 664focused systematic reviews (PRISMA-E 2012): Explanation and elaboration. Int. J. Equity Health 2015 ,14, 92. [CrossRef]27. Chiu, A.E.; Chan, J.L.; Kern, D.G.; Kohler, S.; Rehmus, W.E.; Kimball, A.B. Double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of green teaextracts in the clinical and histologic appearance of photoaging skin. Dermatol. Surg. 2005 ,31, 855–860. [CrossRef]28. Janjua, R.; Munoz, C.; Gorell, E.; Rehmus, W.; Egbert, B.; Kern, D.; Chang, A.L.S. A two-year, double-blind, randomizedplacebo-controlled trial of oral green tea polyphenols on the long-term clinical and histologic appearance of photoaging skin.Dermatol. Surg. 2009 ,35, 1057–1065. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Granger, C.; Aladren, S.; Delgado, J.; Garre, A.; Trullas, C.; Gilaberte, Y. Prospective evaluation of the efﬁcacy of a food supplement
Dermatol. Surg. 2009 ,35, 1057–1065. [CrossRef] [PubMed]29. Granger, C.; Aladren, S.; Delgado, J.; Garre, A.; Trullas, C.; Gilaberte, Y. Prospective evaluation of the efﬁcacy of a food supplementin increasing photoprotection and improving selective markers related to skin photo-ageing. Dermatol. Ther. 2020 ,10, 163–178.[CrossRef]30. Heinrich, U.; Moore, C.E.; De Spirt, S.; Tronnier, H.; Stahl, W. Green tea polyphenols provide photoprotection, increasemicrocirculation, and modulate skin properties of women. J. Nutr. 2011 ,141, 1202–1208. [CrossRef]31. Rhodes, L.E.; Darby, G.; Massey, K.A.; Clarke, K.A.; Dew, T.P .; Farrar, M.D.; Bennet, S.; Watson, R.E.B.; Williamson, G.; Nicolaou,A. Oral green tea catechin metabolites are incorporated into human skin and protect against UV radiation-induced cutaneousinﬂammation in association with reduced production of pro-inﬂammatory eicosanoid 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. Br. J.Nutr. 2013 ,110, 891–900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutr. 2013 ,110, 891–900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Farrar, M.D.; Nicolaou, A.; Clarke, K.A.; Mason, S.; Massey, K.A.; Dew, T.P .; Watson, R.E.B.; Williamson, G.; Rhodes, L.E. Arandomized controlled trial of green tea catechins in protection against ultraviolet radiation–induced cutaneous inﬂammation, 2.Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015 ,102, 608–615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Farrar, M.D.; Huq, R.; Mason, S.; Nicolaou, A.; Clarke, K.A.; Dew, T.P .; Williamson, G.; Watson, R.E.B.; Rhodes, L.E. Oral greentea catechins do not provide photoprotection from direct DNA damage induced by higher dose solar simulated radiation: Arandomized controlled trial. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2018 ,78, 414–416. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Charoenchon, N.; Rhodes, L.E.; Nicolaou, A.; Williamson, G.; Watson, R.E.B.; Farrar, M.D. Ultraviolet radiation-induceddegradation of dermal extracellular matrix and protection by green tea catechins: A randomized controlled trial. Clin. Exp.
Dermatol. 2022 ,47, 1314–1323. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Lu, P .H.; Hsu, C.H. Does supplementation with green tea extract improve acne in post-adolescent women? A randomized,double-blind, and placebo-controlled clinical trial. Complement Ther. Med. 2016 ,25, 159–163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Chiaverini, C.; Roger, C.; Fontas, E.; Bourrat, E.; Bourdon-Lanoy, E.; Labr èze, C.; Mazereeuw, J.; Vabres, P .; Bodemer, C.; Lacour,J.P . Oral epigallocatechin-3-gallate for treatment of dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: A multicentre, randomized, crossover,double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Orphanet. J. Rare Dis. 2016 ,11, 31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 20 of 2137. Chiu, H.F.; Lin, T.Y.; Shen, Y.C.; Venkatakrishnan, K.; Wang, C.K. Improvement of green tea polyphenol with milk on skin withrespect to antioxidation in healthy adults: A double-blind placebo-controlled randomized crossover clinical trial. Food Funct.2016 ,7, 893–901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Megow, I.; Darvin, M.E.; Meinke, M.C.; Lademann, J. A randomized controlled trial of green tea beverages on the in vivo radicalscavenging activity in human skin. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2017 ,30, 225–233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]39. Huang, A.H.; Chien, A.L. Photoaging: A review of current literature. Curr. Derm. Rep. 2020 ,9, 22–29. [CrossRef]40. Guan, L.L.; Lim, H.W.; Mohammad, T.F. Sunscreens and photoaging: A review of current literature. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 2021 ,22, 819–828. [CrossRef] [PubMed]41. Yaar, M.; Gilchrest, B.A. Photoageing: Mechanism, prevention and therapy. Br. J. Dermatol. 2007 ,157, 874–887. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]42. Salminen, A.; Kaarniranta, K.; Kauppinen, A. Photoaging: UV radiation-induced inﬂammation and immunosuppressionaccelerate the aging process in the skin. Inﬂamm. Res. 2022 ,71, 817–831. [CrossRef]43. Papaccio, F.; D’Arino, A.; Caputo, S.; Bellei, B. Focus on the contribution of oxidative stress in skin aging. Antioxidants 2022 ,11, 1121.[CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Fisher, G.J.; Kang, S.; Varani, J.; Bata-Csorgo, Z.; Wan, Y.; Datta, S.; Voorhees, J.J. Mechanisms of photoaging and chronologicalskin aging. Arch. Dermatol. 2002 ,138, 1462–1470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Cao, C.; Xiao, Z.; Wu, Y.; Ge, C. Diet and skin aging-from the perspective of food nutrition. Nutrients 2020 ,12, 870. [CrossRef]46. Fitzpatrick, T.B. The validity and practicality of sun-reactive skin types I through VI. Arch. Dermatol. 1988 ,124, 869–871. [CrossRef]47. Jiang, S.J.; Chu, A.W.; Lu, Z.F.; Pan, M.H.; Che, D.F.; Zhou, X.J. Ultraviolet B-induced alterations of the skin barrier and epidermal
calcium gradient. Exp. Dermatol. 2007 ,16, 985–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Emri, G.; Paragh, G.; T ósaki,Á.; Janka, E.; Koll ár, S.; Heged˝ us, C.; Gell én, E.; Horkay, I.; Koncz, G.; Remenyik, É. Ultravioletradiation-mediated development of cutaneous melanoma: An update. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 2018 ,185, 169–175. [CrossRef]49. Mullenders, L.H. Solar UV damage to cellular DNA: From mechanisms to biological effects. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2018 ,17,1842–1852. [CrossRef]50. Brem, R.; Guven, M.; Karran, P . Oxidatively-generated damage to DNA and proteins mediated by photosensitized UVA. FreeRadicals Biol. Med. 2017 ,107, 101–109. [CrossRef]51. Chaiprasongsuk, A.; Panich, U. Role of Phytochemicals in Skin Photoprotection via Regulation of Nrf2. Front. Pharmacol. 2022 ,13, 823881. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Rahman, M.M.; Rahaman, M.S.; Islam, M.R.; Rahman, F.; Mithi, F.M.; Alqahtani, T.; Almikhlaﬁ, M.A.; Alghamdi, S.Q.; Alruwaili,
A.S.; Hossain, M.S.; et al. Role of phenolic compounds in human disease: Current knowledge and future prospects. Molecules2022 ,27, 233. [CrossRef]53. Heinrich, U.; Neukam, K.; Tronnier, H.; Sies, H.; Stahl, W. Long-term ingestion of high ﬂavanol cocoa provides photoprotectionagainst UV induced erythema and improves skin condition in women. J. Nutr. 2006 ,136, 1565–1569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Chen, Z.; Zhu, Q.Y.; Wong, Y.F.; Zhang, Z.; Chung, H.Y. Stabilizing effect of ascorbic acid on green tea catechins. J. Agric. FoodChem. 1998 ,46, 2512–2516. [CrossRef]55. McArdle, F.; Rhodes, L.E.; Parslew, R.; Jack, C.I.; Friedmann, P .S.; Jackson, M.J. UVR-induced oxidative stress in human skinin vivo: Effects of oral vitamin C supplementation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2002 ,33, 1355–1362. [CrossRef]56. Türko˘ glu, M.; U˘ gurlu, T.; Gedik, G.; Yılmaz, A.M.; Yalçin, A.S. In vivo evaluation of black and green tea dermal products againstUV radiation. Drug Discov. Ther. 2010 ,4, 362–367.
56. Türko˘ glu, M.; U˘ gurlu, T.; Gedik, G.; Yılmaz, A.M.; Yalçin, A.S. In vivo evaluation of black and green tea dermal products againstUV radiation. Drug Discov. Ther. 2010 ,4, 362–367.57. Kapoor, M.P .; Sugita, M.; Fukuzawa, Y.; Timm, D.; Ozeki, M.; Okubo, T. Green tea catechin association with ultraviolet radiation-induced erythema: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Molecules 2021 ,26, 3702. [CrossRef]58. Huang, A.; Honda, Y.; Li, P .; Tanaka, T.; Baba, S. Integration of epigallocatechin gallate in gelatin sponges attenuates matrixmetalloproteinase-dependent degradation and increases bone formation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 6042. [CrossRef]59. DePhillipo, N.N.; Aman, Z.S.; Kennedy, M.I.; Begley, J.P .; Moatshe, G.; LaPrade, R.F. Efﬁcacy of vitamin C supplementationon collagen synthesis and oxidative stress after musculoskeletal injuries: A systematic review. Orthop. J. Sports Med. 2018 ,6,2325967118804544. [CrossRef]
2325967118804544. [CrossRef]60. Melnik, B.C.; John, S.M.; Schmitz, G. Over-stimulation of insulin/IGF-1 signaling by western diet may promote diseases ofcivilization: Lessons learnt from laron syndrome. Nutr. Metab. 2011 ,8, 41. [CrossRef]61. Zouboulis, C.C.; Eady, A.; Philpott, M.; Goldsmith, L.A.; Orfanos, C.; Cunliffe, W.C.; Rosenﬁeld, R. What is the pathogenesis ofacne? Exp. Dermatol. 2005 ,14, 143–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]62. Williams, H.C.; Dellavalle, R.P .; Garner, S. Acne vulgaris. Lancet 2012 ,379, 361–372. [CrossRef]63. Zaenglein, A.L.; Pathy, A.L.; Schlosser, B.J.; Alikhan, A.; Baldwin, H.E.; Berson, D.S.; Bowe, W.P .; Graber, E.M.; Harper, J.C.; Kang,S.; et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2016 ,74, 945–973. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Elsaie, M.L.; Abdelhamid, M.F.; Elsaaiee, L.T.; Emam, H.M. The efﬁcacy of topical 2% green tea lotion in mild-to-moderate acnevulgaris. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2009 ,8, 358–364.
vulgaris. J. Drugs Dermatol. 2009 ,8, 358–364.65. Sharquie, K.E.; Al-Turﬁ, I.A.; Al-Shimary, W.M. Treatment of acne vulgaris with 2% topical tea lotion. Saudi Med. J. 2006 ,27, 83–85.[PubMed]66. Sharquie, K.E.; Noaimi, A.A.; Al-Salih, M.M. Topical therapy of acne vulgaris using 2% tea lotion in comparison with 5% zincsulphate solution. Saudi Med. J. 2008 ,29, 1757–1761.
Nutrients 2022 ,14, 3149 21 of 2167. Mahmood, T.; Akhtar, N.; Khan, B.A. Outcomes of 3% green tea emulsion on skinsebum production in male volunteers. Bosn. J.Basic Med. Sci. 2010 ,10, 260–264. [CrossRef]68. Jung, M.K.; Ha, S.; Son, J.A.; Song, J.H.; Houh, Y.; Cho, E.; Chun, J.H.; Yoon, S.R.; Yang, Y.; Bang, S.I.; et al. Polyphenon-60displays a therapeutic effect on acne by suppression of TLR2 and IL-8 expression via down-regulating the ERK1/2 pathway. Arch.Dermatol. Res. 2012 ,304, 655–663. [CrossRef]69. Waranuch, N.; Phimnuan, P .; Yakaew, S.; Nakyai, W.; Grandmottet, F.; Onlom, C.; Srivilai, J.; Viyoch, J. Antiacne and antiblotchactivities of a formulated combination of Aloe barbadensis leaf powder, Garcinia mangostana peel extract, and Camellia sinensis leafextract. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2019 ,12, 383–391. [CrossRef]70. Bruckner-Tuderman, L. Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: Pathogenesis and clinical features. Dermatol. Clin. 2010 ,28, 107–114.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]71. Chow, H.H.; Cai, Y.; Alberts, D.S.; Hakim, I.; Dorr, R.; Shahi, F.; Crowell, J.A.; Yang, C.S.; Hara, Y. Phase I pharmacokinetic studyof tea polyphenols following single-dose administration of epigallocatechin gallate and polyphenon E. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark.Prev. 2001 ,10, 53–58.72. Schommer, N.N.; Gallo, R.L. Structure and function of the human skin microbiome. Trends Microbiol. 2013 ,21, 660–668. [CrossRef]73. Langley-Evans, S.C. Consumption of black tea elicits an increase in plasma antioxidant potential in humans. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr.2000 ,5, 309–315.74. Dubeau, S.; Samson, G.; Tajmir-Riahi, H. Dual effect of milk on the antioxidant capacity of green, Darjeeling, and English breakfastteas. Food Chem. 2010 ,122, 539–545. [CrossRef]75. Egert, S.; Tereszczuk, J.; Wein, S.; Müller, M.J.; Frank, J.; Rimbach, G.; Wolffram, S. Simultaneous ingestion of dietary proteins
reduces the bioavailability of galloylated catechins from green tea in humans. Eur. J. Nutr. 2013 ,52, 281–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Lorenz, M.; Jochmann, N.; von Krosigk, A.; Martus, P .; Baumann, G.; Stangl, K.; Stangl, V . Addition of milk prevents vascularprotective effects of tea. Eur. Heart J. 2007 ,28, 219–223. [CrossRef]77. Zhang, B.; Rusciano, D.; Osborne, N.N. Orally administered epigallocatechin gallate attenuates retinal neuronal death in vivoand light-induced apoptosis in vitro. Brain Res. 2008 ,1198 , 141–152. [CrossRef]78. Percevault, S.; Charpiat, B.; Leboss é, F.; Mabrut, J.Y.; Vial, T.; Colom, M. Green tea and hepatoxicity: Two case reports. Therapie2021 , S0040-5957(21)00209-2. [CrossRef]79. EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS); Younes, M.; Aggett, P .; Aguilar, F.; Crebelli, R.;Dusemund, B.; Filipiˇ c, M.; Frutos, M.J.; Galtier, P .; Gott, D.; et al. Scientiﬁc opinion on the safety of green tea catechins. EFSA J.
2018 ,16, e05239.80. Chakrawarti, L.; Agrawal, R.; Dang, S.; Gupta, S.; Gabrani, R. Therapeutic effects of EGCG: A patent review. Expert Opin. Ther.Pat. 2016 ,26, 907–916.81. Tzellos, T.; Sardeli, C.; Lallas, A.; Papazisis, G.; Chourdakis, M.; Kouvelas, D. Efﬁcacy, safety and tolerability of green tea catechinsin the treatment of external anogenital warts: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2011 ,25,345–353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]82. Kim, H.K.; Chang, H.K.; Baek, S.Y .; Chung, J.O.; Rha, C.S.; Kim, S.Y .; Kim, B.J.; Kim, M.N. Treatment of Atopic Dermatitis Associatedwith Malassezia sympodialis by Green Tea Extracts Bath Therapy: A Pilot Study . Mycobiology 2012 ,40, 124–128. [CrossRef]83. Clouth, A.; Schöfer, H. Treatment of recalcitrant facial verrucae vulgares with sinecatechins (greentea catechins) ointment. J. Eur.Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2015 ,29, 178–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Butt, M.S.; Ahmad, R.S.; Sultan, M.T.; Qayyum, M.M.; Naz, A. Green Tea and Anticancer Perspectives: Updates from Last Decade.
Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2015 ,29, 178–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]84. Butt, M.S.; Ahmad, R.S.; Sultan, M.T.; Qayyum, M.M.; Naz, A. Green Tea and Anticancer Perspectives: Updates from Last Decade.Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2015 ,55, 792–805. [CrossRef] [PubMed]85. Katiyar, S.K.; Mohan, R.R.; Agarwal, R.; Mukhtar, H. Protection against induction of mouse skin papillomas with low and highrisk of conversion to malignancy by green tea polyphenols. Carcinogenesis 1997 ,18, 497–502. [CrossRef]86. Camouse, M.M.; Domingo, D.S.; Swain, F.R.; Conrad, E.P .; Matsui, M.S.; Maes, D.; Declercq, L.; Cooper, K.D.; Stevens, S.R.; Baron,E.D. Topical application of green and white tea extracts provides protection from solar-simulated ultraviolet light in human skin.Exp. Dermatol. 2009 ,18, 522–526. [CrossRef]87. Mittal, A.; Piyathilake, C.; Hara, Y.; Katiyar, S.K. Exceptionally high protection of photocarcinogenesis by topical application of
(–)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate in hydrophilic cream in SKH-1 hairless mouse model: Relationship to inhibition of UVB-inducedglobal DNA hypomethylation. Neoplasia 2003 ,5, 555–565. [CrossRef]88. Hajiaghaalipour, F.; Kanthimathi, M.S.; Abdulla, M.A.; Sanusi, J. The Effect of Camellia sinensis on Wound Healing Potential inan Animal Model. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013 ,2013 , 386734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Kessels, J.; V oeten, L.; Nelemans, P .; Cleutjens, J.; Hillen, L.M.; Mosterd, K.; Kelleners-Smeets, N.W.J. Topical Sinecatechins, 10%,Ointment for Superficial Basal Cell Carcinoma: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2017 ,153, 1061–1063. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Mahmood, T.; Akhtar, N. Combined topical application of lotus and green tea improves facial skin surface parameters. RejuvenationRes. 2013 ,16, 91–97. [CrossRef]91. Dal Belo, S.E.; Gaspar, L.R.; Maia Campos, P .M. Photoprotective effects of topical formulations containing a combination of
Ginkgo biloba and green tea extracts. Phytother. Res. 2011 ,25, 1854–1860. [CrossRef] [PubMed]92. Morré, D.J.; Geilen, C.C.; Welch, A.M.; Morr é, D.M. Response of carcinoma in situ (actinic keratosis) to green tea concentrate pluscapsicum. J. Diet. Suppl. 2009 ,6, 385–389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
