Almost any sequence in the genome and every coding and non-coding RNA in the transcriptome has the potential to be modulated for therapeutic purposes through the intro -duction of exogenous nucleic acids into a cell. Over the past two decades, the clinical application of gene-based ther -apy for treating or preventing a wide range of diseases has  been investigated1. However, success in clinical trials  has been limited owing to numerous technical barriers.A fundamental engineering challenge of gene-based therapy is the development of safe and effective deliv -ery vectors. Both viral vectors (reviewed in REFS  2,3) and non-viral vectors are used for systemic delivery in clinical trials. In fact, ~70% of gene therapy clinical tri -als carried out so far have used modified viruses such as  retroviruses , lentiviruses , adenoviruses  and adeno-associated viruses  (AAVs) to deliver genes. Although they have substantially advanced the field of gene therapy, several
limitations are associated with viral vectors, including carcinogenesis4, immunogenicity5, broad tropism6, lim -ited DNA packaging capacity7 and difficulty of vector production8. Non-viral gene therapy has the potential to address many of these limitations, particularly with respect to safety. For example, synthetic ‘vehicles’ tend to have lower immunogenicity than viral vectors, and patients do not have pre-existing immunity as is the case with some viral systems9,10. Non-viral vectors also have the potential to deliver larger genetic payloads and are typically easier to synthesize than viral vectors9,10. A diverse collection of synthetic vectors has been developed to bring therapeutic nucleic acids to their sites of action. Nevertheless, few of these vectors have so far been devel -oped clinically owing to their low delivery efficiency rela -tive to viral vectors11. Whereas viruses have evolved to deliver their genomes efficiently to mammalian cells, most
synthetic vectors are unable to effectively transport their  payloads past the multiple barriers that confront them.This drawback may be about to change owing to developments in material sciences, which have yielded new polymers and lipids as delivery vectors9,12–15, as well as owing to the rapid progress of nanotechnology, which has enabled a better understanding of nanosized materials for gene delivery16,17. Moreover, recent advances in nucleic acid chemistry have improved potency and stability while reducing the immunogenicity of RNA molecules18–21.In this Review, we summarize the barriers of  and challenges to systemic delivery of nucleic acids, and discuss how non-viral vectors can overcome obstacles in the in vivo  delivery of DNA, mRNA, small interfer -ing RNA (siRNA) and microRNA (miRNA) mimics. In addition, we highlight some clinical trials that indicate the value of non-viral vectors in gene-based therapy.
Finally, we briefly comment on the potential use of non-viral vectors for systemic delivery of zinc-finger proteins  (ZFPs), transcription activator-like effectors  (TALEs) and CRISPR–Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short pal -indromic repeat–CRISPR-associated) systems, which have emerged as the next generation of tools to achieve precise gene editing with minimal adverse effects.1David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.2Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.3Department of Anesthesiology, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.4Department of Biology, MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.5Harvard–MIT Division of Health Sciences & T echnology, MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.6Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.Correspondence to D.G.A. e-mail: dgander@mit.edudoi:10.1038/nrg3763
Massachusetts 02139, USA.6Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.Correspondence to D.G.A. e-mail: dgander@mit.edudoi:10.1038/nrg3763Published online 15 July 2014Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapyHao Yin1, Rosemary L. Kanasty1,2, Ahmed A. Eltoukhy1, Arturo J. Vegas1,3,  J. Robert Dorkin1,4 and Daniel G. Anderson1–3,5,6Abstract | Gene-based therapy is the intentional modulation of gene expression in specific cells to treat pathological conditions. This modulation is accomplished by introducing exogenous nucleic acids such as DNA, mRNA, small interfering RNA (siRNA), microRNA (miRNA) or antisense oligonucleotides. Given the large size and the negative charge of these macromolecules, their delivery is typically mediated by carriers or vectors. In this Review, we introduce the biological barriers to gene delivery in vivo  and discuss recent
advances in material sciences, nanotechnology and nucleic acid chemistry that have yielded promising non-viral delivery systems, some of which are currently undergoing testing in clinical trials. The diversity of these systems highlights the recent progress of gene-based therapy using non-viral approaches.REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 541© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
In vivo  DNA deliveryAccording to the American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy, DNA therapy remains a strictly experimen -tal approach in the United States, and no gene thera -peutics have so far been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) despite many clinical trials worldwide. Nevertheless, recent clinical progress, including the approval of the AAV-based gene thera -peutic Glybera for use in Europe, has marked a resur -gence of optimism for a biomedical field burdened by a tumultuous history. Many non-viral systems have been developed for therapeutic DNA delivery, including the injection of naked DNA alone or in combination with physical methods22–26 such as gene gun, electroporation, hydrodynamic delivery, sonoporation and magnetofec -tion. These techniques are generally less applicable to systemic gene delivery in humans than in small ani -mals such as mice; hence, a range of synthetic delivery vectors has also been developed, including lipids and
liposomes10,27, polymers (linear and branched polymers, dendrimers and polysaccharides)9,28,29, polymersomes30, cell-penetrating peptides31 and inorganic nanoparticles32.Barriers to non-viral DNA delivery.  One of the chal -lenges to systemic delivery of DNA therapeutics is the potential degradation of the therapeutic gene by endo -nucleases in physiological fluids and the extracellular space (FIG. 1 ). The half-life of plasmid DNA has been esti -mated to be ten minutes following intravenous injection in mice33. For this reason, entrapment of the DNA in a nanoparticulate carrier is desirable both to provide pro -tection from endonuclease degradation and to improve circulation time. For example, zwitterionic lipids have been shown to form a stable structure that envelops DNA and can be used in combination with other formulations to enhance gene delivery in vivo27,34,35. In addition, poly -plexes are spherical or doughnut-shaped nanoparticulate
complexes formed from the condensation of negatively charged plasmid DNA by cationic polymers9. Similarly, mixtures of cationic lipids, neutral lipids and DNA can spontaneously assemble into lipoplexes or liposomes, in which DNA is entrapped within lamellar or inverted hexagonal arrangements of lipid bilayers36. However, at high salt concentrations, electrostatic repulsion between the positively charged complexes is reduced, and they are therefore prone to colloidal instability and aggrega -tion in physiological fluids37. In particular, aggregation of nanoparticles in the blood as a result of either colloidal instability or interaction with blood components (such as serum proteins and erythrocytes) can inhibit locali -zation to the desired tissues, induce rapid clearance by circulating macrophages and even cause embolism in lung capillaries38.The challenges of selective accumulation at the tissue of interest, cellular internalization and endosomal escape
are common to the delivery of all nucleic acid therapeu -tics. However, DNA delivery must also provide transport into the nucleus to allow access to the transcriptional machinery (FIG. 1 ). It was reported nearly 30 years ago that direct microinjection of plasmid DNA that encoded thymidine kinase into the nuclei of thymidine kinase-deficient cells resulted in expression of the kinase in 50–100% of the nuclei, as detected by the incorporation of 3H-thymidine into DNA following autoradiographic analyses39. However, in >1,000 cells that received cyto -plasmic injections of the same plasmid DNA, no thymi -dine kinase activity was detected. The importance of the Nature Reviews | GeneticsDNA mRNA siRNA or miRNADNAmRNARibosomeNucleussiRNA ormiRNARISCMacrophageEndosomeEndocytosisNuclearporeTranscriptionReceptorSerumendonucleasesSystemic deliveryExtravasationBlood vesselExtracellular matrixIntracellular barriers Extracellular barriers
RISCMacrophageEndosomeEndocytosisNuclearporeTranscriptionReceptorSerumendonucleasesSystemic deliveryExtravasationBlood vesselExtracellular matrixIntracellular barriers Extracellular barriersFigure 1 | Barriers to successful in vivo  delivery of nucleic acids using non-viral vectors.  Various non-viral vectors can be used to deliver DNA, mRNA and short double-stranded RNA, including small interfering RNA (siRNA) and microRNA (miRNA) mimics. These vectors need to prevent degradation by serum endonucleases and evade immune detection (which could be achieved by chemical modifications of nucleic acids and encapsulation of vectors). They also need to avoid renal clearance from the blood and prevent nonspecific interactions (using polyethylene glycol (PEG) or through specific characteristics of particles). Moreover, these vectors need to extravasate from the bloodstream to reach target tissues (which requires certain
characteristics of particles and specific ligands), and mediate cell entry and endosomal escape (by specific ligands and key components of carriers). siRNA and miRNA mimics must be loaded into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), whereas mRNA must bind to the translational machinery. DNA has to be further transported to the nucleus to exert its activity.REVIEWS542 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
RetrovirusesSingle-stranded RNA viruses that use reverse transcriptase to transcribe their RNA into DNA, which can be integrated into the host genome. The viral DNA can be transcribed, translated and packed into new viruses. Replication-defective retroviruses are commonly used for gene therapy purposes. Most of these retroviruses are only active in dividing cells.LentivirusesA subclass of retroviruses that are active in non-dividing cells. The replication-defective viruses are used both as a research tool to introduce  a gene in vitro  or in vivo  and  for gene therapy. They infect cells with high efficiency and introduce stable expression.AdenovirusesDNA viruses that do not integrate into the host genome and that usually do not replicate during cell division. Many of them trigger fast immune responses. For gene therapy purposes, they are usually applied in conditions in which temporary expression of proteins is required.Adeno-associated viruses
proteins is required.Adeno-associated viruses(AAVs). DNA viruses that have very low but measurable genome integration rates and that are used as vectors for gene therapy. They are able to infect both dividing and non-dividing cells with high efficiency and long persistence. Although they have small packing capability, they are preferred for gene therapy owing to their low   immunogenicity and  low cytotoxicity.Zinc-finger proteins(ZFPs). DNA-binding proteins that consist of tandem arrays of zinc-fingers, which are protein structure motifs that contain one or more zinc ions. Engineered zinc-fingers have been shown to recognize three specific base pairs of DNA sequences and can be assembled in tandem to recognize specific nucleic acid sequences. The process of engineering is difficult and requires expertise.nuclear barrier is further highlighted by the observation that quiescent or slowly dividing cells with intact nuclei are
generally more difficult to transfect than cells that divide rapidly and that undergo frequent breakdown of their nuclear envelopes40. Both deterministic and stochastic kinetic models of synthetic gene delivery have identified  nuclear uptake as a potential rate-limiting step41,42.Vector unpacking is generally assumed to be neces -sary for DNA release and gene expression, but the extent to which dissociation affects gene delivery is unclear. For lipoplexes, it has been proposed that fusion of the cationic lipid with endosomal membrane lipids facili -tates not only endosomal escape but also DNA release43. Polyplexes have been observed to localize intact to the nucleus, where they presumably undergo dissocia -tion44,45. For certain polyplexes, mechanistic studies have reported slow vector unpacking as an explanation for decreased transfection efficiency46. Lipoplex-delivered plasmids are more efficiently expressed by nearly tenfold
— on the basis of protein expression per plasmid num -ber in the nucleus — than polyplex-delivered plasmids, which might be a potential consequence of incomplete polyplex dissociation in the nucleus47.Expression of the transgene and production of the protein of interest are required for function. Plasmids are routinely used as expression vectors in non-viral gene therapy studies owing to their ease of construction and amplification. Moreover, plasmids are episomal and  non-integrating, which reduces the risk of insertional mutagenesis compared with viral vectors. The choice of enhancer–promoter combination has a great impact on both the level and the duration of transgene expres -sion. Viral enhancers and promoters derived from cyto  megalovirus (CMV), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and simian virus 40 (SV40) are frequently used to achieve high levels of expression in a range of mam -malian cell and tissue types, but this expression is often
transient48. Constitutive mammalian promoters, such as the human ubiquitin C ( UBC ) and the eukaryotic trans -
malian cell and tissue types, but this expression is often transient48. Constitutive mammalian promoters, such as the human ubiquitin C ( UBC ) and the eukaryotic trans -lation elongation factor 1 alpha 1 ( EEF1A1 ) promoters, have been observed to result in more persistent expres -sion49. Tissue-specific promoters — such as the alpha-  fetoprotein ( AFP ) enhancer–albumin ( ALB ) promoter, the expression of which is restricted to the liver50 — offer the possibility of enhanced safety by mini -mizing off-target transgene expression. Numerous cis-acting sequences, including various polyadenylation signals51, introns51 and scaffold/matrix attachment regions   (S/MARs)52, have been reported to increase the level and persistence of transgene expression. Moreover, DNA size and topology have been shown to affect gene expression efficiency, and small covalently closed circular plasmids could mediate greater levels of transgene expression than
large or linearized constructs53. Compact DNA vectors that lack a bacterial backbone (which are known as minicircles) maintain superior levels and duration of gene expression relative to full-length DNA plasmids54,55. In an effort to promote longer-term expression, various systems for transgene integration have been developed, including transposition systems based on the recombi -nases phiC31  (REF.  56), PiggyBac57 and Sleeping Beauty58. However, the safety of these integrating systems with respect to undesired adverse effects as a result of transgene insertion has not yet been established2.Lipid-based DNA vectors.  Lipid-based vectors are among the most widely used non-viral gene carriers. It was first shown in 1980 that liposomes composed of the phospho -lipid phosphatidylserine could entrap and deliver SV40 DNA to monkey kidney cells59. More efficient transfec -tion was obtained in a later study, which showed that the
synthetic cationic lipid DOTMA spontaneously formed small, uniform liposomes that were capable of efficient encapsulation and delivery of DNA to various mam -malian cell lines60. Cationic lipids such as DOTMA are characterized structurally by three components: a cati -onic head group, a hydrophobic tail and a linking group between these domains10. DOSPA, DOTAP , DMRIE and DC-cholesterol10 feature particular modifications of these three domains and are examples of cationic lipids that have been used for liposomal gene delivery43 (FIG. 2a ). Neutral lipids, such as the fusogenic phospholipid DOPE or the membrane component cholesterol, have been included in liposomal formulations as ‘helper lipids’ to enhance transfection activity and nanoparticle stability27. Limitations of cationic lipids include low efficacy owing to poor stability and rapid clearance61, as well as the genera -tion of inflammatory or anti-inflammatory responses62.
Recently, Allovectin -7, which is a locally administered for -mulation consisting of DMRIE–DOPE and a DNA plas -mid, failed to meet its efficacy end points in a Phase III clinical trial for treatment of advanced metastatic mela -noma63. Nonetheless, various liposomal formulations continue to be developed clinically, including DOTAP–cholesterol, GAP-DMORIE–DPyPE and GL67A–DOPE–DMPE–polyethylene glycol (PEG) (TABLE 1 ).Polymeric DNA vectors.  Cationic polymers constitute an alternative class of non-viral DNA vectors and are attrac -tive partly as a result of their immense chemical diversity and their potential for functionalization. Early examples of polymeric DNA vectors are poly( l-lysine) (PLL) and polyethylenimine (PEI). PLL is a homopolypeptide of the basic amino acid lysine (FIG. 2b ), and its ability to condense DNA has been known at least since the 1960s (REFS  64,65). Pioneering studies in the late 1980s indi -cated that PLL conjugated to the asialoorosomucoid
glycoprotein could potentially be applied in non-viral liver-targeted gene delivery66,67. In general, in the absence
cated that PLL conjugated to the asialoorosomucoid glycoprotein could potentially be applied in non-viral liver-targeted gene delivery66,67. In general, in the absence of a lysosomal disruption agent such as chloroquine, PLL has fairly poor transfection activity, presumably because at physiological pH its amine groups tend to be posi -tively charged and therefore have low capacity for endo -somal buffering and lysis10. Moreover, unmodified PLL shows fairly marked in vitro  cytotoxicity68. Numerous modified variants of PLL with enhanced gene delivery properties have been reported69. One example includes PLL covered with the hydrophilic polymer PEG, which is designed to minimize nonspecific interaction with serum components and thereby increase circulation time70,71. The clinical potential of PEGylated PLL was investigated as a vector to treat cystic fibrosis, and there REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 543
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Nature Reviews | GeneticsOO N+H3CCH3H3COO N+CH3 H3CNHNH2+O+H2N+H3NNH3+OO N+H3CCH3H3COOOO N+H3CCH3H3CHO O NHON+H3CCH3HOO OOOPON+CH3H3CH3CO–OOO OOOPON+CH3H3CH3CO–ODOTMA DOSPAHNONH2n HNbaHNNHNNHNHNNHNHH2NO N OO OOHnnnO ONCH3 H3COHONH2OHOOHONHOHOOn mO NN ONHHNNNH OHNONHNHN ONNHNHNNO ONHNNHNNHNOOONOHNNNHNOOHOHOOHO OHOOHOHOOHOSHOOOHOOHHOOOOHOHHOOOOH HOOHOOOHSOHOHNNH2+NH+H2Nn/uni03B2-cyclodextrin-containing polycationDOPE DSPCDOTAP DMRIEBranched PEIChitosanPAMAM dendrimerDC-cholesterol CholesterolpDMAEMA Poly( /uni03B2-amino ester)Poly(L-lysine) Linear PEIFigure 2 | Chemical structures of non-viral DNA vectors.  a | Chemical structures of cationic and neutral lipids are shown. Liposomal formulations used for DNA delivery typically include a mixture of a neutral lipid and a cationic lipid. Cationic lipids (such as DOTMA, DOSPA, DOTAP , DMRIE and
DC-cholesterol) have an active role in DNA binding and transfection. They are characterized structurally by a cationic head group, a hydrophobic tail and a linker region. Neutral lipids (such as the phospholipids DSPC and DOPE, and the membrane component cholesterol) function as ‘helper lipids’ to further enhance nanoparticle stability and overall transfection efficacy. b | Chemical structures of selected polymeric DNA vectors that are commonly used in gene delivery studies and clinical trials are shown. Poly( l‑lysine) and polyethylenimine (PEI) are among the oldest and most commonly used polymeric gene vectors. To improve safety and efficacy, numerous other polymers have been studied for gene delivery, including methacrylate-based polymers such as poly[(2 -dimethylamino)  ethyl methacrylate] (pDMAEMA), carbohydrate-based polymers such as chitosan and β‑cyclodextrin-containing polycations, polyamidoamine
(PAMAM) dendrimers and degradable poly( β‑amino ester) polymers.REVIEWS544 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
T ranscription activator-like effectors(TALEs). Proteins that were first discovered in Xanthomonas  spp. bacteria and that bind to promoter sequences in host plants to facilitate infections. They contain a repeat domain of 34 amino acids. T wo critical amino acids in each repeat allow targeting of specific DNA bases. TALEs can be engineered in a time-consuming process by assembling repeat domains to recognize specific DNA sequences.CRISPR–Cas (Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat–CRISPR-associated). Defense systems against foreign DNA in bacteria and archaea, in which a short CRISPR RNA (crRNA) is used to guide the Cas nuclease to a specific target DNA sequence. These systems have been optimized to function in mammalian cells with high efficiency. The engineering process to target various DNA sequences is straightforward, and the cost is low.is a Phase I clinical trial supporting the safety and tol -
erability of these DNA nanoparticles, as well as some evidence for vector gene transfer72.PEI and its variants are among the most studied poly -meric materials for gene delivery (FIG. 2b ). With a nitrogen atom at every third position along the polymer, PEI has a high charge density at reduced pH values. This attrib -ute of PEI has been postulated to aid in condensation of DNA and endosomal escape73. The ability of PEI to promote gene transfection in vitro  and in vivo  was first demonstrated in 1995 (REF.  74). Soon after, it was shown that the transfection efficiency and cytotoxicity of PEI strongly depend on its structural properties, especially with respect to molecular weight75 and the linear versus branched forms76 (FIG. 2b ). In mice, intravenous injec -tion of PEI–DNA polyplexes has been observed to afford gene transfection in the lungs77, perhaps as a result of the accumulation of nanoparticle aggregates in pulmo -
nary capillaries78. Successful intratumoural gene delivery  in mice using PEI–DNA polyplexes has been reported79. In  humans, PEI has been studied for local gene therapy of various cancers (TABLE 1 ). Nonetheless, as PEI has been known to induce substantial cytotoxicity80, a range of modifications to PEI has been investigated. Examples include block co -polymers of PEG and PEI for improved stability and biocompatibility81,82, degradable disulphide-crosslinked PEIs for reduced toxicity83 and alkylated PEI for increased potency84,85. A PEG–PEI–cholesterol lipopolymer is under clinical investigation for immuno -therapy of ovarian and colorectal cancers through forced expression of the cytokine interleukin -12 (IL -12) (TABLE 1 ).To address issues of efficacy and toxicity associated with PLL and PEI, numerous other polymers are cur -rently being evaluated preclinically for DNA delivery, including poly[(2 -dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate]
(pDMAEMA), poly(β -amino ester)s, and various carbo -hydrate-based polymers and dendrimers9,10 (FIG. 2b ). One vector that has reached clinical development is a formu -lation that comprises the non-ionic poloxamer CRL1005 and the cationic surfactant benzalkonium chloride. This formulation is being evaluated in a Phase II/III study for a genetic vaccine to prevent CMV infection in patients who are undergoing allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplant (TABLE 1 ).In brief, although substantial progress has been made in the field of non-viral gene therapy over the past three decades, DNA-based drugs inherently pose greater deliv -ery and safety challenges than other nucleic acid therapeu -tics as a result of their large molecular sizes, the difficulty of crossing the nuclear barrier and the risk of mutagen -esis. Further clinical progress will be facilitated by addi -tional biological insights into the key rate-determining
steps that limit effective delivery and by a more com -plete understanding of structure–function relationships  for DNA delivery materials.In vivo  mRNA delivery
steps that limit effective delivery and by a more com -plete understanding of structure–function relationships  for DNA delivery materials.In vivo  mRNA deliveryThe potential of mRNA for therapeutic protein expres -sion in vivo has been investigated as an alternative to DNA-based gene therapy. Although mRNA is less stable than DNA, one of its advantages is reduced immuno -genicity. Moreover, there is no potential for mutagenesis Table 1 | Non-viral DNA vectors under clinical evaluationDelivery systemGene therapy drugSponsor Indications Phase Status ClinicalTrials.gov identifierDOTAP–cholesterolDOTAP–Chol -fus1MD Anderson Cancer Center Non-small-cell lung cancer I Completed NCT00059605I/II Active NCT01455389GAP-DMORIE–DPyPETetravalent dengue vaccineUS Army Medical Research and Materiel CommandDengue disease vaccine I Active NCT01502358GL67A–DOPE–DMPE–PEGpGM169/GL67A Imperial College London Cystic fibrosis II Active NCT01621867
PEI BC-819/PEI BioCancell Ltd. Bladder cancer II Active NCT00595088BC-819 BioCancell Ltd. Ovarian cancer I/II Completed NCT00826150DTA -H19 BioCancell Ltd. Pancreatic cancer I/II Completed NCT00711997SNS01 -T Senesco Technologies, Inc. Multiple myeloma and B cell lymphomaI/II Recruiting NCT01435720CYL -02 University Hospital, Toulouse Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma I Completed NCT01274455PEG–PEI–cholesterolEGEN -001 Gynecologic Oncology Group Ovarian, tubal and peritoneal cancersI Recruiting NCT01489371II Active NCT01118052EGEN -001-301 EGEN, Inc. Colorectal peritoneal cancer I/II Recruiting NCT01300858PEI–mannose–dextroseDermaVir/LC002 Genetic Immunity HIV vaccine II Active NCT00711230Poloxamer CRL1005–benzalkonium chlorideASP0113 Astellas Pharma Inc. CMV vaccine III Recruiting NCT01877655II Recruiting NCT01903928VCL -CB01 Astellas Pharma Inc. CMV vaccine II Completed NCT00285259CMV , cytomegalovirus; PEG, polyethylene glycol; PEI, polyethylenimine.REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 545© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
LiposomesVesicles of various sizes with  a lipid bilayer that can encapsulate small molecules or large molecules such as small interfering RNA or DNA. By fusing to the cell membrane, they facilitate delivery of the liposome contents in vitro  and in vivo .PolymersomesVesicles produced using co-polymers, which are made of two or more monomers, to allow both hydrophilic and lipophilic ability. They can encapsulate small molecules, proteins and DNA to form particles of various sizes, and are used for drug delivery systems in vitro  and in vivo .Cell-penetrating peptidesSmall peptides that can translocate across plasma membranes. By covalent or non-covalent binding of these peptides to small molecules, proteins, DNA, small interfering RNA or even nanoparticles, they could facilitate intracellular delivery of various types of molecules.Scaffold/matrix attachment regions(S/MARs). Anchor points of  the genomic DNA for the chromatin scaffold. They are
chromatin scaffold. They are found at introns or borders of transcription units, where they have an important role in separating these units and regulating gene expression.PhiC31A sequence-specific recombinase that mediates recombination between 2 specific 34 -bp sequences, which allows insertion of DNA into another DNA molecule or into the genome at specific sites.PiggyBacA transposon system composed of a transposon  and a transposase, which recognizes transposon-specific sequences on both ends of a vector and integrates the content into different DNA molecules or genome.Sleeping BeautyA transposon system reconstructed from DNA copies of salmon. The transposase was engineered  to facilitate robust and stable gene transfer.that results from genomic integration, and mRNA does not require nuclear localization for expression1,2 (FIG. 1 ).Barriers to non-viral mRNA delivery.  As mRNA mol -ecules are too large, hydrophilic and negatively charged
to diffuse across cell membranes on their own, deliv -ery materials or chemical modifications are generally required to bring therapeutic mRNA to its site of action — namely, to the cytosol of target cells. Systemically administered mRNA delivery systems are subject to a range of challenges to reach their site of action in the body. The ideal mRNA delivery system must protect against serum endonucleases, evade immune detection, prevent nonspecific interactions with proteins or non-target cells, avoid renal clearance, allow extravasation to reach target tissues and promote cell entry (FIG. 1 ). Methods developed to overcome obstacles for RNA delivery include chemical modification, direct injection and the use of nanoparticles as carriers.Non-viral mRNA delivery systems.  Unmodified mRNA can activate various Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and trig -ger an increase in cytokine levels and associated toxic -ity20,86,87. The modification of mRNA with a combination
of 2-thiouridine and 5 -methylcytidine has been shown to reduce immune stimulation through pattern recogni -tion receptors such as TLR3, TLR7, TLR8 and retinoic acid  receptor responder protein 3  (RARRES3; also known as  RIG-I)87, whereas the inclusion of pseudou -ridine in the mRNA (Ψ -mRNA) prevented activation of pattern recognition receptors18 and 2ʹ -5ʹ-oligoadenylate synthetase19. These modifications can also stabilize the mRNA against cleavage and ultimately improve  expression rates20.The serum protein erythropoietin (EPO) has been commonly used to test mRNA delivery owing to its potential as a therapeutic target and the ability to detect its expression in a non-invasive manner. EPO-encoding mRNA has been administered to mice using intraperito -neal, subcutaneous and intramuscular injections either naked or as a complex with a non-liposomal cationic polymer–lipid formulation20,87. Serum EPO levels gener -ally peak several hours after mRNA administration but
may be detected for more than a week depending on the
polymer–lipid formulation20,87. Serum EPO levels gener -ally peak several hours after mRNA administration but may be detected for more than a week depending on the dose and method of delivery20,87.Successful intranasal delivery and systemic delivery have been observed in mice using luciferase mRNA in vivo . Intranasal delivery was reported by complexing the mRNA either to the transfection reagent Stemfect or to a hydrophobic poly(β-amino ester) that had been coated with a positively charged lipid layer88,89. The mRNA complexed to Stemfect could also express  luciferase in the spleen when injected intravenously89.Several studies have already begun to examine the therapeutic potential of mRNA. A direct intramyocar -dial injection of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF -A)-encoding modified mRNA (modRNA) complexed with RNAiMAX  was reported to result  in reduced infarct size and apoptotic cell frequency in mice that had a myocardial infarction86. Whereas
the control group showed <20% survival by day 180,  the mice treated with VEGF -A-encoding modRNA had ~60% survival at the end of 1 year86. In another study, intranasal delivery of modified mRNA was used to treat congenital deficiency in pulmonary surfactant-associated protein B (PSPB) in mice. Untreated PSPB-deficient mice demonstrated 0% survival by day 5, whereas mice given repeated aerosolized administra -tions of modified PSPB-encoding mRNA showed >80% survival by day 30 (REF.  87).Taken together, although the idea of mRNA deliv -ery for gene-based therapy seems to be straightforward, mRNA therapeutics have not yet been fully developed and tested in clinical trials owing to immune responses, instability and delivery barriers. However, encouraged by recent progress in chemical modifications of mRNA and delivery vectors, several biotechnology companies that focus on the development of mRNA therapeutics have been founded and expanded.In vivo  siRNA delivery
In vivo  siRNA deliverySynthetic siRNAs are chemically synthesized double-stranded RNAs with structures that mimic the cleav -age products of the enzyme Dicer. They are typically 19–21  bp in length with 2 -nucleotide single-stranded overhangs at their 3ʹ ends. Upon introduction into the  cyto  plasm, synthetic siRNAs are incorporated into  the RNA interference (RNAi) machinery in the same  way as endogenous small RNAs. The great therapeutic potential of siRNA is a result of its ability to silence nearly any targeted gene after introduction into cells.Challenges of in vivo  siRNA delivery.  The biggest obsta -cle to the therapeutic use of siRNA is the need for in vivo  delivery. The delivery barriers for siRNA closely resem -ble the obstacles for mRNA delivery. In addition, siRNA requires integration into the RNAi machinery61,90 (FIG. 1 ).When administered intravenously, unmodified RNA can be cleaved by serum endonucleases and cause
activation of innate immunity91–93. Both nuclease sus -ceptibility and immunogenicity can be prevented by modifying the chemical structure of the siRNA strands. Common chemical modifications include replacement of the 2ʹ OH group of ribose with - O-methyl or 2ʹ fluoro groups, incorporation of locked or unlocked nucleic acids and substitution of phosphorothioate linkages in place of phosphodiester bonds21. Careful incorporation of these chemical modifications, along with judicious selection of the siRNA sequence, can prevent both deg -radation by endonucleases91,92 and recognition by the innate immune system94. Another approach to shield siRNA from degradation and immune recognition is to encapsulate it inside nanoparticles95.Interaction between delivery systems and various serum components can influence delivery in diverse ways. Some systems rely on interaction with serum proteins to permit their uptake by target cells96,97 (the
mechanisms of which are summarized in REF. 16). For example, some siRNA conjugates and liposomal delivery
proteins to permit their uptake by target cells96,97 (the mechanisms of which are summarized in REF. 16). For example, some siRNA conjugates and liposomal delivery particles interact with serum lipoproteins that facilitate their specific delivery into hepatocytes96,97. However, particles with high positive surface charges can aggregate REVIEWS546 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
RNAiMAXA commercial reagent that delivers small interfering RNAs into various types of cells in vitro  with high efficiency. As a cationic lipid formulation, it can also be used to deliver microRNA antagonists and mimics, as well as mRNAs.Glomerular filtration barrierA blood filtration interface in the kidney that allows free passage of small ions such as sodium and potassium but that retains large proteins. The cutoff to pass this barrier is ~70  kDa, and naked small interfering RNAs (~13  kDa) can thus be filtered through the kidney.unfavourably98. Moreover, adsorption of serum opsonins can tag particles for uptake by the mononuclear phago -cyte system70, a common mechanism through which delivery systems are cleared from the circulation and prevented from reaching target tissues. An accepted strategy for minimizing nonspecific interaction with serum components and thereby increasing circulation time involves steric shielding of the surface of delivery
vehicles with hydrophilic polymers (often PEG)70,71.A major route of elimination of siRNA from the bloodstream is through kidney filtration. As naked siRNA can pass through the glomerular filtration barrier99, many delivery systems prevent renal clearance by encap -sulating siRNA into particles larger than ~20  nm17. It should be noted that several highly efficacious delivery systems, including Dynamic PolyConjugates (DPCs)100 and triantennary N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) conjugates101, are smaller than this cutoff, which prob -ably reflects the fact that these delivery systems mainly deliver their payloads in the first pass through the liver. Some nanoparticulate systems undergo disassembly in  the glomerulus102,103. Interaction with the negatively charged glomerular basement membrane can disrupt the electrostatic interactions that are essential to the sta -bility of certain particles, which causes disassembly and  passage of siRNA into urine102,103.
passage of siRNA into urine102,103.Delivery systems that are not eliminated by degrada -tion, phagocytosis or glomerular filtration can leave the bloodstream by crossing the endothelium to reach target tissues. This occurs most readily in tissues with discon -tinuous endothelia, such as in liver tissues and many solid tumours90. Fenestrations in the liver sinusoidal endothelium permit particles of 100–200  nm in diameter to exit the bloodstream and gain access to hepatocytes and other liver cells104,105. In some tumours, a combina -tion of highly permeable endothelia and poor lymphatic drainage can lead to increased accumulation of circulat -ing nanoparticles in malignant tissue — an occurrence termed the enhanced permeation and retention effect106.Cellular uptake of siRNA delivery nanoparticles most often occurs through endocytosis. To enhance the rate of cell entry, many delivery systems incorporate ligands
that bind specifically to receptors on target cells to trigger receptor-mediated endocytosis107. This ligand–receptor interaction can be hindered by serum proteins adsorbed on the surface of the delivery vehicle108. Endocytosed materials are entrapped in membrane-bound endocytic vesicles, which fuse with early endosomes and become increasingly acidic as they mature into late endosomes. Some delivery materials respond to the low pH environ -ment in endosomes by becoming membrane-destabiliz -ing, thereby enabling siRNA to escape from endosomes into the cytoplasm14,100. For many delivery systems, the precise mechanism of endosomal release is poorly understood. The exact intracellular trafficking path -ways that affect delivery are also unclear. A recent report showed that for a leading lipid delivery system, ~70% of the siRNA taken up by cells underwent endocytic recy -cling and exocytosis109. An improved understanding of
both endosomal release and intracellular trafficking may facilitate the design of delivery systems.In the cytosol, siRNA must be loaded into the RNA-
both endosomal release and intracellular trafficking may facilitate the design of delivery systems.In the cytosol, siRNA must be loaded into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to activate the RNAi pathway. The siRNA strand with the least stably hybrid -ized 5ʹ terminus becomes preferentially loaded into the RISC as the guide strand, and the other strand is cleaved. Covalent attachment of delivery materials to the 5ʹ end of the guide strand is typically avoided because this  end is essential for RISC loading110. The siRNA sequence and backbone modifications must be selected to ensure appropriate strand selection by RISC and to avoid partial hybridization to non-target mRNAs, which can induce off-target gene silencing90.Lipid-based siRNA nanoparticles.  One class of lipid-based siRNA vectors under clinical evaluation is termed the stable nucleic acid–lipid particle (SNALP) formulation14,111,112 (FIG. 3a ). The SNALP formulation was
adapted from a protocol for DNA delivery and involves encapsulating nucleic acids into lipid-based nanoparti -cles (LNPs) that are <200  nm in diameter113. The first SNALP formulation for siRNA delivery was reported in 2005 and targets the hepatitis B virus (HBV) in a mouse model for HBV replication114. Most SNALP formulations can effectively deliver nucleic acids into hepatocytes, and all of the SNALP-targeted genes in clinical trials are disease-relevant targets in the liver. The in vivo  mecha -nisms of siRNA delivery by some SNALP formulations involve apolipoprotein E (APOE)-dependent internali -zation of these particles into hepatocytes97. Interestingly, the LNP–APOE association has been reported to be dependent on p Ka, and more weakly basic cationic lipids (p Ka ~ 6.5) show higher APOE dependence115. However, studies have identified lipid components with higher p Ka that can also facilitate delivery to hepato -
cytes in an APOE-independent manner115,116. A recent study reports that the p Ka of a LNP , rather than the p Ka of individual lipids, is a key determinant of LNP activity in vivo117. Structurally novel lipid components for LNP formulations have been identified with a range of in vivo delivery competence14,15, and understanding their under -lying mechanisms will further aid our knowledge of the  properties that determine LNP-mediated delivery.Several SNALP-based formulations have been stud -ied in clinical trials118 (TABLE 2 ). For treatment of hyper -cholesterolemia, PRO-040201 (TKM-ApoB; Tekmira Pharmaceuticals Corporation), which targets APOB pro -duction, and ALN -PCS02 ( Alnylam Pharmaceuticals ), which targets the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 ( PCSK9 ) transcript118,119, have been reported to substantially reduce expression of their target genes and subsequently of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) choles -
terol in Phase I trials. Whereas the TKM-ApoB trial was terminated owing to siRNA-dependent immunogenic -ity, the ALN -PCS02 trial has been continued with no serious adverse effects reported119. Two separate clini -cal trials are assessing the effects of LNP-based siRNA delivery in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: TKM -080301 (Tekmira Pharmaceuticals Corporation) is being evaluated as an antitumour drug that suppresses polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), and ALN-VSP02 (Alnylam Pharmaceuticals) is being developed to simultaneously REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 547© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Nature Reviews | Geneticsb aNHOO NHNHOOHNHN OONHNHO NOPOHOOO–OOOOHOHNHAcOOHOHNHAcOOHOHNHAcO OO OOOHOHOH dcsiRNA releasedin the cytoplasm GalNAc and PEG released in the endosomeO O O O O O O O OOSSNH3+NHNH3+OOONHNHOOOOOn7PBAVENHO–O–HOHOAcHNOOHOHOHOOHO OHOOHOHOO HOSHOOOHOOHHOOOOHOHHOOOOH HOOHOOOHSOHOHNSnONNHOOHHOOHOOHOHOOHOOHO SHOOOHOOHHOOOOHOHHOO OOHHOOHOOOHOHOHNONNHHNNH2++H2NNHsiRNACDPHOCholesterolOOO OOPON+CH3H3CH3CO–ODSPCH3COOHNnOSOHNnO OOHNTfH3CN OO CH3DLinDMAOOOHN OOOn1212AD–PEG AD–PEG–Tf PEG-C-DMAREVIEWS548 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
target KIF11 (which encodes kinesin spindle protein) and VEGF . In addition to these indications, the siRNA formulation ALN -TTR02 (Alnylam Pharmaceuticals) is being evaluated for its ability to suppress mutant tran -sthyretin (TTR) in TTR-mediated amyloidosis. The sec -ond-generation SNALP formulation ALN -TTR02 (also known as Patisiran) features a DLinDMA analogue that has showed a tenfold increase in efficacy in preclinical studies115.There are also two clinical trials that feature LNP formulations other than SNALP . Silence Therapeutics is evaluating their LNP system, AtuPLEX, which consists of a cationic lipid (AtuFECT01), a helper lipid (DPhyPE) and a PEG–lipid (PEG–DSPE) in a 50:49:1 ratio with  siRNAs120. This formulation was shown to internalize into mouse vascular endothelium after intravenous injec -tion120,121. The AtuPLEX-based formulation Atu027 fea -tures an siRNA that targets the protein kinase N3 ( PKN3 )
transcript and is under evaluation for the treatment of patients with advanced solid cancer122 (TABLE 2 ). Finally, the MD Anderson Cancer Center has initiated a clini -cal trial for their formulation of siRNA–EphA2–DOPC, in which siRNA is incorporated into neutral liposomes composed of DOPC123. This siRNA targets EPHA2  (which encodes a tyrosine kinase) and is being evaluated in patients with advanced cancers (TABLE 2 ). Polymer-based siRNA nanoparticles.  Cyclodextrin polymer (CDP)-based nanoparticles (FIG. 3b ) were the first targeted nanoparticulate siRNA delivery system to enter clinical trials for cancer12. The cyclodextrin deliv -ery system was first introduced to deliver plasmid DNA in 1999 (REF.  13), and the system was re -optimized for siRNA delivery years later124,125. CDPs are of interest as delivery polymers owing to their low toxicity and poly -cationic charge. The CDP–siRNA delivery system has been evaluated in several therapeutically relevant ani -
mal models and in Phase I clinical trials. This system was reported to silence cancer-associated gene targets in mouse models125,126. Its clinical translatability was evaluated in cynomolgus monkeys, in which the CDP–siRNA delivery system indicated efficacy in the range of 0.6–1.2  mg siRNA per kg (body weight) and tolerabil -ity up to 27  mg siRNA per kg (body weight)127. Finally, the clinical potential of CDP-based RNAi delivery was established in a Phase I clinical trial (TABLE 2 ), in which the ribonucleotide reductase M2 ( RRM2 ) mRNA was targeted in patients with solid cancers. A reduction in target mRNA levels was reported, and the presence of the specific mRNA cleavage product supports an RNAi mechanism of action128.Conjugate siRNA delivery systems.  Several promising delivery systems have been developed through covalent attachment of delivery ligands to the siRNA cargo, which yields precisely defined, single-component systems that
require minimal delivery material. The most clinically advanced conjugate platforms are DPCs and GalNAc conjugates. These two systems are proprietary technolo -gies and therefore have not been frequently described in the scientific literature. Nonetheless, these platforms provide informative lessons to guide the development of conjugate delivery systems.DPCs were originally developed as a composition of siRNA conjugated to polymers and ligands in a formu -lation that is designed to respond to intracellular envi -ronments to trigger the release of siRNA. The system includes a membrane-disrupting polymer, shielding polymers and targeting ligands, and each component is designed to provide a particular function in the delivery process (FIG. 3c ).DPCs aimed at treating liver diseases are targeted to hepatocytes using GalNAc ligands, which bind to the asialoglycoprotein receptor. When administered intra -venously in mice, first-generation DPCs effectively
silenced endogenous liver genes, including ApoB , in a
asialoglycoprotein receptor. When administered intra -venously in mice, first-generation DPCs effectively silenced endogenous liver genes, including ApoB , in a dose-dependent manner and produced the expected phenotypic effects100. Newer generations of DPCs under development by Arrowhead Research Corporation aim to expand on this original platform to improve perfor -mance. To target organs other than the liver, the com -pany reports the use of different targeting ligands and the more stable attachment of the PEG shielding agent to increase circulation time. According to the com -pany’s website, the latest generation of DPCs induced 99% silencing of liver genes in non-human primates after a single dose of 0.2  mg DPC per kg (body weight), and the effect lasted nearly 7 weeks (see Dynamic Figure 3 | Structure of non-viral siRNA vectors.  a | A stable nucleic acid–lipid particle (SNALP) is shown. The composition of the SNALP formulation is generally a mixture of
the ‘helper lipid’ DSPC (yellow), cholesterol (orange), a cationic lipid such as DLinDMA (blue), and a polyethylene glycol (PEG)–lipid known as PEG -C-DMA. These components form particles with a lipid bilayer structure, and the chemical structures of these components are shown in the box. The PEG–lipids provide a neutral hydrophilic exterior that enhances particle stability and minimizes clearance152. After administration,  the PEG–lipid component dissociates from the particle at a defined rate, thereby exposing the cationic lipid component of the formulation, which is crucial for cell transfection153. The cationic lipid component has a key role in cellular internalization of the particles, whereas the helper lipid component is important for escape of the payload from the endosomal compartment. b | A Cyclodextrin polymer (CDP)-based nanoparticle is shown. CDPs are synthesized through polymerization of
diamine-bearing cyclodextrin (dark green) and dimethyl suberimidate, which yields oligomers ( n ~ 5) with amidine groups (light blue)35. The positively charged amidine groups interact with nucleic acids to form stable particles. The polymers are end-capped with imidazole functional groups, which have been shown to facilitate endosomal escape154 and improve delivery efficacy of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)125. Adamantane (AD) is a hydrophobic molecule that forms a stable inclusion complex with the cyclic core of cyclodextrin155. CDP–siRNA nanoparticles are formulated with PEG (the molecular mass of which is 5,000) for stability and long circulation time, as well as with transferrin (Tf), which induces the uptake by cells expressing the transferrin receptor155,156. c | A Dynamic PolyConjugate (DPC) is shown. DPCs are composed of a membrane-destabilizing polymer PBAVE, the activity of which is shielded by PEG during
circulation. N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) moieties bind to receptors on hepatocytes to induce uptake of the vector by endocytosis. In the acidic environment of the endosome, PEG and GalNAc moieties are released, which exposes the membrane-  disrupting polymer to promote endosomal release. The siRNA is conjugated to the polymer through a hydrolysable disulphide linker, which is reduced in the cytosol to release the siRNA100. d | A GalNAc  –siRNA conjugate is shown. The chemically stabilized siRNA is conjugated at the 3 ʹ terminus of the passenger strand to three GalNAc molecules through a triantennary spacer molecule. The spacer length, valency and ligand spacing are optimized for high-affinity binding to its receptor on hepatocytes101. Part a reprinted from Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. , Vol. 12 (4), Alabi, C. et al.  Attacking the genome: emerging siRNA nanocarriers from concept to clinic. 427–433 © (2012), with
permission from Elsevier. Parts b, c and d from REF. 101, Nature Publishing Group.◀REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 549© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Table 2 | Non-viral siRNA vectors under clinical evaluationDelivery systemDrug Sponsor Target gene Disease Phase Status ClinicalTrials.gov identifierNaked siRNA ALN -RSV01 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Nucleocapsid gene of RSVRSV infections II Completed NCT00658086TD101 Pachyonychia Congenita ProjectKRT6A  (N171K mutation)Pachyonychia congenita I Completed NCT00716014AGN211745 Allergan FLT1 Age-related macular degeneration and choroidal neovascularizationII Terminated NCT00363714QPI-1007 Quark Pharmaceuticals CASP2 Optic atrophy and non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathyI Completed NCT01064505Acute primary angle-closure glaucomaII Active NCT01965106I5NP Quark Pharmaceuticals TP53 Kidney injury and acute renal failureI Completed NCT00554359Delayed graft function and complications of kidney transplantI/II Active NCT00802347PF-655 (PF-04523655)Quark Pharmaceuticals DDIT4 Choroidal neovascularization, diabetic retinopathy and diabetic
retinopathy and diabetic macular edemaII Completed NCT01445899Age-related macular degenerationII Completed NCT00713518Bevasiranib OPKO Health, Inc. VEGFA Diabetic macular edema II Completed NCT00306904Macular degeneration II Completed NCT00259753SYL1001 Sylentis S.A. TRPV1 Ocular pain and dry eye syndromeI/II Recruiting NCT01776658SYL040012 Sylentis S.A. ADRB2 Ocular hypertension and open angle glaucomaII Completed NCT01739244RXI-109 RXi Pharmaceuticals CTGF Cicatrix and scar prevention I Active NCT01780077Hypertrophic scar II Recruiting NCT02030275Keloid II Recruiting NCT02079168Lipid-based nanoparticlesALN -VSP02 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals KIF11 and VEGFSolid tumours I Completed NCT01158079siRNA–EphA2–DOPCMD Anderson Cancer CenterEPHA2 Advanced cancers I Active NCT01591356Atu027 Silence Therapeutics PKN3 Advanced solid cancers I/II Recruiting NCT01808638TKM -080301 Tekmira Pharmaceuticals CorporationPLK1 Cancer I/II Recruiting NCT01262235
TKM -100201 Tekmira Pharmaceuticals CorporationVP24 , VP35  and Zaire Ebola l-polymerase geneEbola virus Infection I Terminated NCT01518881PRO -040201 Tekmira Pharmaceuticals CorporationAPOB Hypercholesterolemia I Terminated NCT00927459ALN -PCS02 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals PCSK9 Hypercholesterolemia I Completed NCT01437059ALN -TTR02 Alnylam Pharmaceuticals TTR TTR-mediated amyloidosis III Recruiting NCT01960348ND-L02-s0201 Nitto Denko Corporation SERPINH1 Fibrosis I Completed NCT01858935CDP-based nanoparticleCALAA -01 Calando Pharmaceuticals RRM2 Solid tumours I Terminated NCT00689065Dynamic Poly   - ConjugateARC -520 Arrowhead Research CorporationTwo conserved regions of HBV transcriptsHepatitis B I Recruiting NCT01872065II Recruiting NCT02065336REVIEWS550 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PolyConjugates (DPC) technology: an elegant solution to the siRNA delivery problem ).Among the new generation DPCs that target the liver are DPCs in which the masked PBAVE polymer is not covalently attached to the siRNA cargo but is instead co -injected with cholesterol-modified siRNA129. Although the two components did not interact in solu -tion, they were both targeted to hepatocytes and colo -calized in endosomes, even when they were injected separately. The cholesterol moiety, the asialoglycopro -tein receptor and the GalNAc ligand were all required for silencing activity. Interestingly, LDL and the LDL receptor were not essential for gene silencing, although they were required for silencing by cholesterol–siRNA alone96. Arrowhead Research Corporation’s clinical candidate ARC -520 uses this co -injection strategy to target two conserved regions of HBV transcripts. The drug contains a reversibly masked melittin-like pep -
tide in place of the original PBAVE polymer and two  cholesterol-modified siRNAs130,131. ARC -520 is currently in Phase I clinical trials (TABLE 2 ).A leading conjugate delivery platform that is cur -rently under development at Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, siRNA–GalNAc conjugates, contains a highly modi -fied siRNA that is stably conjugated to a multivalent  targeting ligand (FIG. 3d ). This platform is a component of several drug candidates of the company, including ALN-TTRsc, ALN-PCS, ALN -AT3 and ALN -AS1 (REF.  101). ALN-TTRsc, which is designed to silence TTR  for the treatment of TTR-mediated amyloidosis, is the most clinically advanced of all siRNA–GalNAc conjugates developed by the company so far. In a Phase I clinical trial, ALN-TTRsc could stably reduce serum TTR lev -els by >90% with regular subcutaneous administration at a dose of 10  mg per kg (body weight) and by >50% after a single dose of 10  mg per kg (body weight) (see
ALN–TTRsc Phase I study results ) (TABLE 2 ). Serum TTR levels gradually returned to pre-treatment levels upon cessation of treatment. The drug was generally safe and well tolerated, and Phase II clinical studies began at the end of 2013.  Three other drug candidates (ALN-PCS, ALN -AT3 and ALN -AS1 (REF.  132)) have the same GalNAc conjugate platform but different siRNA sequences that target the expression of various hepatocellular proteins (PCSK9, antithrombin and aminolevulinate synthase 1, respectively). These drugs have shown efficacy in animal models and are now under development for treating hypercholesterolemia,  haemophilia and hepatic porphyrias, respectively101.In summary, among the siRNA delivery systems that have shown efficacy in animals, there is much diver -sity in the size, shape, chemical properties, structure and method of development. Synthetic LNP formula -tions are currently among the most potent delivery sys -
tems. Conjugates benefit from well-defined structures with minimal delivery material and apparently broad therapeutic windows, and there is continued progress in improving their potency. There are many physiologi -cal considerations to address in designing materials to deliver siRNAs to target cells, and parts of the delivery process remain poorly understood. The continued study of new and diverse delivery strategies will help to eluci -date the underlying biological processes that influence delivery and will guide the design of future generations of siRNA delivery platforms.In vivo  delivery of miRNA mimicsSince mi  RNAs were discovered 20 years ago, their functions have been intensively investigated and  their mechanisms are well studied. Often 18–25 nucleo -tides in length, mi  RNAs are endogenously synthesized and promote mRNA degradation and/or translational inhibition133. It has been reported that the human genome contains >1,000 mi  RNAs, and each of them
might regulate hundreds of genes under certain condi -tions134. Whereas more than a dozen of clinical trials
genome contains >1,000 mi  RNAs, and each of them might regulate hundreds of genes under certain condi -tions134. Whereas more than a dozen of clinical trials assess mi  RNAs as biomarkers, the clinical use of the most potent mi  RNAs as therapeutics remains challenging.Levels of mi  RNAs can be reduced by inhibitory drugs referred to as antagomirs, which are usually short sin -gle-stranded oligonucleotides with locked nucleic acid modifications. Owing to the size, charge and stability of antagomirs, endogenous proteins can potentially be used as carriers. At a fairly large dose, antagomirs can even be delivered in vivo  without exogenous delivery vehicles. Thus, we do not discuss clinical trials using antagomirs, which have recently been reviewed elsewhere135.Levels of mi  RNAs can be restored through the intro -duction of synthetic mi  RNAs or miRNA mimics, and this approach is referred to as miRNA replacement therapy.
Similarly to therapeutic siRNAs, miRNA replacement therapy requires delivery carriers. As synthetic miRNA Table 2 (cont.) | Non-viral siRNA vectors under clinical evaluationDelivery systemDrug Sponsor Target gene Disease Phase Status ClinicalTrials.gov identifiersiRNA–GalNAc conjugateALN-TTRsc Alnylam Pharmaceuticals TTR TTR-mediated amyloidosis I Recruiting NCT01814839II Recruiting NCT01981837LODER polymersiG12D LODERSilenseed Ltd. KRAS Pancreatic cancer II Active NCT01676259ADRB2 , adrenoceptor beta 2, surface; APOB , apolipoprotein B;  CASP2 , caspase 2, apoptosis-related cysteine peptidase; CDP , cyclodextrin polymer; CTGF , connective tissue growth factor; DDIT4 , DNA-damage-inducible transcript 4 (also known as RTP801 ); EPHA2 , EPH receptor A2;  FLT1 , fms-related tyrosine kinase 1 (also known as VEGFR1 ); GalNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; HBV , hepatitis B virus;  KIF11 , kinesin family member 11; KRT6A , keratin 6A; PCSK9 , proprotein convertase
subtilisin/kexin type 9; PKN3 , protein kinase N3; PLK1 , polo-like kinase 1; RRM2 , ribonucleotide reductase M2; RSV , respiratory syncytial virus; SERPINH1 , serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade H, member 1 (also known as HSP47 ); siRNA, small interfering RNA, TP53  encodes p53; TRPV1 , transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily V , member 1; TTR , transthyretin; VEGFA , vascular endothelial growth factor A.REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 551© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
FokIA restriction endonuclease  with a DNA-binding domain  at the amino terminus and a nonspecific DNA cleavage domain at the carboxyl terminus. Dimerization of two FokI is required to cleave DNA. When it is fused to zinc-finger proteins (ZFPs) or to transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs), FokI will function when a pair of ZFPs or TALEs binds to DNA within short distance. This strategy allows increased specificity of sequence recognition.is similar to siRNA in terms of structure, size and charge, the delivery barrier of miRNA could be the same as that of siRNA, and it is likely that systems for siRNA delivery can also be used for miRNA delivery in clinical trials.Several candidates are under preclinical evalu -ation, mostly for oncology studies owing to the ability of mi  RNAs to downregulate multiple cancer-  relevant genes136. MRX34 (Mirna Therapeutics), which is a miRNA -34a (miR -34a) mimic, is currently in a Phase I
clinical trial (NCT01829971) of patients with primary liver cancer or liver metastases and is expected to finish in December 2014. miR -34a is a component in the p53 sig -nalling pathway and a well-investigated tumour suppres -sor137. miR -34a replacement has shown potent anti  tumour activity in vitro  and in vivo137,138. According to Mirna Therapeutics, the formulation used in the trial is based on an ionizable liposome with a diameter of ~120  nm139. The nanoparticles contain amphoteric lipids that are neutral or anionic at high pH and cationic at low pH139. The detailed structure of this liposome has not yet been revealed.Although there are >1,000 mi  RNAs, most of them have a role in ‘fine-tuning’ gene expression, and only a small percentage of mi  RNAs show potent functionality across multiple targets. Nevertheless, off-target effects are of concern. However, potential off-target sites can be predicted by bioinformatic analyses, and the level of inhi -
bition of each target can vary. By contrast, the off-target effects of small-molecule inhibitors are hard to predict. In fact, many small-molecule drugs can bind to numer -ous different targets, usually in a dose-dependent man -ner. Currently, miRNA therapeutics is explored for severe diseases such as cancer.Delivery of genome editing systemsConventional gene therapy either temporarily intro -duces expression of a DNA fragment or randomly inserts it into the genome. A more precise way to repair disease-causing genes is needed. The sequence-specific ZFPs, TALEs and CRISPR–Cas systems not only have great potential to revolutionize biomedical research as powerful tools but also provide feasible platforms for personalized medicine140,141. ZFPs and TALEs can target unique sequences in the genome following customiza -tion of their DNA-binding domains141–143. Fusion of ZFPs and TALEs with a DNA cleavage module, such as the cleavage domain of the FokI endonuclease, cre -
ates chimeric zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) and TALE nucleases (TALENs)140,144 (FIG. 4 ). Distinct from ZFNs and Nature Reviews | GeneticsFokIFokIDNA double-strand break at nuclease target site Gene correction  Gene disruption Homology-directed repairCas9TALETALEN CRISPR–Cas system ZFNExogenous donor templateTransgene insertion Non-homologous end-joiningZFPFigure 4 | Potential use of non-viral vectors for the delivery of precise genome editing systems.  The mRNA or DNA encoding a zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN)157, a transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) or CRISPR–Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat–CRISPR-associated) systems and a repair template could potentially be introduced in complex with non-viral vectors. These engineered nucleases can manipulate mammalian genomes with precision and high efficiency by creating double-strand breaks (DSBs) or nicks in one strand in targeted genomic sequences140. The DSB is repaired
precision and high efficiency by creating double-strand breaks (DSBs) or nicks in one strand in targeted genomic sequences140. The DSB is repaired by non-homologous end-joining or by homology-directed repair if donor templates are provided. Efficient genome engineering using ZFN, TALEN and CRISPR–Cas systems allows precise correction of disease-causing genes. With successful delivery of these genome editing systems, there is potential for one or more disease-causing genes to be precisely corrected in a certain number of cells in situ , which allows cure of diseases with minimal adverse effects. ZFP , zinc-finger protein.REVIEWS552 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
TALENs, the DNA endonuclease Cas9 (which is derived from the bacterial CRISPR–Cas system) can recognize and induce DNA double-strand breaks in a genomic site through a synthetic guide RNA that hybridizes with the target DNA sequence145,146 (FIG. 4 ). RNA-guided Cas9 enables faster and easier implementation than ZFNs and TALENs, and it has great potential to simultaneously engineer multiple sites in the genome145–147. There are ongoing efforts to increase the efficiency of CRISPR–Cas systems and to decrease their off-target effects148.Ongoing clinical trials (NCT01044654, NCT01252641 and NCT00842634) use ZFNs to disrupt the C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5)-encoding gene in CD4+ T cells ex vivo  to promote HIV -1 resist -ance. In vivo  gene correction by ZFN was achieved using AAV as the delivery system in a mouse model of hae -mophilia149. We showed that CRISPR–Cas9 corrected a disease mutation of hereditary tyrosinaemia in adult
mice and rescued the disease phenotype150.High efficiency of these programmable genome mod -ification systems provides the possibility of precise in vivo  gene editing using non-viral delivery vectors. In princi -ple, non-viral vectors that carry genome editing systems are highly appealing platforms to permanently correct disease mutations, such as point mutations and deletions, without any involvement of viruses, thereby minimizing the chance of short-term and long-term adverse effects. Considering the current limitations of non-viral deliv -ery vectors, likely target tissues for such precise genome editing systems include hepatocytes, endothelial cells and epidermal cells.ConclusionsIn the past decades, substantial advances have been achieved in different areas related to gene-based therapy, including the development of new delivery materials, as well as improved potency and stability of nucleic acids. Moreover, advances in genomics have greatly enhanced
our understanding of the genetic basis of disease and pro -vided a range of new targets for genetic medicine. Many recently identified disease targets are considered ‘undrug -gable’ using small-molecule inhibitors151. The potential of exogenous nucleic acids may provide an avenue to trans -late our knowledge obtained from biomedical research into therapeutics. The broad application of non-viral gene-based therapy will require continued efforts not only to understand the structure–function relationship and the biology behind delivery vectors but also to expand the list of tissues and organs that can be successfully targeted. In addition, non-viral delivery of genome editing systems could facilitate both precise and permanent correction of disease genes. The development of advanced delivery vec -tors should increase the potential of gene-based therapy to treat a range of different tissues and to silence, correct or introduce specific genes with minimal adverse effects.
More than a decade after the initial discovery of RNAi, the promise of RNAi-based drugs seems immi -nent. Several therapeutic approaches based on siRNA have shown promising results in clinical trials and have illuminated the challenges associated with the application of RNAi in humans101. With the recent development of nanoparticle and conjugate formulations, in vivo  delivery of siRNAs and/or mi  RNAs can be achieved with high effi -ciency and low toxicity, and efficacy has been shown in humans. Although non-viral gene-based therapies have yet to be approved by the FDA, recent progress in the clinical development of RNAi has generated considerable excitement. As discussed, several clinical programmes have reported targeted knockdown in humans follow -ing non-viral delivery of siRNAs101,119. One compound, ALN -TTR02, has now transitioned into Phase III clinical trials. More recently, modified siRNAs conjugated to liver-
targeting ligands have shown efficacy in humans following
ALN -TTR02, has now transitioned into Phase III clinical trials. More recently, modified siRNAs conjugated to liver-targeting ligands have shown efficacy in humans following subcutaneous application, which highlights the possibility of siRNA therapeutics that can be self-administered by patients (see ALN–TTRsc Phase I study results ). Taken together, although it will be important to monitor per -formance of these drugs as they advance into later-stage trials, the efficacy already shown by these formulations in humans, together with the many advances in preclinical development, convinces us that siRNA has a broad and important potential as therapeutics in humans.Whereas the promise of RNAi-based therapies seems to be within reach, there are still certain challenges for suc -cessful mRNA- and DNA-based therapies using non-viral vectors. The challenges of stability are greater for mRNA than for siRNA, as the chemical modifications that con -
fer stability on siRNA duplexes can often render mRNAs ineffective. Therapeutic DNA expression additionally requires delivery into the nucleus, which still poses a for -midable challenge. Nonetheless, the immense therapeutic potential of these technologies is on the horizon, and the clinical translation of siRNA delivery systems will help to guide us in overcoming these additional barriers.1. Ginn, S. L., Alexander, I. E., Edelstein, M. L., Abedi, M. R. & Wixon, J. Gene therapy clinical trials worldwide to 2012 — an update. J. Gene Med. 15, 65–77 (2013).2. Kay, M. A. State -of-the-art gene-based therapies: the road ahead.  Nature Rev. Genet. 12, 316–328 (2011).3. Mingozzi, F. & High, K. A. Therapeutic in vivo  gene transfer for genetic disease using AAV: progress and challenges. Nature Rev. Genet. 12, 341–355 (2011).4. Baum, C., Kustikova, O., Modlich, U., Li, Z. & Fehse, B. Mutagenesis and oncogenesis by chromosomal
Mutagenesis and oncogenesis by chromosomal insertion of gene transfer vectors. Hum. Gene Ther. 17, 253–263 (2006).5. Bessis, N., GarciaCozar, F. J. & Boissier, M. C.  Immune responses to gene therapy vectors: influence on vector function and effector mechanisms. Gene Ther. 11 (Suppl. 1), S10–S17  (2004).6. Waehler, R., Russell, S. J. & Curiel, D. T . Engineering targeted viral vectors for gene therapy. Nature Rev. Genet. 8, 573–587 (2007).7. Thomas, C. E., Ehrhardt, A. & Kay, M. A.  Progress and problems with the use of viral vectors for gene therapy. Nature Rev. Genet. 4, 346–358 (2003).8. Bouard, D., Alazard-Dany, D. & Cosset, F. L. Viral vectors: from virology to transgene expression.  Br. J. Pharmacol. 157, 153–165 (2009).9. Pack, D. W., Hoffman, A. S., Pun, S. & Stayton, P . S. Design and development of polymers for gene delivery. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 4, 581–593 (2005).10. Mintzer, M. A. & Simanek, E. E. Nonviral vectors for
gene delivery. Chem. Rev. 109, 259–302 (2009).11. Putnam, D. Polymers for gene delivery across length scales. Nature Mater. 5, 439–451 (2006).12. Davis, M. E. The first targeted delivery of siRNA  in humans via a self-assembling, cyclodextrin polymer-based nanoparticle: from concept to clinic. Mol. Pharmaceut. 6, 659–668 (2009).13. Gonzalez, H., Hwang, S. J. & Davis, M. E. New class of polymers for the delivery of macromolecular therapeutics. Bioconjug. Chem. 10, 1068–1074 (1999).14. Semple, S. C.  et al.  Rational design of cationic lipids for siRNA delivery. Nature Biotech. 28, 172–176 (2010).This study carries out a rational design of a siRNA delivery vector and achieved significant  improvement in delivery efficiency.15. Love, K. T .  et al.  Lipid-like materials for low-dose, in vivo  gene silencing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 1864–1869 (2010).REVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 553
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
16. Monopoli, M. P ., Aberg, C., Salvati, A. & Dawson, K. A. Biomolecular coronas provide the biological identity  of nanosized materials. Nature Nanotechnol. 7,  779–786 (2012).17. Lee, H.  et al.  Molecularly self-assembled nucleic acid nanoparticles for targeted in vivo  siRNA delivery. Nature Nanotechnol. 7, 389–393 (2012).18. Kariko, K., Buckstein, M., Ni, H. & Weissman, D. Suppression of RNA recognition by T oll-like receptors: the impact of nucleoside modification and the evolutionary origin of RNA. Immunity 23, 165–175 (2005).19. Anderson, B. R.  et al.  Nucleoside modifications in RNA limit activation of 2 ʹ-5ʹ-oligoadenylate synthetase and increase resistance to cleavage by RNase L. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 9329–9338 (2011).20. Kariko, K., Muramatsu, H., Keller, J. M. & Weissman, D. Increased erythropoiesis in mice injected with submicrogram quantities of pseudouridine-containing mRNA encoding erythropoietin. Mol. Ther. 20,  948–953 (2012).
948–953 (2012).21. Deleavey, G. F., Watts, J. K. & Damha, M. J. Chemical modification of siRNA . Curr. Protoc. Nucleic Acid Chem.  39, 16.3.1–16.3.22 (2009).22. Mehier-Humbert, S. & Guy, R. H. Physical methods for gene transfer: improving the kinetics of gene delivery into cells. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 57, 733–753 (2005).23. Wells, D. J. Gene therapy progress and prospects: electroporation and other physical methods. Gene Ther. 11, 1363–1369 (2004).24. Newman, C. M. & Bettinger, T . Gene therapy progress and prospects: ultrasound for gene transfer. Gene Ther. 14, 465–475 (2007).25. Plank, C.  et al.  The magnetofection method: using magnetic force to enhance gene delivery. Biol. Chem. 384, 737–747 (2003).26. Zhang, G., Budker, V. G., Ludtke, J. J. & Wolff, J. A. Naked DNA gene transfer in mammalian cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 245, 251–264 (2004).27. Li, W. & Szoka, F. C. Jr. Lipid-based nanoparticles for nucleic acid delivery. Pharm. Res. 24, 438–449 (2007).
28. Thomas, M. & Klibanov, A. M. Non-viral gene therapy: polycation-mediated DNA delivery. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 62, 27–34 (2003).29. Lee, C. C., MacKay, J. A., Frechet, J. M. & Szoka, F. C. Designing dendrimers for biological applications. Nature Biotech. 23, 1517–1526 (2005).30. Discher, D. E. & Ahmed, F. Polymersomes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Engineer. 8, 323–341 (2006).31. Martin, M. E. & Rice, K. G. Peptide-guided gene delivery. AAPS J. 9, E18–29 (2007).32. Sokolova, V. & Epple, M. Inorganic nanoparticles as carriers of nucleic acids into cells.  Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 47, 1382–1395 (2008).33. Kawabata, K., T akakura, Y. & Hashida, M. The fate of plasmid DNA after intravenous injection in mice: involvement of scavenger receptors in its hepatic uptake. Pharm. Res. 12, 825–830 (1995).34. McManus, J. J., Radler, J. O. & Dawson, K. A. Observation of a rectangular columnar phase in a DNA–calcium–zwitterionic lipid complex. J. Am.
DNA–calcium–zwitterionic lipid complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126, 15966–15967 (2004).35. McManus, J. J., Rädler, J. O. & Dawson, K. A.  Does calcium turn a zwitterionic lipid cationic?  J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 9869–9875 (2003).36. Koltover, I., Salditt, T ., Radler, J. O. & Safinya, C. R.  An inverted hexagonal phase of cationic liposome-DNA complexes related to DNA release and delivery. Science 281, 78–81 (1998).This paper elucidates structural considerations involved in the endosomal escape of DNA mediated by liposomal nanoparticles.37. Wiethoff, C. M. & Middaugh, C. R. Barriers to nonviral gene delivery. J. Pharm. Sci. 92, 203–217 (2003).38. Morille, M., Passirani, C., Vonarbourg, A., Clavreul, A. & Benoit, J. P . Progress in developing cationic vectors for non-viral systemic gene therapy against cancer. Biomaterials 29, 3477–3496 (2008).39. Capecchi, M. R. High efficiency transformation by direct microinjection of DNA into cultured mammalian
cells. Cell 22, 479–488 (1980).40. Miller, A. M. & Dean, D. A. Tissue-specific and transcription factor-mediated nuclear entry of DNA.
direct microinjection of DNA into cultured mammalian cells. Cell 22, 479–488 (1980).40. Miller, A. M. & Dean, D. A. Tissue-specific and transcription factor-mediated nuclear entry of DNA. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61, 603–613 (2009).41. Varga, C. M.  et al.  Quantitative comparison of polyethylenimine formulations and adenoviral vectors in terms of intracellular gene delivery processes. Gene Ther. 12, 1023–1032 (2005).42. Dinh, A. T ., Pangarkar, C., Theofanous, T . & Mitragotri, S. Understanding intracellular transport processes pertinent to synthetic gene delivery via stochastic simulations and sensitivity analyses. Biophys. J. 92, 831–846 (2007).43. Wasungu, L. & Hoekstra, D. Cationic lipids, lipoplexes and intracellular delivery of genes. J. Control. Release 116, 255–264 (2006).44. Godbey, W. T ., Wu, K. K. & Mikos, A. G. T racking the intracellular path of poly(ethylenimine)/DNA complexes for gene delivery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 5177–5181 (1999).
96, 5177–5181 (1999).45. Breunig, M.  et al.  Gene delivery with low molecular weight linear polyethylenimines. J. Gene Med. 7, 1287–1298 (2005).46. Schaffer, D. V., Fidelman, N. A., Dan, N. & Lauffenburger, D. A. Vector unpacking as a potential barrier for receptor-mediated polyplex gene delivery. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 67, 598–606 (2000).47. Cohen, R. N., van der Aa, M. A., Macaraeg, N., Lee, A. P . & Szoka, F. C. Jr. Quantification of plasmid DNA copies in the nucleus after lipoplex and polyplex transfection. J. Controlled Release 135, 166–174 (2009).48. Gill, D. R., Pringle, I. A. & Hyde, S. C. Progress and prospects: the design and production of plasmid vectors. Gene Ther. 16, 165–171 (2009).49. Gill, D. R.  et al.  Increased persistence of lung gene expression using plasmids containing the ubiquitin C or elongation factor 1 α promoter. Gene Ther. 8, 1539–1546 (2001).50. Wooddell, C. I., Reppen, T ., Wolff, J. A. & Herweijer, H.
Sustained liver-specific transgene expression from the albumin promoter in mice following hydrodynamic plasmid DNA delivery. J. Gene Med. 10, 551–563 (2008).51. Miao, C. H.  et al.  Inclusion of the hepatic locus control region, an intron, and untranslated region increases and stabilizes hepatic factor IX gene expression in vivo  but not in vitro. Mol. Ther. 1, 522–532 (2000).52. Argyros, O.  et al.  Persistent episomal transgene expression in liver following delivery of a scaffold/matrix attachment region containing non-viral vector. Gene Ther. 15, 1593–1605 (2008).53. Kreiss, P .  et al.  Plasmid DNA size does not affect the physicochemical properties of lipoplexes but modulates gene transfer efficiency. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 3792–3798 (1999).54. Darquet, A. M.  et al.  Minicircle: an improved DNA molecule for in vitro  and in vivo  gene transfer. Gene Ther. 6, 209–218 (1999).55. Kay, M. A., He, C. Y. & Chen, Z. Y. A robust system for
production of minicircle DNA vectors. Nature Biotech. 28, 1287–1289 (2010).56. Ehrhardt, A., Xu, H., Huang, Z., Engler, J. A. & Kay, M. A. A direct comparison of two nonviral gene therapy vectors for somatic integration: in vivo  evaluation of the bacteriophage integrase phiC31  and the Sleeping Beauty transposase. Mol. Ther. 11, 695–706 (2005).57. Wu, S. C.  et al.  PiggyBac is a flexible and highly active transposon as compared to Sleeping Beauty, T ol2, and Mos1 in mammalian cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 15008–15013 (2006).58. Aronovich, E. L., McIvor, R. S. & Hackett, P . B.  The Sleeping Beauty transposon system: a non-viral vector for gene therapy. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20,  R14–R20 (2011).59. Fraley, R., Subramani, S., Berg, P . & Papahadjopoulos, D. Introduction of liposome-encapsulated SV40 DNA into cells. J. Biol. Chem. 255, 10431–10435 (1980).60. Felgner, P . L.  et al.  Lipofection: a highly efficient,
lipid-mediated DNA-transfection procedure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84, 7413–7417 (1987).References 59 and 60 are the earliest studies to
lipid-mediated DNA-transfection procedure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84, 7413–7417 (1987).References 59 and 60 are the earliest studies to show lipid-mediated DNA delivery in vitro.61. Whitehead, K. A., Langer, R. & Anderson, D. G. Knocking down barriers: advances in siRNA delivery. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 8, 129–138 (2009).62. Lonez, C., Vandenbranden, M. & Ruysschaert, J. M. Cationic liposomal lipids: from gene carriers to cell signaling. Prog. Lipid Res. 47, 340–347 (2008).63. Hersey, P . & Gallagher, S. Intralesional immunotherapy for melanoma. J. Surg. Oncol. 109, 320–326 (2014).64. Olins, D. E., Olins, A. L. & Von Hippel, P . H. Model nucleoprotein complexes: studies on the interaction of cationic homopolypeptides with DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 24, 157–176 (1967).65. Laemmli, U. K. Characterization of DNA condensates induced by poly(ethylene oxide) and polylysine.  Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 72, 4288–4292 (1975).
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 72, 4288–4292 (1975).66. Wu, G. Y. & Wu, C. H. Receptor-mediated in vitro  gene transformation by a soluble DNA carrier system. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 4429–4432 (1987).67. Wu, G. Y. & Wu, C. H. Receptor-mediated gene delivery and expression in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 14621–14624 (1988).References 66 and 67 are among the first to investigate the possibility of targeted non-viral nucleic acid delivery in vitro  and in vivo.68. Choi, Y. H.  et al.  Polyethylene glycol-grafted poly-L-lysine as polymeric gene carrier. J. Control. Release 54, 39–48 (1998).69. Kim, S. W. Polylysine copolymers for gene delivery. Cold Spring Harb.Protoc. 2012 , 433–438 (2012).70. Alexis, F., Pridgen, E., Molnar, L. K. & Farokhzad, O. C. Factors affecting the clearance and biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles. Mol. Pharm. 5, 505–515 (2008).71. Bazile, D.  et al.  Stealth Me. PEG–PLA nanoparticles avoid uptake by the mononuclear phagocytes system.
J. Pharm. Sci. 84, 493–498 (1995).72. Konstan, M. W.  et al.  Compacted DNA nanoparticles administered to the nasal mucosa of cystic fibrosis subjects are safe and demonstrate partial to complete cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator reconstitution. Hum. Gene Ther. 15, 1255–1269 (2004).73. Lungwitz, U., Breunig, M., Blunk, T . & Gopferich, A. Polyethylenimine-based non-viral gene delivery systems. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 60, 247–266 (2005).74. Boussif, O.  et al.  A versatile vector for gene  and oligonucleotide transfer into cells in culture and in vivo : polyethylenimine. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 7297–7301 (1995).This is the first paper to show that PEI can facilitate DNA transfection in vitro  and in vivo .75. Godbey, W. T ., Wu, K. K. & Mikos, A. G. Size matters: molecular weight affects the efficiency of poly(ethylenimine) as a gene delivery vehicle. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 45, 268–275 (1999).76. Wightman, L.  et al.  Different behavior of branched and
linear polyethylenimine for gene delivery in vitro  and in vivo. J. Gene Med. 3, 362–372 (2001).77. Goula, D.  et al.  Polyethylenimine-based intravenous delivery of transgenes to mouse lung. Gene Ther. 5, 1291–1295 (1998).78. Kircheis, R., Wightman, L. & Wagner, E. Design and gene delivery activity of modified polyethylenimines. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 53, 341–358 (2001).79. Coll, J. L.  et al.  In vivo  delivery to tumors of DNA complexed with linear polyethylenimine. Hum. Gene Ther. 10, 1659–1666 (1999).80. Lv, H., Zhang, S., Wang, B., Cui, S. & Yan, J. T oxicity of cationic lipids and cationic polymers in gene delivery. J. Control. Release 114, 100–109 (2006).81. Nguyen, H. K.  et al.  Evaluation of polyether-polyethyleneimine graft copolymers as gene transfer agents. Gene Ther. 7, 126–138 (2000).82. Petersen, H.  et al.  Polyethylenimine-graft-poly(ethylene glycol) copolymers: influence of copolymer block structure on DNA complexation and biological activities
as gene delivery system. Bioconjug. Chem. 13,  845–854 (2002).
glycol) copolymers: influence of copolymer block structure on DNA complexation and biological activities as gene delivery system. Bioconjug. Chem. 13,  845–854 (2002).83. Breunig, M., Lungwitz, U., Liebl, R. & Goepferich, A. Breaking up the correlation between efficacy and toxicity for nonviral gene delivery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 14454–14459 (2007).84. Thomas, M. & Klibanov, A. M. Enhancing polyethylenimine’s delivery of plasmid DNA into mammalian cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 14640–14645 (2002).85. Fortune, J. A., Novobrantseva, T . I. & Klibanov, A. M. Highly effective gene transfection in vivo  by alkylated polyethylenimine. J. Drug Deliv. 2011 , 204058 (2011).86. Zangi, L.  et al.  Modified mRNA directs the fate of heart progenitor cells and induces vascular regeneration after myocardial infarction. Nature Biotech. 31,  898–907 (2013).87. Kormann, M. S.  et al.  Expression of therapeutic proteins after delivery of chemically modified mRNA in
mice. Nature Biotech. 29, 154–157 (2011).References 86 and 87 show the therapeutic potential of delivery of modified mRNA in vivo.88. Su, X., Fricke, J., Kavanagh, D. G. & Irvine, D. J. In vitro and in vivo  mRNA delivery using lipid-enveloped pH-responsive polymer nanoparticles. Mol. Pharm. 8, 774–787 (2011).89. Phua, K. K., Leong, K. W. & Nair, S. K. T ransfection efficiency and transgene expression kinetics of mRNA delivered in naked and nanoparticle format. J. Control. Release 166, 227–233 (2013).90. Kanasty, R. L., Whitehead, K. A., Vegas, A. J. & Anderson, D. G. Action and reaction: the biological response to siRNA and its delivery vehicles. Mol. Ther. 20, 513–524 (2012).REVIEWS554 | AUGUST 2014  | VOLUME 15   www.nature.com/reviews/genetics© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
91. Layzer, J. M.  et al.  In vivo  activity of nuclease-resistant siRNAs. RNA 10, 766–771 (2004).92. Jackson, A. L. & Linsley, P . S. Recognizing and avoiding siRNA off-target effects for target identification and therapeutic application. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 9, 57–67 (2010).93. Nguyen, D. N.  et al.  Lipid-derived nanoparticles for immunostimulatory RNA adjuvant delivery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, E797–E803 (2012).94. Whitehead, K. A., Dahlman, J. E., Langer, R. S. & Anderson, D. G. Silencing or stimulation? siRNA delivery and the immune system. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 2, 77–96 (2011).95. Wang, A. Z., Langer, R. & Farokhzad, O. C. Nanoparticle delivery of cancer drugs. Annu. Rev. Med. 63, 185–198 (2012).96. Wolfrum, C.  et al.  Mechanisms and optimization of in vivo  delivery of lipophilic siRNAs. Nature Biotech. 25, 1149–1157 (2007).97. Akinc, A.  et al.  T argeted delivery of RNAi therapeutics with endogenous and exogenous ligand-based
with endogenous and exogenous ligand-based mechanisms. Mol. Ther. 18, 1357–1364 (2010).98. Malek, A.  et al.  In vivo  pharmacokinetics, tissue distribution and underlying mechanisms of various PEI(-PEG)/siRNA complexes. T oxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 236, 97–108 (2009).99. Huang, Y.  et al.  Elimination pathways of systemically delivered siRNA. Mol. Ther. 19, 381–385 (2011).100. Rozema, D. B.  et al.  Dynamic PolyConjugates for targeted in vivo  delivery of siRNA to hepatocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 12982–12987 (2007).101. Kanasty, R., Dorkin, J. R., Vegas, A. & Anderson, D. Delivery materials for siRNA therapeutics. Nature Mater. 12, 967–977 (2013).102. Zuckerman, J. E., Choi, C. H., Han, H. & Davis, M. E. Polycation–siRNA nanoparticles can disassemble at the kidney glomerular basement membrane. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 3137–3142 (2012).103. Naeye, B.  et al.  In vivo  disassembly of IV administered siRNA matrix nanoparticles at the renal filtration
barrier. Biomaterials 34, 2350–2358 (2013).104. Aird, W. C. Phenotypic heterogeneity of the endothelium: I. Structure, function, and mechanisms. Circul. Res. 100, 158–173 (2007).105. Wisse, E., Jacobs, F., T opal, B., Frederik, P . &  De Geest, B. The size of endothelial fenestrae in human liver sinusoids: implications for hepatocyte-directed gene transfer. Gene Ther. 15, 1193–1199 (2008).106. Maeda, H. T umor-selective delivery of macromolecular drugs via the EPR effect:  background and future prospects. Bioconjug. Chem. 21, 797–802 (2010).107. Yu, B., Zhao, X., Lee, L. J. & Lee, R. J. T argeted delivery systems for oligonucleotide therapeutics. AAPS J. 11, 195–203 (2009).108. Salvati, A.  et al.  T ransferrin-functionalized nanoparticles lose their targeting capabilities when a biomolecule corona adsorbs on the surface. Nature Nanotechnol. 8, 137–143 (2013).109. Sahay, G.  et al.  Efficiency of siRNA delivery by lipid
nanoparticles is limited by endocytic recycling. Nature Biotech. 31, 653–658 (2013).This study elucidates the mechanism of cellular uptake of LNPs and the importance of exocytosis in limiting delivery efficiency.110. Schwarz, D. S.  et al.  Asymmetry in the assembly of the RNAi enzyme complex. Cell 115, 199–208 (2003).111. Geisbert, T . W.  et al.  Postexposure protection of non-human primates against a lethal Ebola virus challenge with RNA interference: a proof -of-concept study. Lancet 375, 1896–1905 (2010).112. Zimmermann, T . S.  et al.  RNAi-mediated gene silencing in non-human primates. Nature 441,  111–114 (2006).113. Wheeler, J. J.  et al.  Stabilized plasmid–lipid particles: construction and characterization. Gene Ther. 6,  271–281 (1999).114. Morrissey, D. V.  et al.  Potent and persistent in vivo  anti-HBV activity of chemically modified siRNAs. Nature Biotech. 23, 1002–1007 (2005).115. Jayaraman, M.  et al.  Maximizing the potency of siRNA
lipid nanoparticles for hepatic gene silencing in vivo. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 51, 8529–8533 (2012).
115. Jayaraman, M.  et al.  Maximizing the potency of siRNA lipid nanoparticles for hepatic gene silencing in vivo. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 51, 8529–8533 (2012).116. Akinc, A.  et al.  Development of lipidoid–siRNA formulations for systemic delivery to the liver. Mol. Ther.17, 872–879 (2009).117. Alabi, C. A.  et al.  Multiparametric approach for the evaluation of lipid nanoparticles for siRNA delivery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 12881–12886 (2013).118. Burnett, J. C., Rossi, J. J. & Tiemann, K. Current progress of siRNA/shRNA therapeutics in clinical trials. Biotechnol. J. 6, 1130–1146 (2011).119. Fitzgerald, K.  et al.  Effect of an RNA interference drug on the synthesis of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) and the concentration of serum LDL cholesterol in healthy volunteers: a randomised, single-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial. Lancet 383, 60–68 (2014).120. Santel, A.  et al.  A novel siRNA–lipoplex technology for
RNA interference in the mouse vascular endothelium. Gene Ther. 13, 1222–1234 (2006).121. Santel, A.  et al.  RNA interference in the mouse vascular endothelium by systemic administration of siRNA–lipoplexes for cancer therapy. Gene Ther. 13, 1360–1370 (2006).122. Aleku, M.  et al.  Atu027, a liposomal small interfering RNA formulation targeting protein kinase N3, inhibits cancer progression. Cancer Res. 68, 9788–9798 (2008).123. Landen, C. N. Jr.  et al.  Therapeutic EphA2  gene targeting in vivo  using neutral liposomal small interfering RNA delivery. Cancer Res. 65, 6910–6918 (2005).124. Davis, M. E.  et al.  Self-assembling nucleic acid delivery vehicles via linear, water-soluble, cyclodextrin-containing polymers. Curr. Med. Chem. 11, 179–197 (2004).125. Hu-Lieskovan, S., Heidel, J. D., Bartlett, D. W., Davis, M. E. & T riche, T . J. Sequence-specific knockdown of EWS–FLI1 by targeted, nonviral delivery of small interfering RNA inhibits tumor growth in a
murine model of metastatic Ewing’s sarcoma. Cancer Res. 65, 8984–8992 (2005).126. Bartlett, D. W. & Davis, M. E. Impact of tumor-specific targeting and dosing schedule on tumor growth inhibition after intravenous administration of siRNA-containing nanoparticles. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 99, 975–985 (2008).127. Heidel, J. D.  et al.  Administration in non-human primates of escalating intravenous doses of targeted nanoparticles containing ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 siRNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 5715–5721 (2007).128. Davis, M. E.  et al.  Evidence of RNAi in humans from systemically administered siRNA via targeted nanoparticles. Nature 464, 1067–1070 (2010).This paper provides the first evidence that systemically administered siRNA can induce RNAi in humans.129. Wong, S. C.  et al.  Co-injection of a targeted,  reversibly masked endosomolytic polymer dramatically improves the efficacy of cholesterol-conjugated small interfering RNAs in vivo. Nucleic
Acid. Ther. 22, 380–390 (2012).130. Rozema, D. B., Ekena, K., Lewis, D. L., Loomis, A. G. & Wolff, J. A. Endosomolysis by masking of a membrane-active agent (EMMA) for cytoplasmic release of macromolecules. Bioconjug.Chem. 14, 51–57 (2003).131. Wooddell, C. I.  et al.  Hepatocyte-targeted RNAi therapeutics for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Mol. Ther. 21, 973–985 (2013).132. Yasuda, M.  et al.  RNAi-mediated silencing of hepatic Alas1  effectively prevents and treats the induced acute attacks in acute intermittent porphyria mice . Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1406228111 (2014).133. Chen, K. & Rajewsky, N. The evolution of gene regulation by transcription factors and microRNAs. Nature Rev. Genet.  8, 93–103 (2007).134. Pritchard, C. C., Cheng, H. H. & T ewari, M. MicroRNA profiling: approaches and considerations. Nature Rev. Genet.  13, 358–369 (2012).135. Hydbring, P ., Badalian-Very, G. Clinical applications of
profiling: approaches and considerations. Nature Rev. Genet.  13, 358–369 (2012).135. Hydbring, P ., Badalian-Very, G. Clinical applications of microRNAs F1000Res. 2, 136 (2013).136. Nana-Sinkam, S. P . & Croce, C. M. Clinical applications for microRNAs in cancer. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 93, 98–104 (2013).137. He, L.  et al.  A microRNA component of the p53 tumour suppressor network. Nature 447, 1130–1134 (2007).138. T rang, P .  et al.  Systemic delivery of tumor suppressor microRNA mimics using a neutral lipid emulsion inhibits lung tumors in mice. Mol. Ther. 19, 1116–1122 (2011).139. Bader, A. G. miR -34 — a microRNA replacement therapy is headed to the clinic. Front. Genet. 3, 120 (2012).140. Gaj, T ., Gersbach, C. A. & Barbas, C. F. 3rd. ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/Cas-based methods for genome engineering. T rends Biotechnol. 31, 397–405 (2013).141. Urnov, F. D., Rebar, E. J., Holmes, M. C., Zhang, H. S. & Gregory, P . D. Genome editing with engineered zinc
finger nucleases. Nature Rev. Genet. 11, 636–646 (2010).142. Boch, J.  et al.  Breaking the code of DNA binding specificity of TAL-type III effectors. Science 326, 1509–1512 (2009).143. Moscou, M. J. & Bogdanove, A. J. A simple cipher governs DNA recognition by TAL effectors. Science 326, 1501 (2009).144. Miller, J. C.  et al.  A TALE nuclease architecture for efficient genome editing. Nature Biotech. 29,  143–148 (2011).145. Cong, L.  et al.  Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 339, 819–823 (2013).146. Mali, P .  et al.  RNA-guided human genome engineering via Cas9. Science 339, 823–826 (2013).147. Wang, H.  et al.  One-step generation of mice carrying mutations in multiple genes by CRISPR/Cas-mediated genome engineering. Cell 153, 910–918 (2013).148. Ran, F. A.  et al.  Double nicking by RNA-guided CRISPR Cas9 for enhanced genome editing specificity. Cell 154, 1380–1389 (2013).149. Li, H.  et al.  In vivo  genome editing restores
haemostasis in a mouse model of haemophilia. Nature 475, 217–221 (2011).This study is the first to show that genome editing tools (ZFN) can modify gene in vivo  and rescue disease phenotype.150. Yin, H.  et al.  Genome editing with Cas9 in adult mice corrects a disease mutation and phenotype. Nature Biotech.  32, 551–553 (2014).This paper is the first to show that the Cas9 system can correct a disease mutation and rescue disease phenotype in adult animals.151. Hopkins, A. L. & Groom, C. R. The druggable genome. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 1, 727–730 (2002).152. Heyes, J., Palmer, L., Bremner, K. & MacLachlan, I. Cationic lipid saturation influences intracellular delivery of encapsulated nucleic acids. J. Control. Release 107, 276–287 (2005).153. Ambegia, E.  et al.  Stabilized plasmid-lipid particles containing PEG–diacylglycerols exhibit extended circulation lifetimes and tumor selective gene expression. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1669 , 155–163 (2005).
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1669 , 155–163 (2005).154. Mishra, S., Heidel, J. D., Webster, P . & Davis, M. E. Imidazole groups on a linear, cyclodextrin-containing polycation produce enhanced gene delivery via multiple processes. J. Control. Release 116, 179–191 (2006).155. Bellocq, N. C., Pun, S. H., Jensen, G. S. & Davis, M. E. T ransferrin-containing, cyclodextrin polymer-based particles for tumor-targeted gene delivery. Bioconjug. Chem. 14, 1122–1132 (2003).156. Mishra, S., Webster, P . & Davis, M. E. PEGylation significantly affects cellular uptake and intracellular trafficking of non-viral gene delivery particles. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 83, 97–111 (2004).157. Ramalingam, S., Annaluru, N. & Chandrasegaran, S.   A CRISPR way to engineer the human genome. Genome Biol. 14, 107 (2013).AcknowledgementsThe authors thank R. L. Bogorad, E. A. Appel, O. F. Khan, O. Veiseh, Y. Dong and G. Sahay for discussion. H.Y. is supported
by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Centers for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence and the Harvard–MIT
Veiseh, Y. Dong and G. Sahay for discussion. H.Y. is supported by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Centers for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence and the Harvard–MIT (Massachusetts Institute of T echnology) Center of Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence (5 -U54-CA151884 -04). R.K. is supported by the US National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (grant 1122374). A.A.E. is supported by the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, as a Program of Excellence in Nanotechnology (PEN) Award (con -tract HHSN268201000045C). This work was supported partly by the Koch Institute Support (core) Grant P30-CA14051 from the US National Cancer Institute. The authors acknowledge the service to the MIT community of  the late S. Collier.Competing interests statementThe authors declare competing interests : see Web version for details.FURTHER INFORMATIONALN–TTRsc Phase I study results:  http://www.alnylam.com/web/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/ALN-TTRsc-PhaseI-
web/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/ALN-TTRsc-PhaseI-Results-HFSA-Sept2013.pdfAlnylam Pharmaceuticals:  www.alnylam.comDynamic PolyConjugates (DPC) technology: an elegant solution to the siRNA delivery problem:  http://www.arrowheadresearch.com/sites/default/files/udocs/Arrowhead_Research_Corporation-DPC_Technology_White_Paper.pdfALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDFREVIEWSNATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS   VOLUME 15  | AUGUST 2014  | 555© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
