nutrientsReviewVitamin C and Immune FunctionAnitra C. Carr1,* and Silvia Maggini21Department of Pathology, University of Otago, Christchurch, P .O. Box 4345, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand2Bayer Consumer Care Ltd., Peter-Merian-Strasse 84, 4002 Basel, Switzerland; silvia.maggini@bayer.com*Correspondence: anitra.carr@otago.ac.nz; Tel.: +643-364-0649Received: 21 September 2017; Accepted: 31 October 2017; Published: 3 November 2017Abstract: Vitamin C is an essential micronutrient for humans, with pleiotropic functions related toits ability to donate electrons. It is a potent antioxidant and a cofactor for a family of biosyntheticand gene regulatory enzymes. Vitamin C contributes to immune defense by supporting variouscellular functions of both the innate and adaptive immune system. Vitamin C supports epithelialbarrier function against pathogens and promotes the oxidant scavenging activity of the skin, thereby
potentially protecting against environmental oxidative stress. Vitamin C accumulates in phagocyticcells, such as neutrophils, and can enhance chemotaxis, phagocytosis, generation of reactive oxygenspecies, and ultimately microbial killing. It is also needed for apoptosis and clearance of the spentneutrophils from sites of infection by macrophages, thereby decreasing necrosis/NETosis andpotential tissue damage. The role of vitamin C in lymphocytes is less clear, but it has been shown toenhance differentiation and proliferation of B- and T-cells, likely due to its gene regulating effects.Vitamin C deﬁciency results in impaired immunity and higher susceptibility to infections. In turn,infections signiﬁcantly impact on vitamin C levels due to enhanced inﬂammation and metabolicrequirements. Furthermore, supplementation with vitamin C appears to be able to both prevent andtreat respiratory and systemic infections. Prophylactic prevention of infection requires dietary vitamin
C intakes that provide at least adequate, if not saturating plasma levels (i.e., 100–200 mg/day), whichoptimize cell and tissue levels. In contrast, treatment of established infections requires signiﬁcantlyhigher (gram) doses of the vitamin to compensate for the increased inﬂammatory response andmetabolic demand.Keywords: ascorbate; ascorbic acid; immunity; immune system; neutrophil function; microbialkilling; lymphocytes; infection; vitamin C1. IntroductionThe immune system is a multifaceted and sophisticated network of specialized organs, tissues,cells, proteins, and chemicals, which has evolved in order to protect the host from a range of pathogens,such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites, as well as cancer cells [ 1]. It can be divided into epithelialbarriers, and cellular and humoral constituents of either innate (non-speciﬁc) and acquired (speciﬁc)immunity [ 1]. These constituents interact in multiple and highly complex ways. More than half
a century of research has shown vitamin C to be a crucial player in various aspects of the immunesystem, particularly immune cell function [2,3].Vitamin C is an essential nutrient which cannot be synthesized by humans due to loss of a keyenzyme in the biosynthetic pathway [ 4,5]. Severe vitamin C deﬁciency results in the potentially fataldisease scurvy [ 6]. Scurvy is characterized by weakening of collagenous structures, resulting in poorwound healing, and impaired immunity. Individuals with scurvy are highly susceptible to potentiallyfatal infections such as pneumonia [ 7]. In turn, infections can signiﬁcantly impact on vitamin C levelsdue to enhanced inﬂammation and metabolic requirements. Early on, it was noted that scurvy oftenNutrients 2017 ,9, 1211; doi:10.3390/nu9111211 www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 2 of 25followed infectious epidemics in populations [ 7], and cases of scurvy have been reported followingrespiratory infection [8]. This is particularly apparent for individuals who are already malnourished.Although the amount of vitamin C required to prevent scurvy is relatively low (i.e.,~10 mg/day) [ 9], the recommended dietary intakes for vitamin C are up to one hundred-foldhigher than that for many other vitamins [ 10]. A diet that supplies 100–200 mg/day of vitamin Cprovides adequate to saturating plasma concentrations in healthy individuals and should covergeneral requirements for the reduction of chronic disease risk [ 11,12]. Due to the low storage capacityof the body for the water-soluble vitamin, a regular and adequate intake is required to preventhypovitaminosis C. Epidemiological studies have indicated that hypovitaminosis C (plasma vitamin C< 23 µmol/L) is relatively common in Western populations, and vitamin C deﬁciency (<11 µmol/L)
is the fourth leading nutrient deﬁciency in the United States [ 13,14]. There are several reasons whyvitamin C dietary recommendations are not met, even in countries where food availability and supplywould be expected to be sufﬁcient. These include poor dietary habits, life-stages and/or lifestyleseither limiting intakes or increasing micronutrient requirements (e.g., smoking and alcohol or drugabuse), various diseases, exposure to pollutants and smoke (both active and passive), and economicreasons (poor socioeconomic status and limited access to nutritious food) [ 15,16]. Even otherwise‘healthy’ individuals in industrialized countries can be at risk due to lifestyle-related factors, suchas those on a diet or eating an unbalanced diet, and people facing periods of excessive physical orpsychological stress [15,16].Vitamin C has a number of activities that could conceivably contribute to its immune-modulating
effects. It is a highly effective antioxidant, due to its ability to readily donate electrons, thus protectingimportant biomolecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids) from damage by oxidantsgenerated during normal cell metabolism and through exposure to toxins and pollutants (e.g.,cigarette smoke) [ 17]. Vitamin C is also a cofactor for a family of biosynthetic and gene regulatorymonooxygenase and dioxygenase enzymes [ 18,19]. The vitamin has long been known as a cofactorfor the lysyl and prolyl hydroxylases required for stabilization of the tertiary structure of collagen,and is a cofactor for the two hydroxylases involved in carnitine biosynthesis, a molecule required fortransport of fatty acids into mitochondria for generation of metabolic energy (Figure 1) [19].Nutrients  2016 , 8, 1211 2 of 24  reported following respiratory infection [8]. This is particularly apparent for individuals who are already malnourished.
already malnourished. Although the amount of vitamin C required to prevent scurvy is relatively low (i.e., ~10 mg/day) [9], the recommended dietary intakes for vitamin C are up to one hundred-fold higher than that for many other vitamins [10]. A diet that supplies 100 –200 mg/day of vitamin C provides adequate to saturating plasma concentrations in healthy individuals and should cover general requirements for the reduction of chronic disease risk [11,12]. Due to  the low storage capacity of the body for the water-soluble vitamin, a regular and adequate intake  is required to prevent hypovitaminosis C. Epidemiological studies have indicated that hypovitaminosis C (plasma vitamin C < 23 μmol/L) is relatively common in Western populations, and vitamin C deficiency (<11 μmol/L) is the fourth leading nutrient deficiency in the United States  [13,14]. There are several reasons why vitamin C
dietary recommendations are not met, even in countries where food availability and supply would be expected to be sufficient. These include poor di etary habits, life-stages an d/or lifestyles either
limiting intakes or increasing micronutrient requirem ents (e.g., smoking and alcohol or drug abuse), various diseases, exposure to pollutants and smoke (both active and passive), and economic reasons (poor socioeconomic status and limited access to nu tritious food) [15,16]. Even otherwise ‘healthy’ individuals in industrialized countries can be at risk  due to lifestyle-related factors, such as those on a diet or eating an unbalanced diet, and people fa cing periods of excessive physical or psychological stress [15,16]. Vitamin C has a number of activities that could conceivably contribute to its immune-modulating effects. It is a highly effective antioxidant, due to its ability to readily donate electrons, thus protecting important biomolecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids) from damage by oxidants generated during normal cell metabolism and through exposure to toxins and pollutants (e.g., cigarette
smoke) [17]. Vitamin C is also a cofactor for a family of biosynthetic and gene regulatory monooxygenase and dioxygenase enzymes [18,19]. The vitamin has long been known as a cofactor for the lysyl and prolyl hydroxylases required for stabilizat ion of the tertiary structure of collagen, and is a cofactor for the two hydroxylases in volved in carnitine biosynthesis, a molecule required for transport of fatty acids into mitochondria for generation of metabolic energy (Figure 1) [19].  Figure 1.  The enzyme cofactor activities of vitamin C. Vitamin C is a cofactor of a family of biosynthetic and gene regulatory monooxygenase  and dioxygenase enzymes. These enzymes are involved in the synthesis of collagen, carnitine,  catecholamine hormones, e.g., norepinephrine, and amidated peptide hormones, e.g., va sopressin. These enzymes also hy droxylate transcription factors, e.g., hypoxia-inducible factor 1 α, and methylated DNA and histones, thus playing a role in gene
transcription and epig enetic regulation. ↑ indicates an increase and ↓ indicates a decrease. Figure 1. The enzyme cofactor activities of vitamin C. Vitamin C is a cofactor of a family ofbiosynthetic and gene regulatory monooxygenase and dioxygenase enzymes. These enzymes areinvolved in the synthesis of collagen, carnitine, catecholamine hormones, e.g., norepinephrine, andamidated peptide hormones, e.g., vasopressin. These enzymes also hydroxylate transcription factors,e.g., hypoxia-inducible factor 1 α, and methylated DNA and histones, thus playing a role in genetranscription and epigenetic regulation. ↑indicates an increase and ↓indicates a decrease.
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 3 of 25Vitamin C is also a cofactor for the hydroxylase enzymes involved in the synthesis of catecholaminehormones, e.g., norepinephrine, and amidated peptide hormones e.g., vasopressin, which are centralto the cardiovascular response to severe infection [ 20]. Furthermore, research over the past 15 yearsor so has uncovered new roles for vitamin C in the regulation of gene transcription and cell signalingpathways through regulation of transcription factor activity and epigenetic marks (Figure 1) [ 21,22].For example, the asparagyl and prolyl hydroylases required for the downregulation of the pleiotropictranscription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1 α(HIF-1 α) utilize vitamin C as a cofactor [ 21]. Recentresearch has also indicated an important role for vitamin C in regulation of DNA and histonemethylation by acting as a cofactor for enzymes which hydoxylate these epigenetic marks [22].
Our review explores the various roles of vitamin C in the immune system, including barrierintegrity and leukocyte function, and discusses potential mechanisms of action. We discussthe relevance of the immune-modulating effects of vitamin C in the context of infections and conditionsleading to vitamin C insufﬁciency.2. Barrier Integrity and Wound HealingThe skin has numerous essential functions, the primary of which is to act as a barrier againstexternal insults, including pathogens. The epidermal layer is highly cellular, comprising primarilykeratinocytes, whilst the dermal layer comprises ﬁbroblasts which secrete collagen ﬁbers, the majorcomponent of the dermis [ 23]. Skin contains millimolar concentrations of vitamin C, with higher levelsfound in the epidermis than the dermis [ 24–26]. Vitamin C is actively accumulated into the epidermaland dermal cells via the two sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter (SVCT) isoforms 1 and 2 [ 27],
suggesting that the vitamin has crucial functions within the skin. Clues to the role of vitamin C inthe skin come from the symptoms of the vitamin C deﬁciency disease scurvy, which is characterizedby bleeding gums, bruising, and impaired wound healing [ 28,29]. These symptoms are thought tobe a result of the role of vitamin C as a co-factor for the prolyl and lysyl hydroxylase enzymes thatstabilize the tertiary structure of collagen (Table 1) [ 30]. Further research has shown that vitamin C canalso increase collagen gene expression in ﬁbroblasts [31–35].Table 1. Role of vitamin C in immune defense.Immune System Function of Vitamin C Refs.Epithelial barriersEnhances collagen synthesis and stabilization [30–35]Protects against ROS-induced damage1[36–40]Enhances keratinocyte differentiation and lipid synthesis [41–45]Enhances ﬁbroblast proliferation and migration [46,47]Shortens time to wound healing in patients [48,49]Phagocytes (neutrophils,
Phagocytes (neutrophils,macrophages)Acts as an antioxidant/electron donor [50–53]Enhances motility/chemotaxis [54–63]Enhances phagocytosis and ROS generation [64–71]Enhances microbial killing [54,55,57,58,70,72]Facilitates apoptosis and clearance [71,73,74]Decreases necrosis/NETosis [73,75]B- and T-lymphocytesEnhances differentiation and proliferation [62,63,76–82]Enhances antibody levels [78,83–85]Inﬂammatory mediatorsModulates cytokine production [75,77,86–94]Decreases histamine levels [56,61,95–101]1ROS, reactive oxygen species; NET, neutrophil extracellular trap. Note that many of these studies comprisedmarginal or deﬁcient vitamin C status at baseline. Supplementation in situations of adequate vitamin C status maynot have comparable effects.Vitamin C intervention studies in humans (using both dietary and gram doses of vitamin C) haveshown enhanced vitamin C uptake into skin cells [ 26,36] and enhanced oxidant scavenging activity
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 4 of 25of the skin [ 36,37]. The elevated antioxidant status of the skin following vitamin C supplementationcould potentially protect against oxidative stress induced by environmental pollutants [ 38,39].The antioxidant effects of vitamin C are likely to be enhanced in combination with vitamin E [ 40,102].Cell culture and preclinical studies have indicated that vitamin C can enhance epithelial barrierfunctions via a number of different mechanisms. Vitamin C supplementation of keratinocytes inculture enhances differentiation and barrier function via modulating signaling and biosyntheticpathways, with resultant elevations in barrier lipid synthesis [ 41–45]. Dysfunctional epithelialbarrier function in the lungs of animals with serious infection can be restored by administrationof vitamin C [ 74]. This was attributed to enhanced expression of tight junction proteins and preventionof cytoskeletal rearrangements.
of cytoskeletal rearrangements.Animal studies using the vitamin C-dependent Gulo knockout mouse indicated that deﬁciencydid not affect the formation of collagen in the skin of unchallenged mice [ 103]; however,following full thickness excisional wounding there was signiﬁcantly decreased collagen formationin vitamin C-deﬁcient mice [ 46]. This ﬁnding is in agreement with an earlier study carried out withscorbutic guinea pigs [ 104]. Thus, vitamin C appears to be particularly essential during wound healing,also decreasing the expression of pro-inﬂammatory mediators and enhancing the expression of variouswound healing mediators [ 46]. Fibroblast cell culture experiments have also indicated that vitamin Ccan alter gene expression proﬁles within dermal ﬁbroblasts, promoting ﬁbroblast proliferation andmigration which is essential for tissue remodeling and wound healing [ 46,47]. Following surgery,
patients require relatively high intakes of vitamin C in order to normalize their plasma vitamin C status(e.g.,≥500 mg/day) [105], and administration of antioxidant micronutrients, including vitamin C, topatients with disorders in wound healing can shorten the time to wound closure [48,49,106,107].Leukocytes, particularly neutrophils and monocyte-derived macrophages, are major players inwound healing [ 108]. During the initial inﬂammatory stage, neutrophils migrate to the wound site inorder to sterilize it via the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antimicrobial proteins [ 109].The neutrophils eventually undergo apoptosis and are cleared by macrophages, resulting in resolutionof the inﬂammatory response. However, in chronic, non-healing wounds, such as those observedin diabetics, the neutrophils persist and instead undergo necrotic cell death which can perpetuatethe inﬂammatory response and hinder wound healing [ 109,110]. Vitamin C is thought to inﬂuence
several important aspects of neutrophil function: migration in response to inﬂammatory mediators(chemotaxis), phagocytosis and killing of microbes, and apoptosis and clearance by macrophages(see below).3. Vitamin C and Leukocyte FunctionLeukocytes, such as neutrophils and monocytes, actively accumulate vitamin C against a concentrationgradient, resulting in values that are 50- to 100-fold higher than plasma concentrations [111–113] .These cellsaccumulate maximal vitamin C concentrations at dietary intakes of ~100 mg/day [114,115], althoughother body tissues likely require higher intakes for saturation [116,117] . Neutrophils accumulatevitamin C via SVCT2 and typically contain intracellular levels of at least 1 mM [ 111,118]. Followingstimulation of their oxidative burst neutrophils can further increase their intracellular concentration ofvitamin C through the non-speciﬁc uptake of the oxidized form, dehydroascorbate (DHA), via glucose
transporters (GLUT) [118,119] . DHA is then rapidly reduced to ascorbate intracellularly, to give levelsof about 10 mM [ 119]. It is believed that the accumulation of such high vitamin C concentrations
of about 10 mM [ 119]. It is believed that the accumulation of such high vitamin C concentrationsindicates important functions within these cells.Accumulation of millimolar concentrations of vitamin C into neutrophils, particularly followingactivation of their oxidative burst, is thought to protect these cells from oxidative damage [ 119].Vitamin C is a potent water-soluble antioxidant that can scavenge numerous reactive oxidants and canalso regenerate the important cellular and membrane antioxidants glutathione and vitamin E [ 120].Upon phagocytosis or activation with soluble stimulants, vitamin C is depleted from neutrophils inan oxidant-dependent manner [ 50–53]. An alteration in the balance between oxidant generation and
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 5 of 25antioxidant defenses can lead to alterations in multiple signaling pathways, with the pro-inﬂammatorytranscription factor nuclear factor κB (NF κB) playing a central role [ 121]. Oxidants can activateNFκB, which triggers a signaling cascade leading to continued synthesis of oxidative species and otherinﬂammatory mediators [ 122,123]. Vitamin C has been shown to attenuate both oxidant generation andNFκB activation in dendritic cells in vitro , and NF κB activation in neutrophils isolated from septic Guloknockout mice [ 75,124]. Thiol-containing proteins can be particularly sensitive to redox alterationswithin cells and are often central to the regulation of redox-related cell signaling pathways [ 125].Vitamin C-dependent modulation of thiol-dependent cell signaling and gene expression pathways hasbeen reported in T-cells [126,127].Thus, vitamin C could modulate immune function through modulation of redox-sensitive cell
signaling pathways or by directly protecting important cell structural components. For example,exposure of neutrophils to oxidants can inhibit motility of the cells, which is thought to be due tooxidation of membrane lipids and resultant effects on cell membrane ﬂuidity [ 63]. Neutrophils containhigh levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids in their plasma membranes, and thus improvements inneutrophil motility observed following vitamin C administration (see below) could conceivably beattributed to oxidant scavenging as well as regeneration of vitamin E [120].3.1. Neutrophil ChemotaxisNeutrophil inﬁltration into infected tissues is an early step in innate immunity. In responseto pathogen- or host-derived inﬂammatory signals (e.g., N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine(fMLP), interleukin (IL)-8, leukotriene B4, and complement component C5a), marginated neutrophilsliterally swarm to the site of infection [ 128]. Migration of neutrophils in response to chemical stimuli is
termed chemotaxis, while random migration is termed chemokinesis (Figure 2). Neutrophils expressmore than 30 different chemokine and chemoattractant receptors in order to sense and rapidly respondto tissue damage signals [ 128]. Early studies carried out in scorbutic guinea pigs indicated impairedleukocyte chemotactic response compared with leukocytes isolated from guinea pigs supplementedwith adequate vitamin C in their diet (Table 1) [ 54–56,64]. These ﬁndings suggest that vitamin Cdeﬁciency may impact on the ability of phagocytes to migrate to sites of infection.Patients with severe infection exhibit compromised neutrophil chemotactic ability [ 129–132].This neutrophil ‘paralysis’ is believed to be partly due to enhanced levels of anti-inﬂammatory andimmune-suppressive mediators (e.g., IL-4 and IL-10) during the compensatory anti-inﬂammatoryresponse observed following initial hyper-stimulation of the immune system [ 133]. However, it is also
possible that vitamin C depletion, which is prevalent during severe infection [ 20], may contribute.Studies in the 1980s and 1990s indicated that patients with recurrent infections had impairedleukocyte chemotaxis, which could be restored in response to supplementation with gram dosesof vitamin C [ 57–60,65–67]. Furthermore, supplementation of neonates with suspected sepsis with400 mg/day vitamin C dramatically improved neutrophil chemotaxis [134].Recurrent infections can also result from genetic disorders of neutrophil function, such aschronic granulomatous disease (CGD), an immunodeﬁciency disease resulting in defective leukocytegeneration of ROS [ 135], and Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS), a rare autosomal recessive disorderaffecting vesicle trafﬁcking [ 136]. Although vitamin C administration would not be expected toaffect the underlying defects of these genetic disorders, it may support the function of redundant
antimicrobial mechanisms in these cells. For example, patients with CGD showed improved
affect the underlying defects of these genetic disorders, it may support the function of redundantantimicrobial mechanisms in these cells. For example, patients with CGD showed improvedleukocyte chemotaxis following supplementation with gram doses of vitamin C administered eitherenterally or parenterally [ 137–139]. This was associated with decreased infections and clinicalimprovement [ 137,138]. A mouse model of CHS showed improved neutrophil chemotaxis followingvitamin C supplementation [ 140], and neutrophils isolated from two children with CHS showedimproved chemotaxis following supplementation with 200–500 mg/day vitamin C [ 141,142], althoughthis effect has not been observed in all cases [ 140,143]. The vitamin C-dependent enhancement of
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 6 of 25chemotaxis was thought to be mediated in part via effects on microtubule assembly [ 144,145], andmore recent research has indicated that intracellular vitamin C can stabilize microtubules [146].Nutrients  2016 , 8, 1211 6 of 24  [144,145], and more recent research has indica ted that intracellular vitamin C can stabilize microtubules [146].  Figure 2.  Role of vitamin C in phagocyte func tion. Vitamin C has been shown to: ( a) enhance neutrophil migration in response to chemoattractants (chemotaxis), ( b) enhance engulfment (phagocytosis) of microbes, and ( c) stimulate reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and killing of microbes. ( d) Vitamin C supports caspase-dependent apop tosis, enhancing uptake and clearance by macrophages, and inhibits necr osis, including NETosis, thus supporting resolution of the inflammatory response and attenuating tissue damage.
Supplementation of healthy volunt eers with dietary or gram doses of vitamin C has also been shown to enhance neutrophil chemotactic ability [61–63,147]. Johnston et al., proposed that the antihistamine effect of vitamin C correlated with enhanced chemotaxis [61]. In participants who had inadequate vitamin C status (i.e., <50 μM), supplementation with a dietary source of vitamin C (providing ~250 mg/day) resulted in a 20% increase in neutrophil chemotaxis [147]. Furthermore, supplementation of elderly women with 1 g/day vita min C, in combination with vitamin E, enhanced neutrophil functions, including chemotaxis [148]. Thus, members of the general population may benefit from improved immune cell function through enhanced vitamin C intake, particularly if they have inadequate vitamin C status, which can be more prevalent in the elderly. However, it should be noted that it is not yet certain to what extent im proved ex vivo leukocyte ch emotaxis translates into
improved in vivo immune function. 3.2. Phagocytosis and Microbial Killing Once neutrophils have migrated to the site of infection, they proceed to engulf the invading pathogens (Figure 2). Various intracellular granul es are mobilized and fuse  with the phagosome, emptying their arsenal of antimicr obial peptides and proteins into the phagosome [149]. Components of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphat e (NADPH) oxidase assemble in the phagosomal Figure 2. Role of vitamin C in phagocyte function. Vitamin C has been shown to: ( a) enhance neutrophilmigration in response to chemoattractants (chemotaxis), ( b) enhance engulfment (phagocytosis)of microbes, and ( c) stimulate reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and killing of microbes.(d) Vitamin C supports caspase-dependent apoptosis, enhancing uptake and clearance by macrophages,and inhibits necrosis, including NETosis, thus supporting resolution of the inﬂammatory response andattenuating tissue damage.
attenuating tissue damage.Supplementation of healthy volunteers with dietary or gram doses of vitamin C has alsobeen shown to enhance neutrophil chemotactic ability [ 61–63,147]. Johnston et al., proposed thatthe antihistamine effect of vitamin C correlated with enhanced chemotaxis [ 61]. In participants whohad inadequate vitamin C status (i.e., <50 µM), supplementation with a dietary source of vitamin C(providing ~250 mg/day) resulted in a 20% increase in neutrophil chemotaxis [ 147]. Furthermore,supplementation of elderly women with 1 g/day vitamin C, in combination with vitamin E, enhancedneutrophil functions, including chemotaxis [ 148]. Thus, members of the general population maybeneﬁt from improved immune cell function through enhanced vitamin C intake, particularly if theyhave inadequate vitamin C status, which can be more prevalent in the elderly. However, it should be
noted that it is not yet certain to what extent improved ex vivo leukocyte chemotaxis translates intoimproved in vivo immune function.3.2. Phagocytosis and Microbial Killing
noted that it is not yet certain to what extent improved ex vivo leukocyte chemotaxis translates intoimproved in vivo immune function.3.2. Phagocytosis and Microbial KillingOnce neutrophils have migrated to the site of infection, they proceed to engulf the invadingpathogens (Figure 2). Various intracellular granules are mobilized and fuse with the phagosome,
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 7 of 25emptying their arsenal of antimicrobial peptides and proteins into the phagosome [ 149]. Componentsof the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase assemble in the phagosomalmembrane and generate superoxide, the ﬁrst in a long line of ROS generated by neutrophils to killpathogens. The enzyme superoxide dismutase converts superoxide to hydrogen peroxide, whichcan then be utilized to form the oxidant hypochlorous acid via the azurophilic granule enzymemyeloperoxidase [ 149]. Hypochlorous acid can further react with amines to form secondary oxidantsknown as chloramines. These various neutrophil-derived oxidants have different reactivities andspeciﬁcities for biological targets, with protein thiol groups being particularly susceptible.Neutrophils isolated from scorbutic guinea pigs exhibit a severely impaired ability to killmicrobes [ 54,55,70], and studies have indicated impaired phagocytosis and/or ROS generation in
neutrophils from scorbutic compared with ascorbate replete animals [ 68–70]. Generation of ROS byneutrophils from volunteers with inadequate vitamin C status can be enhanced by 20% followingsupplementation with a dietary source of vitamin C [ 147], and increases in both phagocytosisand oxidant generation were observed following supplementation of elderly participants witha combination of vitamins C and E [ 148]. Patients with recurrent infections [ 57,58,66,67,72], or thegenetic conditions CGD or CHS [ 138,139,141,143,150], have impaired neutrophil bacterial killingand/or phagocytosis, which can be signiﬁcantly improved following supplementation with gramdoses of vitamin C, resulting in long lasting clinical improvement. A couple of studies, however,showed no improvement of ex vivo anti-fungal or anti-bacterial activity in neutrophils isolated fromCGD or CHS patients supplemented with vitamin C [ 140,151]. The reason for these differences
is not clear, although it may depend on the baseline vitamin C level of the patients, which is notassessed in most cases. Furthermore, different microbes have variable susceptibility to the oxidativeand non-oxidative anti-microbial mechanisms of neutrophils. For example, Staphylococcus aureusis susceptible to oxidative mechanisms, whereas other microorganisms are more susceptible tonon-oxidative mechanisms [ 152]. Therefore, the type of microbe used to assess the ex vivo neutrophilfunctions could inﬂuence the ﬁndings.Patients with severe infection (sepsis) exhibit a decreased ability to phagocytose microbes anda diminished ability to generate ROS [ 153]. Decreased neutrophil phagocytosis was associated withenhanced patient mortality [ 154]. Interestingly, Stephan et al. [ 155] observed impaired neutrophilkilling activity in critically ill patients prior to acquiring nosocomial infections, suggesting that
critical illness itself, without prior infection, can also impair neutrophil function. This resulted insubsequent susceptibility to hospital-acquired infections. Impaired phagocytic and oxidant-generatingcapacity of leukocytes in patients with severe infection has been attributed to the compensatoryanti-inﬂammatory response, resulting in enhanced levels of immunosuppressive mediators such asIL-10 [ 133], as well as to the hypoxic conditions of inﬂammatory sites, which diminishes substrate forROS generation [ 156]. Another explanation is the larger numbers of immature neutrophils releasedfrom the bone marrow due to increased demands during severe infection. These immature ‘band’cells have decreased functionality compared with differentiated neutrophils [ 157]. Thus, conﬂictingﬁndings in severe infection could be due to variability in the total numbers of underactive immatureneutrophils compared with activated fully-differentiated neutrophils [ 158,159]. Despite displaying
an activated basal state, the mature neutrophils from patients with severe infection do not generate
an activated basal state, the mature neutrophils from patients with severe infection do not generateROS to the same extent as healthy neutrophils following ex vivo stimulation [ 160]. The effect ofvitamin C supplementation on phagocytosis, oxidant generation, and microbial killing by leukocytesfrom septic patients has not yet been explored.3.3. Neutrophil Apoptosis and ClearanceFollowing microbial phagocytosis and killing, neutrophils undergo a process of programmedcell death called apoptosis [ 161]. This process facilitates subsequent phagocytosis and clearance ofthe spent neutrophils from sites of inﬂammation by macrophages, thus supporting resolution ofinﬂammation and preventing excessive tissue damage (Figure 2). Caspases are key effector enzymes
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 8 of 25in the apoptotic process, culminating in phosphatidyl serine exposure, thus marking the cells foruptake and clearance by macrophages [ 162]. Interestingly, caspases are thiol-dependent enzymes,making them very sensitive to inactivation by ROS generated by activated neutrophils [ 163,164].Thus, vitamin C may be expected to protect the oxidant-sensitive caspase-dependent apoptotic processfollowing activation of neutrophils. In support of this premise, in vitro studies have shown that loadinghuman neutrophils with vitamin C can enhance Escherichia coli -mediated apoptosis of the neutrophils(Table 1) [ 71]. Peritoneal neutrophils isolated from vitamin C-deﬁcient Gulo mice exhibited attenuatedapoptosis [ 75], and instead underwent necrotic cell death [ 73]. These vitamin C-deﬁcient neutrophilswere not phagocytosed by macrophages in vitro , and persisted at inﬂammatory loci in vivo [73].
Furthermore, administration of vitamin C to septic animals decreased the numbers of neutrophils inthe lungs of these animals [74].Numerous studies have reported attenuated neutrophil apoptosis in patients with severe infectioncompared with control participants [ 165–172]. The delayed apoptosis appears to be related todisease severity and is thought to be associated with enhanced tissue damage observed in patientswith sepsis [ 173,174]. Immature ‘band’ neutrophils released during severe infection were alsofound to be resistant to apoptosis and had longer life spans [ 157]. Plasma from septic patientshas been found to suppress apoptosis in healthy neutrophils, suggesting that pro-inﬂammatorycytokines were responsible for the increased in vivo survival of neutrophils during inﬂammatoryconditions [165,174–176] . Interestingly, high-dose vitamin C administration has been shown tomodulate cytokine levels in patients with cancer [ 177] and, although this has not yet been assessed
in patients with severe infection, could conceivably be another mechanism by which vitamin Cmay modulate neutrophil function in these patients. To date, only one study has investigatedthe effect of vitamin C supplementation on neutrophil apoptosis in septic patients [178]. Intravenoussupplementation of septic abdominal surgery patients with 450 mg/day vitamin C was found todecrease caspase-3 protein levels and, thus was presumed to have an anti-apoptotic effect on peripheralblood neutrophils. However, caspase activity and apoptosis of the neutrophils following activation wasnot assessed. Furthermore, circulating neutrophils may not reﬂect the activation status of neutrophilsat inﬂammatory tissue loci. Clearly, more studies need to be undertaken to tease out the role ofvitamin C in neutrophil apoptosis and clearance from inﬂammatory loci.3.4. Neutrophil Necrosis and NETosisNeutrophils that fail to undergo apoptosis instead undergo necrotic cell death (Figure 2).
The subsequent release of toxic intracellular components, such as proteases, can cause extensivetissue damage [ 179,180]. One recently discovered form of neutrophil death has been termedNETosis. This results from the release of ‘neutrophil extracellular traps’ (NETs) comprising neutrophilDNA, histones, and enzymes [ 181]. Although NETs have been proposed to comprise a uniquemethod of microbial killing [ 182,183], they have also been implicated in tissue damage and organfailure [184,185] . NET-associated histones can act as damage-associated molecular pattern proteins,activating the immune system and causing further damage [ 186]. Patients with sepsis, or who go onto develop sepsis, have signiﬁcantly elevated levels of circulating cell-free DNA, which is thought toindicate NET formation [184,187].Pre-clinical studies in vitamin C-deﬁcient Gulo knockout mice indicated enhanced NETosis
in the lungs of septic animals and increased circulating cell-free DNA [ 75]. The levels of these
Pre-clinical studies in vitamin C-deﬁcient Gulo knockout mice indicated enhanced NETosisin the lungs of septic animals and increased circulating cell-free DNA [ 75]. The levels of thesemarkers were attenuated in vitamin C sufﬁcient animals or in deﬁcient animals that were administeredvitamin C (Table 1). The same investigators showed that in vitro supplementation of humanneutrophils with vitamin C attenuated phorbol ester-induced NETosis [ 75]. Administration ofgram doses of vitamin C to septic patients over four days, however, did not appear to decreasecirculating cell-free DNA levels [188], although the duration of treatment may have been too short tosee a sustained effect. It should be noted that cell-free DNA is not speciﬁc for neutrophil-derived DNA,as it may also derive from necrotic tissue; however, the association of neutrophil-speciﬁc proteins
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 9 of 25or enzymes, such as myeloperoxidase, with the DNA can potentially provide an indication of itssource [184].The transcription factor HIF-1 αfacilitates neutrophil survival at hypoxic loci through delayingapoptosis [ 189]. Interestingly, vitamin C is a cofactor for the iron-containing dioxygenase enzymesthat regulate the levels and activity of HIF-1 α[190]. These hydroxylase enzymes downregulateHIF-1 αactivity by facilitating degradation of constitutively expressed HIF-1 αand decreasingbinding of transcription coactivators. In vitamin C-deﬁcient Gulo knockout mice, up-regulationof HIF-1 αwas observed under normoxic conditions, along with attenuated neutrophil apoptosis andclearance by macrophages [ 73]. HIF-1 αhas also been proposed as a regulator of NET generation byneutrophils [ 191], hence providing a potential mechanism by which vitamin C could downregulateNET generation by these cells [75].3.5. Lymphocyte Function
3.5. Lymphocyte FunctionLike phagocytes, B- and T-lymphocytes accumulate vitamin C to high levels via SVCT [ 192,193].The role of vitamin C within these cells is less clear, although antioxidant protection has beensuggested [ 194].In vitro studies have indicated that incubation of vitamin C with lymphocytespromotes proliferation [ 76,77], resulting in enhanced antibody generation [ 78], and also providesresistance to various cell death stimuli [ 195]. Furthermore, vitamin C appears to have an importantrole in developmental differentiation and maturation of immature T-cells (Table 1) [ 76,79]. Similarproliferative and differentiation/maturation effects have been observed with mature and immaturenatural killer cells, respectively [196].Early studies in guinea pigs showed enhanced mitotic activity of isolated peripheral bloodlymphocytes following intraperitoneal vitamin C treatment, and enhanced humoral antibody
levels during immunization [ 82–85]. Although one human intervention study has reportedpositive associations between antibody levels (immunoglobulin (Ig)M, (Ig)G, (Ig)A) and vitamin Csupplementation [ 85], another has not [ 62]. Instead, Anderson and coworkers showed that oraland intravenous supplementation of low gram doses of vitamin C to children with asthma andhealthy volunteers enhanced lymphocyte transformation, an ex vivo measure of mitogen-inducedproliferation and enlargement of T-lymphocytes (Table 1) [ 62,63,81]. Administration of vitamin C toelderly people was also shown to enhance ex vivo lymphocyte proliferation [ 80], a ﬁnding conﬁrmedusing combinations of vitamin C with vitamins A and/or E [ 148,197]. Exposure to toxic chemicals canaffect lymphocyte function, and both natural killer cell activity and lymphocyte blastogenic responsesto T- and B-cell mitogens were restored to normal levels following vitamin C supplementation [ 198].
Although the human studies mentioned above are encouraging, it is apparent that more humanintervention studies are needed to conﬁrm these ﬁndings.Recent research in wild-type and Gulo knockout mice indicated that parenteral administrationof 200 mg/kg vitamin C modulated the immunosuppression of regulatory T-cells (Tregs) observedin sepsis [ 89]. Vitamin C administration enhanced Treg proliferation and inhibited the negativeimmunoregulation of Tregs by inhibiting the expression of speciﬁc transcription factors, antigens,and cytokines [ 89]. The mechanisms involved likely rely on the gene regulatory effects ofvitamin C [ 79,89,199,200]. For example, recent research has implicated vitamin C in epigeneticregulation through its action as a cofactor for the iron-containing dioxygenases which hydroxylatemethylated DNA and histones [ 22,201]. The ten-eleven translocation (TET) enzymes hydroxylate
methylcytosine residues, which may act as epigenetic marks in their own right, and also facilitateremoval of the methylated residues, an important process in epigenetic regulation [ 202]. Preliminary
removal of the methylated residues, an important process in epigenetic regulation [ 202]. Preliminaryevidence indicates that vitamin C can regulate T-cell maturation via epigenetic mechanisms involvingthe TETs and histone demethylation [ 79,199,200]. It is likely that the cell signaling and gene regulatoryfunctions of vitamin C, via regulation of transcription factors and epigenetic marks, play major roles inits immune-regulating functions.
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 10 of 253.6. Inﬂammatory MediatorsCytokines are important cell signaling molecules secreted by a variety of immune cells, both innateand adaptive, in response to infection and inﬂammation [ 1]. They comprise a broad range of molecules,including chemokines, interferons (IFNs), ILs, lymphokines, and TNFs, which modulate both humoraland cell-based immune responses, and regulate the maturation, growth, and responsiveness of speciﬁccell populations. Cytokines can elicit pro-inﬂammatory or anti-inﬂammatory responses, and vitamin Cappears to modulate systemic and leukocyte-derived cytokines in a complex manner.Incubation of vitamin C with peripheral blood lymphocytes decreased lipopolysaccharide(LPS)-induced generation of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF- αand IFN- γ, and increasedanti-inﬂammatory IL-10 production, while having no effect on IL-1 βlevels [ 77]. Furthermore, in vitro
addition of vitamin C to peripheral blood monocytes isolated from pneumonia patients decreasedthe generation of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF- αand IL-6 [ 86]. However, another study foundthat in vitro treatment of peripheral blood monocytes with vitamin C and/or vitamin E enhancedLPS-stimulated TNF- αgeneration, but did not affect IL-1 βgeneration [ 87]. Furthermore, incubationof vitamin C with virus-infected human and murine ﬁbroblasts enhanced generation of antiviralIFN [ 91–93]. Supplementation of healthy human volunteers with 1 g/day vitamin C (with and withoutvitamin E) was shown to enhance peripheral blood mononuclear cell-derived IL-10, IL-1, and TNF- αfollowing stimulation with LPS [ 87,94]. Thus, the effect of vitamin C on cytokine generation appearsto depend on the cell type and/or the inﬂammatory stimulant. Recent research has indicated thatvitamin C treatment of microglia, resident myeloid-derived macrophages in the central nervous
system, attenuates activation of the cells and synthesis of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF, IL-6,and IL-1 β[90]. This is indicative of an anti-inﬂammatory phenotype.Preclinical studies using Gluo knockout mice have highlighted the cytokine-modulating effects ofvitamin C. Vitamin C-deﬁcient Gulo knockout mice infected with inﬂuenza virus showed enhancedsynthesis of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF- αand IL-1 α/βin their lungs, and decreasedproduction of the anti-viral cytokine IFN- α/β[88]. Administration of vitamin C to Gulo mice withpolymicrobial peritonitis resulted in decreased synthesis of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines TNF- αand IL-1 βby isolated neutrophils [ 75]. Another study in septic Gulo mice administered 200 mg/kgparenteral vitamin C has shown decreased secretion of the inhibitory cytokines TGF- βand IL-10 byTregs [ 89]. In this study, attenuated IL-4 secretion and augmented IFN- γsecretion was also observed,
suggesting immune-modulating effects of vitamin C in sepsis. Overall, vitamin C appears to normalizecytokine generation, likely through its gene-regulating effects.Histamine is an immune mediator produced by basophils, eosinophils, and mast cells duringthe immune response to pathogens and stress. Histamine stimulates vasodilation and increasedcapillary permeability, resulting in the classic allergic symptoms of runny nose and eyes. Studiesusing guinea pigs, a vitamin C-requiring animal model, have indicated that vitamin C depletion isassociated with enhanced circulating histamine levels, and that supplementation of the animals withvitamin C resulted in decreased histamine levels [ 56,95–98]. Enhanced histamine generation was foundto increase the utilization of vitamin C in these animals [ 96]. Consistent with the animal studies, humanintervention studies with oral vitamin C (125 mg/day to 2 g/day) and intravenous vitamin C (7.5 g
infusion) have reported decreased histamine levels [ 61,99–101], which was more apparent in patientswith allergic compared with infectious diseases [ 101]. Although vitamin C has been proposed to
infusion) have reported decreased histamine levels [ 61,99–101], which was more apparent in patientswith allergic compared with infectious diseases [ 101]. Although vitamin C has been proposed to‘detoxify’ histamine [96,97], the precise mechanisms responsible for the in vivo decrease in histaminelevels following vitamin C administration are currently unknown. Furthermore, effects of vitamin Csupplementation on histamine levels are not observed in all studies [203].4. Vitamin C Insufﬁciency ConditionsNumerous environmental and health conditions can have an impact on vitamin C status.In this section we discuss examples which also have a link with impaired immunity and increasedsusceptibility to infection. For example, exposure to air pollution containing oxidants, such as ozone
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 11 of 25and nitrogen dioxide, can upset the oxidant-antioxidant balance within the body and cause oxidativestress [ 204]. Oxidative stress can also occur if antioxidant defenses are impaired, which may be the casewhen vitamin C levels are insufﬁcient [ 205]. Air pollution can damage respiratory tract lining ﬂuidand increase the risk of respiratory disease, particularly in children and the elderly [ 204,206] who areat risk of both impaired immunity and vitamin C insufﬁciency [ 14,204]. Vitamin C is a free-radicalscavenger that can scavenge superoxide and peroxyl radicals, hydrogen peroxide, hypochlorous acid,and oxidant air pollutants [ 207,208]. The antioxidant properties of vitamin C enable it to protect lungcells exposed to oxidants and oxidant-mediated damage caused by various pollutants, heavy metals,pesticides, and xenobiotics [204,209].Tobacco smoke is an underestimated pollutant in many parts of the world. Both smokers and
passive smokers have lower plasma and leukocyte vitamin C levels than non-smokers [ 10,210,211],partly due to increased oxidative stress and to both a lower intake and a higher metabolic turnoverof vitamin C compared to non-smokers [ 10,211–213]. Mean serum concentrations of vitamin C inadults who smoke have been found to be one-third lower than those of non-smokers, and it has beenrecommended that smokers should consume an additional 35 mg/day of vitamin C to ensure there issufﬁcient ascorbic acid to repair oxidant damage [ 10,14]. Vitamin C levels are also lower in childrenand adolescents exposed to environmental tobacco smoke [ 214]. Research in vitamin C-deﬁcientguinea pigs exposed to tobacco smoke has indicated that vitamin C can protect against proteindamage and lipid peroxidation [ 213,215]. In passive smokers exposed to environmental tobacco smoke,vitamin C supplementation signiﬁcantly reduced plasma F 2-isoprostane concentrations, a measure of
oxidative stress [ 216]. Tobacco use increases susceptibility to bacterial and viral infections [ 217,218], inwhich vitamin C may play a role. For example, in a population-based study the risk of developingobstructive airways disease was signiﬁcantly higher in those with the lowest plasma vitamin Cconcentrations (26 µmol/L) compared to never smokers, a risk that decreased with increasing vitamin Cconcentration [219].Individuals with diabetes are at greater risk of common infections, including inﬂuenza,pneumonia, and foot infections, which are associated with increased morbidity and mortality [ 220,221].Several immune-related changes are observed in obesity that contribute towards the developmentof type 2 diabetes. A major factor is persistent low-grade inﬂammation of adipose tissue in obesesubjects, which plays a role in the progression to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, and which
is not present in the adipose tissue of lean subjects [ 222,223]. The adipose tissue is inﬁltrated bypro-inﬂammatory macrophages and T-cells, leading to the accumulation of pro-inﬂammatory cytokinessuch as interleukins and TNF- α[224,225]. A decrease in plasma vitamin C levels has been observedin studies of type 2 diabetes [ 18,226], and a major cause of increased need for vitamin C in type 2diabetes is thought to be the high level of oxidative stress caused by hyperglycemia [ 10,227,228].Inverse correlations have been reported between plasma vitamin C concentrations and the risk ofdiabetes, hemoglobin A1c concentrations (an index of glucose tolerance), fasting and postprandialblood glucose, and oxidative stress [ 219,229–232]. Meta-analysis of interventional studies has indictedthat supplementation with vitamin C can improve glycemic control in type 2 diabetes [233].Elderly people are particularly susceptible to infections due to immunosenescence and decreased
immune cell function [ 234]. For example, common viral infections such as respiratory illnesses, that
Elderly people are particularly susceptible to infections due to immunosenescence and decreasedimmune cell function [ 234]. For example, common viral infections such as respiratory illnesses, thatare usually self-limiting in healthy young people, can lead to the development of complications such aspneumonia, resulting in increased morbidity and mortality in elderly people. A lower mean vitamin Cstatus has been observed in free-living or institutionalized elderly people, indicated by lowered plasmaand leukocyte concentrations [ 10,235,236], which is of concern because low vitamin C concentrations(<17 µmol/L) in older people (aged 75–82 years) are strongly predictive of all-cause mortality [ 237].Acute and chronic diseases that are prevalent in this age group may also play an important part inthe reduction of vitamin C reserves [ 238–240]. Institutionalization in particular is an aggravating
factor in this age group, resulting in even lower plasma vitamin C levels than in non-institutionalizedelderly people. It is noteworthy that elderly hospitalized patients with acute respiratory infections
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 12 of 25have been shown to fare signiﬁcantly better with vitamin C supplementation than those not receivingthe vitamin [ 241]. Decreased immunological surveillance in individuals older than 60 years also resultsin greater risk of cancer, and patients with cancer, particularly those undergoing cancer treatments,have compromised immune systems, decreased vitamin C status, and enhanced risk of developingsepsis [ 242,243]. Hospitalized patients, in general, have lower vitamin C status than the generalpopulation [244].5. Vitamin C and InfectionA major symptom of the vitamin C deﬁciency disease scurvy is the marked susceptibility toinfections, particularly of the respiratory tract, with pneumonia being one of the most frequentcomplications of scurvy and a major cause of death [ 7]. Patients with acute respiratory infections, suchas pulmonary tuberculosis and pneumonia, have decreased plasma vitamin C concentrations relative to
control subjects [ 245]. Administration of vitamin C to patients with acute respiratory infections returnstheir plasma vitamin C levels to normal and ameliorates the severity of the respiratory symptoms [ 246].Cases of acute lung infections have shown rapid clearance of chest X-rays following administration ofintravenous vitamin C [ 247,248]. This vitamin C-dependent clearance of neutrophils from infectedlungs could conceivably be due to enhanced apoptosis and subsequent phagocytosis and clearance ofthe spent neutrophils by macrophages [ 73]. Pre-clinical studies of animals with sepsis-induced lunginjury have indicated that vitamin C administration can increase alveolar ﬂuid clearance, enhancebronchoalveolar epithelial barrier function, and attenuate sequestration of neutrophils [ 74], all essentialfactors for normal lung function.Meta-analysis has indicated that vitamin C supplementation with doses of 200 mg or more
daily is effective in ameliorating the severity and duration of the common cold, and the incidenceof the common cold if also exposed to physical stress [ 249]. Supplementation of individuals whohad an inadequate vitamin C status (i.e., <45 µmol/L) also decreased the incidence of the commoncold [ 203]. Surprisingly, few studies have assessed vitamin C status during the common cold [ 250].Signiﬁcant decreases in both leukocyte vitamin C levels, and urinary excretion of the vitamin, havebeen reported to occur during common cold episodes, with levels returning to normal followingthe infection [ 251–254]. These changes indicate that vitamin C is utilized during the common coldinfection. Administration of gram doses of vitamin C during the common cold episode amelioratedthe decline in leukocyte vitamin C levels, suggesting that administration of vitamin C may be beneﬁcialfor the recovery process [251].
for the recovery process [251].Beneﬁcial effects of vitamin C on recovery have been noted in pneumonia. In elderly peoplehospitalized because of pneumonia, who were determined to have very low vitamin C levels,administration of vitamin C reduced the respiratory symptom score in the more severe patients [ 246].In other pneumonia patients, low-dose vitamin C (0.25–0.8 g/day) reduced the hospital stay by19% compared with no vitamin C supplementation, whereas the higher-dose group (0.5–1.6 g/day)reduced the duration by 36% [ 255]. There was also a positive effect on the normalization ofchest X-ray, temperature, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ 255]. Since prophylactic vitamin Cadministration also appears to decrease the risk of developing more serious respiratory infections, suchas pneumonia [ 256], it is likely that the low vitamin C levels observed during respiratory infections areboth a cause and a consequence of the disease.6. Conclusions
6. ConclusionsOverall, vitamin C appears to exert a multitude of beneﬁcial effects on cellular functions ofboth the innate and adaptive immune system. Although vitamin C is a potent antioxidant protecting
Overall, vitamin C appears to exert a multitude of beneﬁcial effects on cellular functions ofboth the innate and adaptive immune system. Although vitamin C is a potent antioxidant protectingthe body against endogenous and exogenous oxidative challenges, it is likely that its action as a cofactorfor numerous biosynthetic and gene regulatory enzymes plays a key role in its immune-modulatingeffects. Vitamin C stimulates neutrophil migration to the site of infection, enhances phagocytosis andoxidant generation, and microbial killing. At the same time, it protects host tissue from excessive
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 13 of 25damage by enhancing neutrophil apoptosis and clearance by macrophages, and decreasing neutrophilnecrosis and NETosis. Thus, it is apparent that vitamin C is necessary for the immune system to mountand sustain an adequate response against pathogens, whilst avoiding excessive damage to the host.Vitamin C appears to be able to both prevent and treat respiratory and systemic infections byenhancing various immune cell functions. Prophylactic prevention of infection requires dietary vitamin Cintakes that provide at least adequate, if not saturating plasma levels (i.e., 100–200 mg/day), whichoptimize cell and tissue levels. In contrast, treatment of established infections requires significantlyhigher (gram) doses of the vitamin to compensate for the increased metabolic demand.Epidemiological studies indicate that hypovitaminosis C is still relatively common in Western
populations, and vitamin C deﬁciency is the fourth leading nutrient deﬁciency in the UnitedStates. Reasons include reduced intake combined with limited body stores. Increased needs occurdue to pollution and smoking, ﬁghting infections, and diseases with oxidative and inﬂammatorycomponents, e.g., type 2 diabetes, etc. Ensuring adequate intake of vitamin C through the diet or viasupplementation, especially in groups such as the elderly or in individuals exposed to risk factors forvitamin C insufﬁciency, is required for proper immune function and resistance to infections.Acknowledgments: Thanks are given to Mark Hampton for critically reviewing the manuscript and DeborahNock (Medical WriteAway, Norwich, UK) for medical writing support and editorial assistance on behalf of BayerConsumer Care Ltd. A.C.C. is the recipient of a Health Research Council of New Zealand Sir Charles HercusHealth Research Fellowship.
Health Research Fellowship.Author Contributions: A.C.C. and S.M. conceived and wrote the review, and A.C.C. had primary responsibilityfor the ﬁnal content.Conﬂicts of Interest: S.M. is employed by Bayer Consumer Care Ltd., a manufacturer of multivitamins, andwrote the section on ‘Vitamin C insufﬁciency conditions’. A.C.C. has received funding, as a Key Opinion Leader,from Bayer Consumer Care Ltd.References1. Parkin, J.; Cohen, B. An overview of the immune system. Lancet 2001 ,357, 1777–1789. [CrossRef]2. Maggini, S.; Wintergerst, E.S.; Beveridge, S.; Hornig, D.H. Selected vitamins and trace elements supportimmune function by strengthening epithelial barriers and cellular and humoral immune responses. Br. J.Nutr. 2007 ,98, S29–S35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Webb, A.L.; Villamor, E. Update: Effects of antioxidant and non-antioxidant vitamin supplementation onimmune function. Nutr. Rev. 2007 ,65, 181. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Burns, J.J. Missing step in man, monkey and guinea pig required for the biosynthesis of L-ascorbic acid.Nature 1957 ,180, 553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Nishikimi, M.; Fukuyama, R.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.; Yagi, K. Cloning and chromosomal mappingof the human nonfunctional gene for L-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase, the enzyme for L-ascorbic acidbiosynthesis missing in man. J. Biol. Chem. 1994 ,269, 13685–13688. [PubMed]6. Sauberlich, H.E. A history of scurvy and vitamin C. In Vitamin C in Health and Disease ; Packer, L., Fuchs, J.,Eds.; Marcel Dekker: New York, NY, USA, 1997; pp. 1–24.7. Hemila, H. Vitamin C and Infections. Nutrients 2017 ,9, 339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Carr, A.C.; McCall, C. The role of vitamin C in the treatment of pain: New insights. J. Transl. Med. 2017 ,15, 77.[CrossRef] [PubMed]9. Krebs, H.A. The Shefﬁeld Experiment on the vitamin C requirement of human adults. Proc. Nutr. Soc.1953 ,12, 237–246. [CrossRef]
1953 ,12, 237–246. [CrossRef]10. Institute of Medicine Panel on Dietary Antioxidants and Related Compounds. Dietary Reference Intakes forVitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids ; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2000.
Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids ; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2000.11. Levine, M.; Dhariwal, K.R.; Welch, R.W.; Wang, Y.; Park, J.B. Determination of optimal vitamin Crequirements in humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1995 ,62, 1347S–1356S. [PubMed]12. Carr, A.C.; Frei, B. Toward a new recommended dietary allowance for vitamin C based on antioxidant andhealth effects in humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1999 ,69, 1086–1087. [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 14 of 2513. Schleicher, R.L.; Carroll, M.D.; Ford, E.S.; Lacher, D.A. Serum vitamin C and the prevalence of vitamin Cdeﬁciency in the United States: 2003–2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009 ,90, 1252–1263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]14. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Second National Report on Biochemical Indicators of Diet andNutrition in the US Population 2012 ; National Center for Environmental Health: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2012.15. Maggini, S.; Beveridge, S.; Sorbara, J.; Senatore, G. Feeding the immune system: The role of micronutrientsin restoring resistance to infections. CAB Rev. 2008 ,3, 1–21. [CrossRef]16. Huskisson, E.; Maggini, S.; Ruf, M. The role of vitamins and minerals in energy metabolism and well-being.J. Int. Med. Res. 2007 ,35, 277–289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]17. Carr, A.; Frei, B. Does vitamin C act as a pro-oxidant under physiological conditions? FASEB J. 1999 ,13,
1007–1024. [PubMed]18. Mandl, J.; Szarka, A.; Banhegyi, G. Vitamin C: Update on physiology and pharmacology. Br. J. Pharmacol.2009 ,157, 1097–1110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]19. Englard, S.; Seifter, S. The biochemical functions of ascorbic acid. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 1986 ,6, 365–406.[CrossRef] [PubMed]20. Carr, A.C.; Shaw, G.M.; Fowler, A.A.; Natarajan, R. Ascorbate-dependent vasopressor synthesis: A rationalefor vitamin C administration in severe sepsis and septic shock? Crit. Care 2015 ,19, e418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]21. Kuiper, C.; Vissers, M.C. Ascorbate as a co-factor for Fe- and 2-oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenases:Physiological activity in tumor growth and progression. Front. Oncol. 2014 ,4, 359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Young, J.I.; Zuchner, S.; Wang, G. Regulation of the epigenome by vitamin C. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 2015 ,35,545–564. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Pullar, J.M.; Carr, A.C.; Vissers, M.C.M. The roles of vitamin C in skin health. Nutrients 2017 ,9, 866. [CrossRef][PubMed]
[PubMed]24. Rhie, G.; Shin, M.H.; Seo, J.Y.; Choi, W.W.; Cho, K.H.; Kim, K.H.; Park, K.C.; Eun, H.C.; Chung, J.H.Aging- and photoaging-dependent changes of enzymic and nonenzymic antioxidants in the epidermis anddermis of human skin in vivo. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2001 ,117, 1212–1217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Shindo, Y.; Witt, E.; Han, D.; Epstein, W.; Packer, L. Enzymic and non-enzymic antioxidants in epidermisand dermis of human skin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1994 ,102, 122–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. McArdle, F.; Rhodes, L.E.; Parslew, R.; Jack, C.I.; Friedmann, P .S.; Jackson, M.J. UVR-induced oxidative stressin human skin in vivo : Effects of oral vitamin C supplementation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2002 ,33, 1355–1362.[CrossRef]27. Steiling, H.; Longet, K.; Moodycliffe, A.; Mansourian, R.; Bertschy, E.; Smola, H.; Mauch, C.; Williamson, G.Sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter isoforms in skin: Distribution, kinetics, and effect of UVB-induced
oxidative stress. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2007 ,43, 752–762. [CrossRef] [PubMed]28. Hodges, R.E.; Baker, E.M.; Hood, J.; Sauberlich, H.E.; March, S.C. Experimental scurvy in man. Am. J.Clin. Nutr. 1969 ,22, 535–548. [PubMed]29. Hodges, R.E.; Hood, J.; Canham, J.E.; Sauberlich, H.E.; Baker, E.M. Clinical manifestations of ascorbic aciddeﬁciency in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1971 ,24, 432–443. [PubMed]30. Kivirikko, K.I.; Myllyla, R.; Pihlajaniemi, T. Protein hydroxylation: Prolyl 4-hydroxylase, an enzyme withfour cosubstrates and a multifunctional subunit. FASEB J. 1989 ,3, 1609–1617. [PubMed]31. Geesin, J.C.; Darr, D.; Kaufman, R.; Murad, S.; Pinnell, S.R. Ascorbic acid speciﬁcally increases type I andtype III procollagen messenger RNA levels in human skin ﬁbroblast. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1988 ,90, 420–424.[CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Kishimoto, Y.; Saito, N.; Kurita, K.; Shimokado, K.; Maruyama, N.; Ishigami, A. Ascorbic acid enhances
the expression of type 1 and type 4 collagen and SVCT2 in cultured human skin ﬁbroblasts. Biochem. Biophys.
the expression of type 1 and type 4 collagen and SVCT2 in cultured human skin ﬁbroblasts. Biochem. Biophys.Res. Commun. 2013 ,430, 579–584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Nusgens, B.V .; Humbert, P .; Rougier, A.; Colige, A.C.; Haftek, M.; Lambert, C.A.; Richard, A.; Creidi, P .;Lapiere, C.M. Topically applied vitamin C enhances the mRNA level of collagens I and III, their processingenzymes and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in the human dermis. J. Investig. Dermatol.2001 ,116, 853–859. [CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Tajima, S.; Pinnell, S.R. Ascorbic acid preferentially enhances type I and III collagen gene transcription inhuman skin ﬁbroblasts. J. Dermatol. Sci. 1996 ,11, 250–253. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 15 of 2535. Davidson, J.M.; LuValle, P .A.; Zoia, O.; Quaglino, D., Jr.; Giro, M. Ascorbate differentially regulates elastin andcollagen biosynthesis in vascular smooth muscle cells and skin ﬁbroblasts by pretranslational mechanisms.J. Biol. Chem. 1997 ,272, 345–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]36. Fuchs, J.; Kern, H. Modulation of UV-light-induced skin inﬂammation by D-alpha-tocopherol and L-ascorbicacid: A clinical study using solar simulated radiation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1998 ,25, 1006–1012. [CrossRef]37. Lauer, A.C.; Groth, N.; Haag, S.F.; Darvin, M.E.; Lademann, J.; Meinke, M.C. Dose-dependent vitamin Cuptake and radical scavenging activity in human skin measured with in vivo electron paramagneticresonance spectroscopy. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2013 ,26, 147–154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]38. Valacchi, G.; Sticozzi, C.; Belmonte, G.; Cervellati, F.; Demaude, J.; Chen, N.; Krol, Y.; Oresajo, C. Vitamin C
compound mixtures prevent ozone-induced oxidative damage in human keratinocytes as initial assessmentof pollution protection. PLoS ONE 2015 ,10, e0131097. [CrossRef] [PubMed]39. Valacchi, G.; Muresan, X.M.; Sticozzi, C.; Belmonte, G.; Pecorelli, A.; Cervellati, F.; Demaude, J.; Krol, Y.;Oresajo, C. Ozone-induced damage in 3D-skin model is prevented by topical vitamin C and vitamin Ecompound mixtures application. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2016 ,82, 209–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]40. Lin, J.Y.; Selim, M.A.; Shea, C.R.; Grichnik, J.M.; Omar, M.M.; Monteiro-Riviere, N.A.; Pinnell, S.R. UVphotoprotection by combination topical antioxidants vitamin C and vitamin E. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol.2003 ,48, 866–874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]41. Pasonen-Seppanen, S.; Suhonen, T.M.; Kirjavainen, M.; Suihko, E.; Urtti, A.; Miettinen, M.; Hyttinen, M.;Tammi, M.; Tammi, R. Vitamin C enhances differentiation of a continuous keratinocyte cell line
(REK) into epidermis with normal stratum corneum ultrastructure and functional permeability barrier.Histochem. Cell Biol. 2001 ,116, 287–297. [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Savini, I.; Catani, M.V .; Rossi, A.; Duranti, G.; Melino, G.; Avigliano, L. Characterization of keratinocytedifferentiation induced by ascorbic acid: Protein kinase C involvement and vitamin C homeostasis. J. Investig.Dermatol. 2002 ,118, 372–379. [CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Ponec, M.; Weerheim, A.; Kempenaar, J.; Mulder, A.; Gooris, G.S.; Bouwstra, J.; Mommaas, A.M.The formation of competent barrier lipids in reconstructed human epidermis requires the presence ofvitamin C. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1997 ,109, 348–355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]44. Uchida, Y.; Behne, M.; Quiec, D.; Elias, P .M.; Holleran, W.M. Vitamin C stimulates sphingolipid productionand markers of barrier formation in submerged human keratinocyte cultures. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2001 ,117,1307–1313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
1307–1313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Kim, K.P .; Shin, K.O.; Park, K.; Yun, H.J.; Mann, S.; Lee, Y.M.; Cho, Y. Vitamin C stimulates epidermalceramide production by regulating its metabolic enzymes. Biomol. Ther. 2015 ,23, 525–530. [CrossRef][PubMed]46. Mohammed, B.M.; Fisher, B.J.; Kraskauskas, D.; Ward, S.; Wayne, J.S.; Brophy, D.F.; Fowler, A.A., III;Yager, D.R.; Natarajan, R. Vitamin C promotes wound healing through novel pleiotropic mechanisms.Int. Wound J. 2016 ,13, 572–584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]47. Duarte, T.L.; Cooke, M.S.; Jones, G.D. Gene expression proﬁling reveals new protective roles for vitamin C inhuman skin cells. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2009 ,46, 78–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]48. Desneves, K.J.; Todorovic, B.E.; Cassar, A.; Crowe, T.C. Treatment with supplementary arginine, vitamin Cand zinc in patients with pressure ulcers: A randomised controlled trial. Clin. Nutr. 2005 ,24, 979–987.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]49. Taylor, T.V .; Rimmer, S.; Day, B.; Butcher, J.; Dymock, I.W. Ascorbic acid supplementation in the treatment ofpressure-sores. Lancet 1974 ,2, 544–546. [CrossRef]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]49. Taylor, T.V .; Rimmer, S.; Day, B.; Butcher, J.; Dymock, I.W. Ascorbic acid supplementation in the treatment ofpressure-sores. Lancet 1974 ,2, 544–546. [CrossRef]50. Stankova, L.; Gerhardt, N.B.; Nagel, L.; Bigley, R.H. Ascorbate and phagocyte function. Infect. Immun.1975 ,12, 252–256. [PubMed]51. Winterbourn, C.C.; Vissers, M.C. Changes in ascorbate levels on stimulation of human neutrophils.Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1983 ,763, 175–179. [CrossRef]52. Parker, A.; Cuddihy, S.L.; Son, T.G.; Vissers, M.C.; Winterbourn, C.C. Roles of superoxide andmyeloperoxidase in ascorbate oxidation in stimulated neutrophils and H( 2)O(2)-treated HL60 cells. Free Radic.Biol. Med. 2011 ,51, 1399–1405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Oberritter, H.; Glatthaar, B.; Moser, U.; Schmidt, K.H. Effect of functional stimulation on ascorbate contentin phagocytes under physiological and pathological conditions. Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol. 1986 ,81,46–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 16 of 2554. Goldschmidt, M.C. Reduced bactericidal activity in neutrophils from scorbutic animals and the effect ofascorbic acid on these target bacteria in vivo and in vitro .Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1991 ,54, 1214S–1220S. [PubMed]55. Goldschmidt, M.C.; Masin, W.J.; Brown, L.R.; Wyde, P .R. The effect of ascorbic acid deﬁciency on leukocytephagocytosis and killing of actinomyces viscosus. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 1988 ,58, 326–334. [PubMed]56. Johnston, C.S.; Huang, S.N. Effect of ascorbic acid nutriture on blood histamine and neutrophil chemotaxisin guinea pigs. J. Nutr. 1991 ,121, 126–130. [PubMed]57. Rebora, A.; Dallegri, F.; Patrone, F. Neutrophil dysfunction and repeated infections: Inﬂuence of levamisoleand ascorbic acid. Br. J. Dermatol. 1980 ,102, 49–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]58. Patrone, F.; Dallegri, F.; Bonvini, E.; Minervini, F.; Sacchetti, C. Disorders of neutrophil function in children
with recurrent pyogenic infections. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 1982 ,171, 113–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]59. Boura, P .; Tsapas, G.; Papadopoulou, A.; Magoula, I.; Kountouras, G. Monocyte locomotion in anergicchronic brucellosis patients: The in vivo effect of ascorbic acid. Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol. 1989 ,11,119–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]60. Anderson, R.; Theron, A. Effects of ascorbate on leucocytes: Part III. In vitro and in vivo stimulation ofabnormal neutrophil motility by ascorbate. S. Afr. Med. J. 1979 ,56, 429–433. [PubMed]61. Johnston, C.S.; Martin, L.J.; Cai, X. Antihistamine effect of supplemental ascorbic acid and neutrophilchemotaxis. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 1992 ,11, 172–176. [PubMed]62. Anderson, R.; Oosthuizen, R.; Maritz, R.; Theron, A.; Van Rensburg, A.J. The effects of increasing weeklydoses of ascorbate on certain cellular and humoral immune functions in normal volunteers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.1980 ,33, 71–76. [PubMed]
1980 ,33, 71–76. [PubMed]63. Anderson, R. Ascorbate-mediated stimulation of neutrophil motility and lymphocyte transformation byinhibition of the peroxidase/H 2O2/halide system in vitro and in vivo .Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1981 ,34, 1906–1911.[PubMed]64. Ganguly, R.; Durieux, M.F.; Waldman, R.H. Macrophage function in vitamin C-deﬁcient guinea pigs. Am. J.Clin. Nutr. 1976 ,29, 762–765. [PubMed]65. Corberand, J.; Nguyen, F.; Fraysse, B.; Enjalbert, L. Malignant external otitis and polymorphonuclearleukocyte migration impairment. Improvement with ascorbic acid. Arch. Otolaryngol. 1982 ,108, 122–124.[CrossRef] [PubMed]66. Levy, R.; Schlaeffer, F. Successful treatment of a patient with recurrent furunculosis by vitamin C:Improvement of clinical course and of impaired neutrophil functions. Int. J. Dermatol. 1993 ,32, 832–834.[CrossRef] [PubMed]67. Levy, R.; Shriker, O.; Porath, A.; Riesenberg, K.; Schlaeffer, F. Vitamin C for the treatment of recurrent
furunculosis in patients with imparied neutrophil functions. J. Infect. Dis. 1996 ,173, 1502–1505. [CrossRef][PubMed]68. Nungester, W.J.; Ames, A.M. The relationship between ascorbic acid and phagocytic activity. J. Infect. Dis.1948 ,83, 50–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]69. Shilotri, P .G. Phagocytosis and leukocyte enzymes in ascorbic acid deﬁcient guinea pigs. J. Nutr. 1977 ,107,1513–1516. [PubMed]70. Shilotri, P .G. Glycolytic, hexose monophosphate shunt and bactericidal activities of leukocytes in ascorbicacid deﬁcient guinea pigs. J. Nutr. 1977 ,107, 1507–1512. [PubMed]71. Sharma, P .; Raghavan, S.A.; Saini, R.; Dikshit, M. Ascorbate-mediated enhancement of reactive oxygenspecies generation from polymorphonuclear leukocytes: Modulatory effect of nitric oxide. J. Leukoc. Biol.2004 ,75, 1070–1078. [CrossRef] [PubMed]72. Rebora, A.; Crovato, F.; Dallegri, F.; Patrone, F. Repeated staphylococcal pyoderma in two siblings with
defective neutrophil bacterial killing. Dermatologica 1980 ,160, 106–112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]73. Vissers, M.C.; Wilkie, R.P . Ascorbate deﬁciency results in impaired neutrophil apoptosis and clearance and
73. Vissers, M.C.; Wilkie, R.P . Ascorbate deﬁciency results in impaired neutrophil apoptosis and clearance andis associated with up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2007 ,81, 1236–1244.[CrossRef] [PubMed]74. Fisher, B.J.; Kraskauskas, D.; Martin, E.J.; Farkas, D.; Wegelin, J.A.; Brophy, D.; Ward, K.R.; Voelkel, N.F.;Fowler, A.A., III; Natarajan, R. Mechanisms of attenuation of abdominal sepsis induced acute lung injury byascorbic acid. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 2012 ,303, L20–L32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 17 of 2575. Mohammed, B.M.; Fisher, B.J.; Kraskauskas, D.; Farkas, D.; Brophy, D.F.; Fowler, A.A.; Natarajan, R.Vitamin C: A novel regulator of neutrophil extracellular trap formation. Nutrients 2013 ,5, 3131–3151.[CrossRef] [PubMed]76. Huijskens, M.J.; Walczak, M.; Koller, N.; Briede, J.J.; Senden-Gijsbers, B.L.; Schnijderberg, M.C.; Bos, G.M.;Germeraad, W.T. Technical advance: Ascorbic acid induces development of double-positive T cells fromhuman hematopoietic stem cells in the absence of stromal cells. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2014 ,96, 1165–1175. [CrossRef][PubMed]77. Molina, N.; Morandi, A.C.; Bolin, A.P .; Otton, R. Comparative effect of fucoxanthin and vitamin C onoxidative and functional parameters of human lymphocytes. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2014 ,22, 41–50.[CrossRef] [PubMed]78. Tanaka, M.; Muto, N.; Gohda, E.; Yamamoto, I. Enhancement by ascorbic acid 2-glucoside or repeated
additions of ascorbate of mitogen-induced IgM and IgG productions by human peripheral bloodlymphocytes. Jpn. J. Pharmacol. 1994 ,66, 451–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]79. Manning, J.; Mitchell, B.; Appadurai, D.A.; Shakya, A.; Pierce, L.J.; Wang, H.; Nganga, V .; Swanson, P .C.;May, J.M.; Tantin, D.; et al. Vitamin C promotes maturation of T-cells. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2013 ,19,2054–2067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]80. Kennes, B.; Dumont, I.; Brohee, D.; Hubert, C.; Neve, P . Effect of vitamin C supplements on cell-mediatedimmunity in old people. Gerontology 1983 ,29, 305–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]81. Anderson, R.; Hay, I.; van Wyk, H.; Oosthuizen, R.; Theron, A. The effect of ascorbate on cellular humoralimmunity in asthmatic children. S. Afr. Med. J. 1980 ,58, 974–977. [PubMed]82. Fraser, R.C.; Pavlovic, S.; Kurahara, C.G.; Murata, A.; Peterson, N.S.; Taylor, K.B.; Feigen, G.A. The effect of
variations in vitamin C intake on the cellular immune response of guinea pigs. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1980 ,33,839–847. [PubMed]83. Feigen, G.A.; Smith, B.H.; Dix, C.E.; Flynn, C.J.; Peterson, N.S.; Rosenberg, L.T.; Pavlovic, S.; Leibovitz, B.Enhancement of antibody production and protection against systemic anaphylaxis by large doses ofvitamin C. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol. 1982 ,38, 313–333. [CrossRef]84. Prinz, W.; Bloch, J.; Gilich, G.; Mitchell, G. A systematic study of the effect of vitamin C supplementation onthe humoral immune response in ascorbate-dependent mammals. I. The antibody response to sheep redblood cells (a T-dependent antigen) in guinea pigs. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 1980 ,50, 294–300. [PubMed]85. Prinz, W.; Bortz, R.; Bregin, B.; Hersch, M. The effect of ascorbic acid supplementation on some parametersof the human immunological defence system. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 1977 ,47, 248–257. [PubMed]
86. Chen, Y.; Luo, G.; Yuan, J.; Wang, Y.; Yang, X.; Wang, X.; Li, G.; Liu, Z.; Zhong, N. Vitamin C mitigatesoxidative stress and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in severe community-acquired pneumonia and LPS-inducedmacrophages. Mediators Inﬂamm. 2014 ,2014 , 426740. [CrossRef] [PubMed]87. Jeng, K.C.; Yang, C.S.; Siu, W.Y.; Tsai, Y.S.; Liao, W.J.; Kuo, J.S. Supplementation with vitamins C and Eenhances cytokine production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells in healthy adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.1996 ,64, 960–965. [PubMed]88. Kim, Y.; Kim, H.; Bae, S.; Choi, J.; Lim, S.Y.; Lee, N.; Kong, J.M.; Hwang, Y.I.; Kang, J.S.; Lee, W.J. Vitamin C isan essential factor on the anti-viral immune responses through the production of interferon-a/b at the initialstage of inﬂuenza A virus (H 3N2) infection. Immune Netw. 2013 ,13, 70–74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]89. Gao, Y.L.; Lu, B.; Zhai, J.H.; Liu, Y.C.; Qi, H.X.; Yao, Y.; Chai, Y.F.; Shou, S.T. The parenteral vitamin C improves
sepsis and sepsis-induced multiple organ dysfunction syndrome via preventing cellular immunosuppression.Mediat. Inﬂamm. 2017 ,2017 , 4024672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
sepsis and sepsis-induced multiple organ dysfunction syndrome via preventing cellular immunosuppression.Mediat. Inﬂamm. 2017 ,2017 , 4024672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]90. Portugal, C.C.; Socodato, R.; Canedo, T.; Silva, C.M.; Martins, T.; Coreixas, V .S.; Loiola, E.C.; Gess, B.; Rohr, D.;Santiago, A.R.; et al. Caveolin-1-mediated internalization of the vitamin C transporter SVCT2 in microgliatriggers an inﬂammatory phenotype. Sci. Signal. 2017 ,10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]91. Dahl, H.; Degre, M. The effect of ascorbic acid on production of human interferon and the antiviral activityin vitro. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. B 1976 ,84b, 280–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]92. Karpinska, T.; Kawecki, Z.; Kandefer-Szerszen, M. The inﬂuence of ultraviolet irradiation, L-ascorbic acidand calcium chloride on the induction of interferon in human embryo ﬁbroblasts. Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp.1982 ,30, 33–37.
1982 ,30, 33–37.93. Siegel, B.V . Enhancement of interferon production by poly(rI)-poly(rC) in mouse cell cultures by ascorbicacid. Nature 1975 ,254, 531–532. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 18 of 2594. Canali, R.; Natarelli, L.; Leoni, G.; Azzini, E.; Comitato, R.; Sancak, O.; Barella, L.; Virgili, F. Vitamin Csupplementation modulates gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells speciﬁcally uponan inﬂammatory stimulus: A pilot study in healthy subjects. Genes Nutr. 2014 ,9, 390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]95. Dawson, W.; West, G.B. The inﬂuence of ascorbic acid on histamine metabolism in guinea-pigs. Br. J.Pharmacol. Chemother. 1965 ,24, 725–734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]96. Nandi, B.K.; Subramanian, N.; Majumder, A.K.; Chatterjee, I.B. Effect of ascorbic acid on detoxiﬁcation ofhistamine under stress conditions. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1974 ,23, 643–647. [CrossRef]97. Subramanian, N.; Nandi, B.K.; Majumder, A.K.; Chatterjee, I.B. Role of L-ascorbic acid on detoxiﬁcation ofhistamine. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1973 ,22, 1671–1673. [CrossRef]98. Chatterjee, I.B.; Gupta, S.D.; Majumder, A.K.; Nandi, B.K.; Subramanian, N. Effect of ascorbic acid on
histamine metabolism in scorbutic guinea-pigs. J. Physiol. 1975 ,251, 271–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]99. Clemetson, C.A. Histamine and ascorbic acid in human blood. J. Nutr. 1980 ,110, 662–668. [PubMed]100. Johnston, C.S.; Solomon, R.E.; Corte, C. Vitamin C depletion is associated with alterations in blood histamineand plasma free carnitine in adults. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 1996 ,15, 586–591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]101. Hagel, A.F.; Layritz, C.M.; Hagel, W.H.; Hagel, H.J.; Hagel, E.; Dauth, W.; Kressel, J.; Regnet, T.; Rosenberg, A.;Neurath, M.F.; et al. Intravenous infusion of ascorbic acid decreases serum histamine concentrations inpatients with allergic and non-allergic diseases. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 2013 ,386, 789–793.[CrossRef] [PubMed]102. Bruno, R.S.; Leonard, S.W.; Atkinson, J.; Montine, T.J.; Ramakrishnan, R.; Bray, T.M.; Traber, M.G. Fasterplasma vitamin E disappearance in smokers is normalized by vitamin C supplementation. Free Radic.
Biol. Med. 2006 ,40, 689–697. [CrossRef] [PubMed]103. Parsons, K.K.; Maeda, N.; Yamauchi, M.; Banes, A.J.; Koller, B.H. Ascorbic acid-independent synthesis ofcollagen in mice. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2006 ,290, E1131–E1139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]104. Ross, R.; Benditt, E.P . Wound healing and collagen formation. II. Fine structure in experimental scurvy. J. CellBiol. 1962 ,12, 533–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]105. Fukushima, R.; Yamazaki, E. Vitamin C requirement in surgical patients. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care2010 ,13, 669–676. [CrossRef] [PubMed]106. Blass, S.C.; Goost, H.; Tolba, R.H.; Stoffel-Wagner, B.; Kabir, K.; Burger, C.; Stehle, P .; Ellinger, S. Time towound closure in trauma patients with disorders in wound healing is shortened by supplements containingantioxidant micronutrients and glutamine: A PRCT. Clin. Nutr. 2012 ,31, 469–475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Cereda, E.; Gini, A.; Pedrolli, C.; Vanotti, A. Disease-speciﬁc, versus standard, nutritional support forthe treatment of pressure ulcers in institutionalized older adults: A randomized controlled trial. J. Am.Geriatr. Soc. 2009 ,57, 1395–1402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]108. Martin, P .; Leibovich, S.J. Inﬂammatory cells during wound repair: The good, the bad and the ugly. Trends CellBiol. 2005 ,15, 599–607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]109. Wilgus, T.A.; Roy, S.; McDaniel, J.C. Neutrophils and Wound Repair: Positive Actions and Negative Reactions.Adv. Wound Care 2013 ,2, 379–388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]110. Wong, S.L.; Demers, M.; Martinod, K.; Gallant, M.; Wang, Y.; Goldﬁne, A.B.; Kahn, C.R.; Wagner, D.D.Diabetes primes neutrophils to undergo NETosis, which impairs wound healing. Nat. Med. 2015 ,21, 815–819.[CrossRef] [PubMed]111. Washko, P .; Rotrosen, D.; Levine, M. Ascorbic acid transport and accumulation in human neutrophils. J. Biol.Chem. 1989 ,264, 18996–19002. [PubMed]
Chem. 1989 ,264, 18996–19002. [PubMed]112. Bergsten, P .; Amitai, G.; Kehrl, J.; Dhariwal, K.R.; Klein, H.G.; Levine, M. Millimolar concentrations of
Chem. 1989 ,264, 18996–19002. [PubMed]112. Bergsten, P .; Amitai, G.; Kehrl, J.; Dhariwal, K.R.; Klein, H.G.; Levine, M. Millimolar concentrations ofascorbic acid in puriﬁed human mononuclear leukocytes. Depletion and reaccumulation. J. Biol. Chem.1990 ,265, 2584–2587. [PubMed]113. Evans, R.M.; Currie, L.; Campbell, A. The distribution of ascorbic acid between various cellular componentsof blood, in normal individuals, and its relation to the plasma concentration. Br. J. Nutr. 1982 ,47, 473–482.[CrossRef] [PubMed]114. Levine, M.; Conry-Cantilena, C.; Wang, Y.; Welch, R.W.; Washko, P .W.; Dhariwal, K.R.; Park, J.B.;Lazarev, A.; Graumlich, J.F.; King, J.; et al. Vitamin C pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers: Evidence fora recommended dietary allowance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996 ,93, 3704–3709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]115. Levine, M.; Wang, Y.; Padayatty, S.J.; Morrow, J. A new recommended dietary allowance of vitamin C for
healthy young women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001 ,98, 9842–9846. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 19 of 25116. Carr, A.C.; Bozonet, S.M.; Pullar, J.M.; Simcock, J.W.; Vissers, M.C. Human skeletal muscle ascorbate is highlyresponsive to changes in vitamin C intake and plasma concentrations. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013 ,97, 800–807.[CrossRef] [PubMed]117. Vissers, M.C.; Bozonet, S.M.; Pearson, J.F.; Braithwaite, L.J. Dietary ascorbate intake affects steady statetissue concentrations in vitamin C-deﬁcient mice: Tissue deﬁciency after suboptimal intake and superiorbioavailability from a food source (kiwifruit). Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2011 ,93, 292–301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]118. Corpe, C.P .; Lee, J.H.; Kwon, O.; Eck, P .; Narayanan, J.; Kirk, K.L.; Levine, M. 6-Bromo-6-deoxy-l-ascorbicacid: An ascorbate analog speciﬁc for Na+-dependent vitamin C transporter but not glucose transporterpathways. J. Biol. Chem. 2005 ,280, 5211–5220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]119. Washko, P .W.; Wang, Y.; Levine, M. Ascorbic acid recycling in human neutrophils. J. Biol. Chem. 1993 ,268,
15531–15535. [PubMed]120. Buettner, G.R. The pecking order of free radicals and antioxidants: Lipid peroxidation, alpha-tocopherol,and ascorbate. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1993 ,300, 535–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]121. Sen, C.K.; Packer, L. Antioxidant and redox regulation of gene transcription. FASEB J. 1996 ,10, 709–720.[PubMed]122. Li, N.; Karin, M. Is NF-kappaB the sensor of oxidative stress? Faseb J. 1999 ,13, 1137–1143. [PubMed]123. Macdonald, J.; Galley, H.F.; Webster, N.R. Oxidative stress and gene expression in sepsis. Br. J. Anaesth.2003 ,90, 221–232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]124. Tan, P .H.; Sagoo, P .; Chan, C.; Yates, J.B.; Campbell, J.; Beutelspacher, S.C.; Foxwell, B.M.; Lombardi, G.;George, A.J. Inhibition of NF-kappa B and oxidative pathways in human dendritic cells by antioxidativevitamins generates regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 2005 ,174, 7633–7644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Winterbourn, C.C.; Hampton, M.B. Thiol chemistry and speciﬁcity in redox signaling. Free Radic. Biol. Med.2008 ,45, 549–561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]126. Grifﬁths, H.R.; Willetts, R.S.; Grant, M.M.; Mistry, N.; Lunec, J.; Bevan, R.J. In vivo vitamin C supplementationincreases phosphoinositol transfer protein expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthyindividuals. Br. J. Nutr. 2009 ,101, 1432–1439. [CrossRef] [PubMed]127. Grant, M.M.; Mistry, N.; Lunec, J.; Grifﬁths, H.R. Dose-dependent modulation of the T cell proteome byascorbic acid. Br. J. Nutr. 2007 ,97, 19–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]128. Lammermann, T. In the eye of the neutrophil swarm-navigation signals that bring neutrophils together ininﬂamed and infected tissues. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2016 ,100, 55–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]129. Demaret, J.; Venet, F.; Friggeri, A.; Cazalis, M.A.; Plassais, J.; Jallades, L.; Malcus, C.; Poitevin-Later, F.;
Textoris, J.; Lepape, A.; et al. Marked alterations of neutrophil functions during sepsis-inducedimmunosuppression. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2015 ,98, 1081–1090. [CrossRef] [PubMed]130. Arraes, S.M.; Freitas, M.S.; da Silva, S.V .; de Paula Neto, H.A.; Alves-Filho, J.C.; Auxiliadora Martins, M.;Basile-Filho, A.; Tavares-Murta, B.M.; Barja-Fidalgo, C.; Cunha, F.Q. Impaired neutrophil chemotaxis insepsis associates with GRK expression and inhibition of actin assembly and tyrosine phosphorylation. Blood2006 ,108, 2906–2913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]131. Chishti, A.D.; Shenton, B.K.; Kirby, J.A.; Baudouin, S.V . Neutrophil chemotaxis and receptor expression inclinical septic shock. Intensive Care Med. 2004 ,30, 605–611. [CrossRef] [PubMed]132. Tavares-Murta, B.M.; Zaparoli, M.; Ferreira, R.B.; Silva-Vergara, M.L.; Oliveira, C.H.; Murta, E.F.;Ferreira, S.H.; Cunha, F.Q. Failure of neutrophil chemotactic function in septic patients. Crit. Care Med.2002 ,30, 1056–1061. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2002 ,30, 1056–1061. [CrossRef] [PubMed]133. Hotchkiss, R.S.; Monneret, G.; Payen, D. Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: From cellular dysfunctions to
2002 ,30, 1056–1061. [CrossRef] [PubMed]133. Hotchkiss, R.S.; Monneret, G.; Payen, D. Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: From cellular dysfunctions toimmunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2013 ,13, 862–874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]134. Vohra, K.; Khan, A.J.; Telang, V .; Rosenfeld, W.; Evans, H.E. Improvement of neutrophil migration bysystemic vitamin C in neonates. J. Perinatol. 1990 ,10, 134–136. [PubMed]135. Roos, D. Chronic granulomatous disease. Br. Med. Bull. 2016 ,118, 50–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]136. Introne, W.; Boissy, R.E.; Gahl, W.A. Clinical, molecular, and cell biological aspects of Chediak-Higashisyndrome. Mol. Genet. Metab. 1999 ,68, 283–303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]137. Anderson, R.; Dittrich, O.C. Effects of ascorbate on leucocytes: Part IV . Increased neutrophil function andclinical improvement after oral ascorbate in 2 patients with chronic granulomatous disease. S. Afr. Med. J.1979 ,56, 476–480. [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 20 of 25138. Anderson, R. Assessment of oral ascorbate in three children with chronic granulomatous disease anddefective neutrophil motility over a 2-year period. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 1981 ,43, 180–188. [PubMed]139. Anderson, R. Effects of ascorbate on normal and abnormal leucocyte functions. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. Suppl.1982 ,23, 23–34. [PubMed]140. Gallin, J.I.; Elin, R.J.; Hubert, R.T.; Fauci, A.S.; Kaliner, M.A.; Wolff, S.M. Efﬁcacy of ascorbic acid inChediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS): Studies in humans and mice. Blood 1979 ,53, 226–234. [PubMed]141. Boxer, L.A.; Watanabe, A.M.; Rister, M.; Besch, H.R., Jr.; Allen, J.; Baehner, R.L. Correction of leukocytefunction in Chediak-Higashi syndrome by ascorbate. N. Engl. J. Med. 1976 ,295, 1041–1045. [CrossRef][PubMed]142. Yegin, O.; Sanal, O.; Yeralan, O.; Gurgey, A.; Berkel, A.I. Defective lymphocyte locomotion inChediak-Higashi syndrome. Am. J. Dis. Child. 1983 ,137, 771–773. [PubMed]
143. Weening, R.S.; Schoorel, E.P .; Roos, D.; van Schaik, M.L.; Voetman, A.A.; Bot, A.A.; Batenburg-Plenter, A.M.;Willems, C.; Zeijlemaker, W.P .; Astaldi, A. Effect of ascorbate on abnormal neutrophil, platelet andlymphocytic function in a patient with the Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Blood 1981 ,57, 856–865. [PubMed]144. Boxer, L.A.; Vanderbilt, B.; Bonsib, S.; Jersild, R.; Yang, H.H.; Baehner, R.L. Enhancement of chemotacticresponse and microtubule assembly in human leukocytes by ascorbic acid. J. Cell. Physiol. 1979 ,100, 119–126.[CrossRef] [PubMed]145. Boxer, L.A.; Albertini, D.F.; Baehner, R.L.; Oliver, J.M. Impaired microtubule assembly andpolymorphonuclear leucocyte function in the Chediak-Higashi syndrome correctable by ascorbic acid.Br. J. Haematol. 1979 ,43, 207–213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]146. Parker, W.H.; Rhea, E.M.; Qu, Z.C.; Hecker, M.R.; May, J.M. Intracellular ascorbate tightens the endothelial
permeability barrier through Epac1 and the tubulin cytoskeleton. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2016 ,311,C652–C662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]147. Bozonet, S.M.; Carr, A.C.; Pullar, J.M.; Vissers, M.C.M. Enhanced human neutrophil vitamin C status,chemotaxis and oxidant generation following dietary supplementation with vitamin C-rich SunGoldkiwifruit. Nutrients 2015 ,7, 2574–2588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]148. De la Fuente, M.; Ferrandez, M.D.; Burgos, M.S.; Soler, A.; Prieto, A.; Miquel, J. Immune function in agedwomen is improved by ingestion of vitamins C and E. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 1998 ,76, 373–380. [CrossRef][PubMed]149. Winterbourn, C.C.; Kettle, A.J.; Hampton, M.B. Reactive oxygen species and neutrophil function. Annu. Rev.Biochem. 2016 ,85, 765–792. [CrossRef] [PubMed]150. Patrone, F.; Dallegri, F.; Bonvini, E.; Minervini, F.; Sacchetti, C. Effects of ascorbic acid on neutrophil function.
Studies on normal and chronic granulomatous disease neutrophils. Acta Vitaminol. Enzymol. 1982 ,4, 163–168.[PubMed]151. Foroozanfar, N.; Lucas, C.F.; Joss, D.V .; Hugh-Jones, K.; Hobbs, J.R. Ascorbate (1 g/day) does not help thephagocyte killing defect of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 1983 ,51, 99–102.[PubMed]152. Hampton, M.B.; Kettle, A.J.; Winterbourn, C.C. Inside the neutrophil phagosome: Oxidants, myeloperoxidase,and bacterial killing. Blood 1998 ,92, 3007–3017. [PubMed]153. Wenisch, C.; Graninger, W. Are soluble factors relevant for polymorphonuclear leukocyte dysregulation insepticemia? Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 1995 ,2, 241–245. [PubMed]154. Danikas, D.D.; Karakantza, M.; Theodorou, G.L.; Sakellaropoulos, G.C.; Gogos, C.A. Prognostic valueof phagocytic activity of neutrophils and monocytes in sepsis. Correlation to CD64 and CD14 antigenexpression. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2008 ,154, 87–97. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Stephan, F.; Yang, K.; Tankovic, J.; Soussy, C.J.; Dhonneur, G.; Duvaldestin, P .; Brochard, L.; Brun-Buisson, C.;
expression. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2008 ,154, 87–97. [CrossRef] [PubMed]155. Stephan, F.; Yang, K.; Tankovic, J.; Soussy, C.J.; Dhonneur, G.; Duvaldestin, P .; Brochard, L.; Brun-Buisson, C.;Harf, A.; Delclaux, C. Impairment of polymorphonuclear neutrophil functions precedes nosocomialinfections in critically ill patients. Crit. Care Med. 2002 ,30, 315–322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]156. McGovern, N.N.; Cowburn, A.S.; Porter, L.; Walmsley, S.R.; Summers, C.; Thompson, A.A.; Anwar, S.;Willcocks, L.C.; Whyte, M.K.; Condliffe, A.M.; et al. Hypoxia selectively inhibits respiratory burst activityand killing of Staphylococcus aureus in human neutrophils. J. Immunol. 2011 ,186, 453–463. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 21 of 25157. Drifte, G.; Dunn-Siegrist, I.; Tissieres, P .; Pugin, J. Innate immune functions of immature neutrophils inpatients with sepsis and severe systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome. Crit. Care Med. 2013 ,41, 820–832.[CrossRef] [PubMed]158. Bass, D.A.; Olbrantz, P .; Szejda, P .; Seeds, M.C.; McCall, C.E. Subpopulations of neutrophils with increasedoxidative product formation in blood of patients with infection. J. Immunol. 1986 ,136, 860–866. [PubMed]159. Pillay, J.; Ramakers, B.P .; Kamp, V .M.; Loi, A.L.; Lam, S.W.; Hietbrink, F.; Leenen, L.P .; Tool, A.T.; Pickkers, P .;Koenderman, L. Functional heterogeneity and differential priming of circulating neutrophils in humanexperimental endotoxemia. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2010 ,88, 211–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]160. Wenisch, C.; Fladerer, P .; Patruta, S.; Krause, R.; Horl, W. Assessment of neutrophil function in patients with
septic shock: Comparison of methods. Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 2001 ,8, 178–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]161. Fox, S.; Leitch, A.E.; Dufﬁn, R.; Haslett, C.; Rossi, A.G. Neutrophil apoptosis: Relevance to the innate immuneresponse and inﬂammatory disease. J. Innate Immun. 2010 ,2, 216–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]162. Hampton, M.B.; Fadeel, B.; Orrenius, S. Redox regulation of the caspases during apoptosis. Ann. N. Y. Acad.Sci.1998 ,854, 328–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]163. Fadeel, B.; Ahlin, A.; Henter, J.I.; Orrenius, S.; Hampton, M.B. Involvement of caspases in neutrophilapoptosis: Regulation by reactive oxygen species. Blood 1998 ,92, 4808–4818. [PubMed]164. Wilkie, R.P .; Vissers, M.C.; Dragunow, M.; Hampton, M.B. A functional NADPH oxidase prevents caspaseinvolvement in the clearance of phagocytic neutrophils. Infect. Immun. 2007 ,75, 3256–3263. [CrossRef][PubMed]165. Keel, M.; Ungethum, U.; Steckholzer, U.; Niederer, E.; Hartung, T.; Trentz, O.; Ertel, W. Interleukin-10
counterregulates proinﬂammatory cytokine-induced inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis during severe sepsis.Blood 1997 ,90, 3356–3363. [PubMed]166. Jimenez, M.F.; Watson, R.W.; Parodo, J.; Evans, D.; Foster, D.; Steinberg, M.; Rotstein, O.D.; Marshall, J.C.Dysregulated expression of neutrophil apoptosis in the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome.Arch. Surg. 1997 ,132, 1263–1269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]167. Harter, L.; Mica, L.; Stocker, R.; Trentz, O.; Keel, M. Mcl-1 correlates with reduced apoptosis in neutrophilsfrom patients with sepsis. J. Am. Coll. Surg. 2003 ,197, 964–973. [CrossRef] [PubMed]168. Taneja, R.; Parodo, J.; Jia, S.H.; Kapus, A.; Rotstein, O.D.; Marshall, J.C. Delayed neutrophil apoptosis insepsis is associated with maintenance of mitochondrial transmembrane potential and reduced caspase-9activity. Crit. Care Med. 2004 ,32, 1460–1469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Fotouhi-Ardakani, N.; Kebir, D.E.; Pierre-Charles, N.; Wang, L.; Ahern, S.P .; Filep, J.G.; Milot, E. Role formyeloid nuclear differentiation antigen in the regulation of neutrophil apoptosis during sepsis. Am. J. Respir.Crit. Care Med. 2010 ,182, 341–350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]170. Paunel-Gorgulu, A.; Flohe, S.; Scholz, M.; Windolf, J.; Logters, T. Increased serum soluble Fas after majortrauma is associated with delayed neutrophil apoptosis and development of sepsis. Crit. Care 2011 ,15, R20.[CrossRef] [PubMed]171. Paunel-Gorgulu, A.; Kirichevska, T.; Logters, T.; Windolf, J.; Flohe, S. Molecular mechanisms underlyingdelayed apoptosis in neutrophils from multiple trauma patients with and without sepsis. Mol. Med. 2012 ,18,325–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]172. Tamayo, E.; Gomez, E.; Bustamante, J.; Gomez-Herreras, J.I.; Fonteriz, R.; Bobillo, F.; Bermejo-Martin, J.F.;Castrodeza, J.; Heredia, M.; Fierro, I.; et al. Evolution of neutrophil apoptosis in septic shock survivors and
nonsurvivors. J. Crit. Care 2012 ,27, 415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]173. Fialkow, L.; Fochesatto Filho, L.; Bozzetti, M.C.; Milani, A.R.; Rodrigues Filho, E.M.; Ladniuk, R.M.;
nonsurvivors. J. Crit. Care 2012 ,27, 415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]173. Fialkow, L.; Fochesatto Filho, L.; Bozzetti, M.C.; Milani, A.R.; Rodrigues Filho, E.M.; Ladniuk, R.M.;Pierozan, P .; de Moura, R.M.; Prolla, J.C.; Vachon, E.; et al. Neutrophil apoptosis: A marker of disease severityin sepsis and sepsis-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome. Crit. Care 2006 ,10, R155. [CrossRef][PubMed]174. Ertel, W.; Keel, M.; Infanger, M.; Ungethum, U.; Steckholzer, U.; Trentz, O. Circulating mediators inserum of injured patients with septic complications inhibit neutrophil apoptosis through up-regulation ofprotein-tyrosine phosphorylation. J. Trauma 1998 ,44, 767–775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]175. Parlato, M.; Souza-Fonseca-Guimaraes, F.; Philippart, F.; Misset, B.; Adib-Conquy, M.; Cavaillon, J.M.CD24-triggered caspase-dependent apoptosis via mitochondrial membrane depolarization and reactive
oxygen species production of human neutrophils is impaired in sepsis. J. Immunol. 2014 ,192, 2449–2459.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 22 of 25176. Colotta, F.; Re, F.; Polentarutti, N.; Sozzani, S.; Mantovani, A. Modulation of granulocyte survival andprogrammed cell death by cytokines and bacterial products. Blood 1992 ,80, 2012–2020. [PubMed]177. Mikirova, N.; Riordan, N.; Casciari, J. Modulation of Cytokines in Cancer Patients by Intravenous AscorbateTherapy. Med. Sci. Monit. 2016 ,22, 14–25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]178. Ferron-Celma, I.; Mansilla, A.; Hassan, L.; Garcia-Navarro, A.; Comino, A.M.; Bueno, P .; Ferron, J.A. Effect ofvitamin C administration on neutrophil apoptosis in septic patients after abdominal surgery. J. Surg. Res.2009 ,153, 224–230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]179. Pechous, R.D. With Friends like These: The Complex Role of Neutrophils in the Progression of SeverePneumonia. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2017 ,7, 160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]180. Zawrotniak, M.; Rapala-Kozik, M. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)—Formation and implications.
Acta Biochim. Pol. 2013 ,60, 277–284. [PubMed]181. Fuchs, T.A.; Abed, U.; Goosmann, C.; Hurwitz, R.; Schulze, I.; Wahn, V .; Weinrauch, Y.; Brinkmann, V .;Zychlinsky, A. Novel cell death program leads to neutrophil extracellular traps. J. Cell Biol. 2007 ,176, 231–241.[CrossRef] [PubMed]182. Brinkmann, V .; Reichard, U.; Goosmann, C.; Fauler, B.; Uhlemann, Y.; Weiss, D.S.; Weinrauch, Y.;Zychlinsky, A. Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 2004 ,303, 1532–1535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]183. Parker, H.; Albrett, A.M.; Kettle, A.J.; Winterbourn, C.C. Myeloperoxidase associated with neutrophilextracellular traps is active and mediates bacterial killing in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. J. Leukoc.Biol. 2012 ,91, 369–376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]184. Czaikoski, P .G.; Mota, J.M.; Nascimento, D.C.; Sonego, F.; Castanheira, F.V .; Melo, P .H.; Scortegagna, G.T.;Silva, R.L.; Barroso-Sousa, R.; Souto, F.O.; et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps induce organ damage during
experimental and clinical sepsis. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0148142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]185. Camicia, G.; Pozner, R.; de Larranaga, G. Neutrophil extracellular traps in sepsis. Shock 2014 ,42, 286–294.[CrossRef] [PubMed]186. Silk, E.; Zhao, H.; Weng, H.; Ma, D. The role of extracellular histone in organ injury. Cell Death Dis. 2017 ,8,e2812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]187. Margraf, S.; Logters, T.; Reipen, J.; Altrichter, J.; Scholz, M.; Windolf, J. Neutrophil-derived circulating freeDNA (cf-DNA/NETs): A potential prognostic marker for posttraumatic development of inﬂammatorysecond hit and sepsis. Shock 2008 ,30, 352–358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]188. Natarajan, R.; Fisher, B.J.; Syed, A.A.; Fowler, A.A. Impact of intravenous ascorbic acid infusion on novelbiomarkers in patients with severe sepsis. J. Pulm. Respir. Med. 2014 ,4, 8. [CrossRef]189. Elks, P .M.; van Eeden, F.J.; Dixon, G.; Wang, X.; Reyes-Aldasoro, C.C.; Ingham, P .W.; Whyte, M.K.;
Walmsley, S.R.; Renshaw, S.A. Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (Hif-1alpha) delaysinﬂammation resolution by reducing neutrophil apoptosis and reverse migration in a zebraﬁsh inﬂammationmodel. Blood 2011 ,118, 712–722. [CrossRef] [PubMed]190. Hirota, K.; Semenza, G.L. Regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 by prolyl and asparaginyl hydroxylases.Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2005 ,338, 610–616. [CrossRef] [PubMed]191. McInturff, A.M.; Cody, M.J.; Elliott, E.A.; Glenn, J.W.; Rowley, J.W.; Rondina, M.T.; Yost, C.C. Mammaliantarget of rapamycin regulates neutrophil extracellular trap formation via induction of hypoxia-induciblefactor 1 alpha. Blood 2012 ,120, 3118–3125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]192. Hong, J.M.; Kim, J.H.; Kang, J.S.; Lee, W.J.; Hwang, Y.I. Vitamin C is taken up by human T cells viasodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 2 (SVCT2) and exerts inhibitory effects on the activation of thesecells in vitro. Anat. Cell Biol. 2016 ,49, 88–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 2 (SVCT2) and exerts inhibitory effects on the activation of thesecells in vitro. Anat. Cell Biol. 2016 ,49, 88–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]193. Bergsten, P .; Yu, R.; Kehrl, J.; Levine, M. Ascorbic acid transport and distribution in human B lymphocytes.Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1995 ,317, 208–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]194. Lenton, K.J.; Therriault, H.; Fulop, T.; Payette, H.; Wagner, J.R. Glutathione and ascorbate are negativelycorrelated with oxidative DNA damage in human lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 1999 ,20, 607–613. [CrossRef][PubMed]195. Campbell, J.D.; Cole, M.; Bunditrutavorn, B.; Vella, A.T. Ascorbic acid is a potent inhibitor of various formsof T cell apoptosis. Cell. Immunol. 1999 ,194, 1–5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]196. Huijskens, M.J.; Walczak, M.; Sarkar, S.; Atraﬁ, F.; Senden-Gijsbers, B.L.; Tilanus, M.G.; Bos, G.M.; Wieten, L.;Germeraad, W.T. Ascorbic acid promotes proliferation of natural killer cell populations in culture systems
applicable for natural killer cell therapy. Cytotherapy 2015 ,17, 613–620. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 23 of 25197. Penn, N.D.; Purkins, L.; Kelleher, J.; Heatley, R.V .; Mascie-Taylor, B.H.; Belﬁeld, P .W. The effect of dietarysupplementation with vitamins A, C and E on cell-mediated immune function in elderly long-stay patients:A randomized controlled trial. Age Ageing 1991 ,20, 169–174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]198. Heuser, G.; Vojdani, A. Enhancement of natural killer cell activity and T and B cell function by bufferedvitamin C in patients exposed to toxic chemicals: The role of protein kinase-C. Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol.1997 ,19, 291–312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]199. Sasidharan Nair, V .; Song, M.H.; Oh, K.I. Vitamin C Facilitates Demethylation of the Foxp3 Enhancer ina Tet-Dependent Manner. J. Immunol. 2016 ,196, 2119–2131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]200. Nikolouli, E.; Hardtke-Wolenski, M.; Hapke, M.; Beckstette, M.; Geffers, R.; Floess, S.; Jaeckel, E.; Huehn, J.
Alloantigen-Induced Regulatory T Cells Generated in Presence of Vitamin C Display Enhanced Stabilityof Foxp3 Expression and Promote Skin Allograft Acceptance. Front. Immunol. 2017 ,8, 748. [CrossRef][PubMed]201. Monfort, A.; Wutz, A. Breathing-in epigenetic change with vitamin C. EMBO Rep. 2013 ,14, 337–346.[CrossRef] [PubMed]202. Song, C.X.; He, C. Potential functional roles of DNA demethylation intermediates. Trends Biochem. Sci.2013 ,38, 480–484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]203. Johnston, C.S.; Barkyoumb, G.M.; Schumacher, S.S. Vitamin C supplementation slightly improves physicalactivity levels and reduces cold incidence in men with marginal vitamin C status: A randomized controlledtrial. Nutrients 2014 ,6, 2572–2583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]204. Haryanto, B.; Suksmasari, T.; Wintergerst, E.; Maggini, S. Multivitamin supplementation supports immunefunction and ameliorates conditions triggered by reduced air quality. Vitam. Miner. 2015 ,4, 1–15.
205. Romieu, I.; Castro-Giner, F.; Kunzli, N.; Sunyer, J. Air pollution, oxidative stress and dietary supplementation:A review. Eur. Respir. J. 2008 ,31, 179–196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]206. Kelly, F.; Dunster, C.; Mudway, I. Air pollution and the elderly: Oxidant/antioxidant issues worthconsideration. Eur. Respir. J. 2003 ,21, 70s–75s. [CrossRef]207. Marmot, A.; Eley, J.; Stafford, M.; Stansfeld, S.; Warwick, E.; Marmot, M. Building health: An epidemiologicalstudy of “sick building syndrome” in the Whitehall II study. Occup. Environ. Med. 2006 ,63, 283–289.[CrossRef] [PubMed]208. Pozzer, A.; Zimmermann, P .; Doering, U.; van Aardenne, J.; Tost, H.; Dentener, F.; Janssens-Maenhout, G.;Lelieveld, J. Effects of business-as-usual anthropogenic emissions on air quality. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2012 ,12,6915–6937. [CrossRef]209. Sram, R.J.; Binkova, B.; Rossner, P ., Jr. Vitamin C for DNA damage prevention. Mutat. Res. 2012 ,733, 39–49.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]210. Tribble, D.; Giuliano, L.; Fortmann, S. Reduced plasma ascorbic acid concentrations in nonsmokers regularlyexposed to environmental tobacco smoke. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1993 ,58, 886–890. [PubMed]211. Valkonen, M.; Kuusi, T. Passive smoking induces atherogenic changes in low-density lipoprotein. Circulation1998 ,97, 2012–2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]212. Schectman, G.; Byrd, J.C.; Hoffmann, R. Ascorbic acid requirements for smokers: Analysis of a populationsurvey. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1991 ,53, 1466–1470. [PubMed]213. Preston, A.M.; Rodriguez, C.; Rivera, C.E.; Sahai, H. Inﬂuence of environmental tobacco smoke on vitamin Cstatus in children. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003 ,77, 167–172. [PubMed]214. Strauss, R. Environmental tobacco smoke and serum vitamin C levels in children. Pediatrics 2001 ,107,540–542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]215. Panda, K.; Chattopadhyay, R.; Chattopadhyay, D.J.; Chatterjee, I.B. Vitamin C prevents cigarette
smoke-induced oxidative damage in vivo. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2000 ,29, 115–124. [CrossRef]216. Dietrich, M.; Block, G.; Benowitz, N.; Morrow, J.; Hudes, M.; Jacob, P ., III; Norkus, E.; Packer, L. Vitamin C
216. Dietrich, M.; Block, G.; Benowitz, N.; Morrow, J.; Hudes, M.; Jacob, P ., III; Norkus, E.; Packer, L. Vitamin Csupplementation decreases oxidative stress biomarker f2-isoprostanes in plasma of nonsmokers exposed toenvironmental tobacco smoke. Nutr. Cancer 2003 ,45, 176–184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]217. Bagaitkar, J.; Demuth, D.; Scott, D. Tobacco use increases susceptibility to bacterial infection. Tob. Induc. Dis.2008 ,4, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]218. Arcavi, L.; Benowitz, N.L. Cigarette smoking and infection. Arch. Intern. Med. 2004 ,164, 2206–2216.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 24 of 25219. Sargeant, L.; Jaeckel, A.; Wareham, N. Interaction of vitamin C with the relation between smoking andobstructive airways disease in EPIC Norfolk. European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.Eur. Respir. J. 2000 ,16, 397–403. [CrossRef] [PubMed]220. Peleg, A.Y.; Weerarathna, T.; McCarthy, J.S.; Davis, T.M. Common infections in diabetes: Pathogenesis,management and relationship to glycaemic control. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 2007 ,23, 3–13. [CrossRef][PubMed]221. Narayan, K.M.V .; Williams, D.; Gregg, E.W.; Cowie, C.C. (Eds.) Diabetes Public Health: From Data to Policy ;Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2011.222. Pirola, L.; Ferraz, J. Role of pro- and anti-inﬂammatory phenomena in the physiopathology of type 2 diabetesand obesity. World J. Biol. Chem. 2017 ,8, 120–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]223. Donath, M. Targeting inﬂammation in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: Time to start. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
2014 ,13, 465–476. [CrossRef] [PubMed]224. Ferrante, A.W., Jr. Macrophages, fat, and the emergence of immunometabolism. J. Clin. Investig. 2013 ,123,4992–4993. [CrossRef] [PubMed]225. Osborn, O.; Olefsky, J.M. The cellular and signaling networks linking the immune system and metabolism indisease. Nat. Med. 2012 ,18, 363–374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]226. Wilson, R.; Willis, J.; Gearry, R.; Skidmore, P .; Fleming, E.; Frampton, C.; Carr, A. Inadequate vitamin C statusin prediabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus: Associations with glycaemic control, obesity, and smoking.Nutrients 2017 ,9, 997. [CrossRef] [PubMed]227. Maggini, S.; Wenzlaff, S.; Hornig, D. Essential role of vitamin C and zinc in child immunity and health. J. Int.Med. Res. 2010 ,38, 386–414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]228. Wintergerst, E.; Maggini, S.; Hornig, D. Immune-enhancing role of vitamin C and zinc and effect on clinicalconditions. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2006 ,50, 85–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
229. Harding, A.H.; Wareham, N.J.; Bingham, S.A.; Khaw, K.; Luben, R.; Welch, A.; Forouhi, N.G. Plasmavitamin C level, fruit and vegetable consumption, and the risk of new-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus:The European prospective investigation of cancer—Norfolk prospective study. Arch. Intern. Med. 2008 ,168,1493–1499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]230. Kositsawat, J.; Freeman, V .L. Vitamin C and A1c relationship in the National Health and NutritionExamination Survey (NHANES) 2003–2006. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2011 ,30, 477–483. [CrossRef] [PubMed]231. Carter, P .; Gray, L.J.; Talbot, D.; Morris, D.H.; Khunti, K.; Davies, M.J. Fruit and vegetable intake andthe association with glucose parameters: A cross-sectional analysis of the Let’s Prevent Diabetes Study. Eur. J.Clin. Nutr. 2013 ,67, 12–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]232. Mazloom, Z.; Hejazi, N.; Dabbaghmanesh, M.H.; Tabatabaei, H.R.; Ahmadi, A.; Ansar, H. Effect of vitamin C
supplementation on postprandial oxidative stress and lipid proﬁle in type 2 diabetic patients. Pak. J. Biol. Sci.2011 ,14, 900–904. [PubMed]233. Ashor, A.W.; Werner, A.D.; Lara, J.; Willis, N.D.; Mathers, J.C.; Siervo, M. Effects of vitamin Csupplementation on glycaemic control: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlledtrials. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2017 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]234. Hajishengallis, G. Too old to ﬁght? Aging and its toll on innate immunity. Mol. Oral Microbiol. 2010 ,25,25–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]235. Cheng, L.; Cohen, M.; Bhagavan, H. Vitamin C and the elderly. In CRC Handbook of Nutrition in the Aged ;Watson, R., Ed.; CRC Press Inc.: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1985; pp. 157–185.236. Simon, J.; Hudes, E.; Tice, J. Relation of serum ascorbic acid to mortality among US adults. J. Am. Coll. Nutr.2001 ,20, 255–263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]237. Fletcher, A.; Breeze, E.; Shetty, P . Antioxidant vitamins and mortality in older persons: Findings from
the nutrition add-on study to the Medical Research Council Trial of Assessment and Management of Older
the nutrition add-on study to the Medical Research Council Trial of Assessment and Management of OlderPeople in the Community. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003 ,78, 999–1010. [PubMed]238. Thurman, J.; Mooradian, A. Vitamin supplementation therapy in the elderly. Drugs Aging 1997 ,11, 433–449.[CrossRef] [PubMed]239. Hanck, A. Vitamin C in the elderly. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. Suppl. 1983 ,24, 257–269. [PubMed]240. Schorah, C.J. The level of vitamin C reserves required in man: Towards a solution to the controversy.Proc. Nutr. Soc. 1981 ,40, 147–154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1211 25 of 25241. Hunt, C.; Chakravorty, N.; Annan, G. The clinical and biochemical effects of vitamin C supplementation inshort-stay hospitalized geriatric patients. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 1984 ,54, 65–74. [PubMed]242. Mayland, C.R.; Bennett, M.I.; Allan, K. Vitamin C deﬁciency in cancer patients. Palliat. Med. 2005 ,19, 17–20.[CrossRef] [PubMed]243. Danai, P .A.; Moss, M.; Mannino, D.M.; Martin, G.S. The epidemiology of sepsis in patients with malignancy.Chest 2006 ,129, 1432–1440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]244. Gan, R.; Eintracht, S.; Hoffer, L.J. Vitamin C deﬁciency in a university teaching hospital. J. Am. Coll. Nutr.2008 ,27, 428–433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]245. Bakaev, V .V .; Duntau, A.P . Ascorbic acid in blood serum of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis andpneumonia. Int. J. Tuberc. Lung Dis. 2004 ,8, 263–266. [PubMed]246. Hunt, C.; Chakravorty, N.K.; Annan, G.; Habibzadeh, N.; Schorah, C.J. The clinical effects of vitamin C
supplementation in elderly hospitalised patients with acute respiratory infections. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res.1994 ,64, 212–219. [PubMed]247. Bharara, A.; Grossman, C.; Grinnan, D.; Syed, A.A.; Fisher, B.J.; DeWilde, C.; Natarajan, R.; Fowler, A.A.Intravenous vitamin C administered as adjunctive therapy for recurrent acute respiratory distress syndrome.Case Rep. Crit. Care 2016 ,2016 , 8560871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]248. Fowler, A.A.; Kim, C.; Lepler, L.; Malhotra, R.; Debesa, O.; Natarajan, R.; Fisher, B.J.; Syed, A.; DeWilde, C.;Priday, A.; et al. Intravenous vitamin C as adjunctive therapy for enterovirus/rhinovirus induced acuterespiratory distress syndrome. World J. Crit. Care Med. 2017 ,6, 85–90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]249. Hemila, H.; Chalker, E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.2013 ,1, CD000980.250. Hemila, H. Vitamin C and the common cold. Br. J. Nutr. 1992 ,67, 3–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
251. Hume, R.; Weyers, E. Changes in leucocyte ascorbic acid during the common cold. Scott. Med. J. 1973 ,18,3–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]252. Wilson, C.W. Ascorbic acid function and metabolism during colds. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1975 ,258, 529–539.[CrossRef] [PubMed]253. Schwartz, A.R.; Togo, Y.; Hornick, R.B.; Tominaga, S.; Gleckman, R.A. Evaluation of the efﬁcacy of ascorbicacid in prophylaxis of induced rhinovirus 44 infection in man. J. Infect. Dis. 1973 ,128, 500–505. [CrossRef][PubMed]254. Davies, J.E.; Hughes, R.E.; Jones, E.; Reed, S.E.; Craig, J.W.; Tyrrell, D.A. Metabolism of ascorbic acid (vitaminC) in subjects infected with common cold viruses. Biochem. Med. 1979 ,21, 78–85. [CrossRef]255. Mochalkin, N. Ascorbic acid in the complex therapy of acute pneumonia. Voen. Med. Zhurnal 1970 ,9, 17–21.Available online: http://www.mv.helsinki.ﬁ/home/hemila/T5.pdf (accessed on 5 December 2014).
256. Hemila, H.; Louhiala, P . Vitamin C for preventing and treating pneumonia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.2013 ,8, CD005532.©2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
