pharmaceuticsReviewTherapeutic Use of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-DerivedExosomes: From Basic Science to ClinicsCarl Randall Harrell1, Nemanja Jovicic2, Valentin Djonov3and Vladislav Volarevic4,5,*1Regenerative Processing Plant, LLC, 34176 US Highway 19 N Palm Harbor, Palm Harbor, FL 34684, USA;dr.harrell@regenerativeplant.org2Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac,Svetozara Markovica 69, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia; nemanjajovicic.kg@gmail.com3Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, 2 Baltzerstrasse, 3012 Bern, Switzerland;valentin.djonov@ana.unibe.ch4Department for Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular Medicine and Stem Cell Research,Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac, 69 Svetozar Markovic Street, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia5Center of Excellence for the Acceleration of Harm Reduction (CoEHAR), Universit àdi Catania, Via SantaSoﬁa 78, 95123 Catania, Italy
Soﬁa 78, 95123 Catania, Italy*Correspondence: vladislav.volarevic@ana.unibe.ch; Tel.: +381-34306800; Fax: +381-34306800Received: 31 March 2020; Accepted: 11 May 2020; Published: 22 May 2020/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Abstract: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are, due to their immunosuppressive and regenerativeproperties, used as new therapeutic agents in cell-based therapy of inﬂammatory and degenerativediseases. A large number of experimental and clinical studies revealed that most of MSC-mediatedbeneﬁcial e ﬀects were attributed to the e ﬀects of MSC-sourced exosomes (MSC-Exos). MSC-Exos arenano-sized extracellular vesicles that contain MSC-derived bioactive molecules (messenger RNA(mRNA), microRNAs (miRNAs)), enzymes, cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors) that modulate
phenotype, function and homing of immune cells, and regulate survival and proliferation ofparenchymal cells. In this review article, we emphasized current knowledge about molecular andcellular mechanisms that were responsible for MSC-Exos-based beneﬁcial e ﬀects in experimentalmodels and clinical trials. Additionally, we elaborated on the challenges of conventionalMSC-Exos administration and proposed the use of new bioengineering and cellular modiﬁcationtechniques which could enhance therapeutic e ﬀects of MSC-Exos in alleviation of inﬂammatory anddegenerative diseases.Keywords: mesenchymal stem cells; exosomes; inﬂammation; regeneration; therapy1. IntroductionMesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are self-renewable, adult stem cells that reside in almostall postnatal tissue and organs [ 1]. MSCs interact with parenchymal cells and promote repairand regeneration of injured tissues in juxtacrine and paracrine manner [ 1,2]. Damage associated
molecular patterns and alarmins, released from injured cells, induce activation of MSCs which,in turn, prevent apoptosis of un-injured parenchymal cells and stimulate their survival andproliferation [ 2]. MSCs suppress e ﬀector functions of inﬂammatory neutrophils, monocytes,T lymphocytes, natural killer (NK), and natural killer T (NKT) cells and promote generation andexpansion of immunosuppressive T regulatory cells (Tregs) leading to the alleviation of on-goinginﬂammation [3]. Additionally, MSCs induce neo-angiogenesis and promote homing of alternativelyactivated macrophages and tolerogenic dendritic cells (DCs) into the inﬂamed tissues wherethese immunoregulatory cells enhance endogenous healing process [ 4]. Therefore, due to theirPharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474; doi:10.3390 /pharmaceutics12050474 www.mdpi.com /journal /pharmaceutics
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 2 of 17immunosuppressive and regenerative properties, MSCs have been considered as potentially newtherapeutic agents in the treatment of inﬂammatory and degenerative diseases.Although MSC-dependent neo-vascularization, increased viability of parenchymal cells andimmunosuppression signiﬁcantly contributed to the enhanced repair and regeneration of injuredand inﬂamed tissues, several lines of evidence indicated potential unwanted e ﬀects of MSC-basedcell therapy [ 5]. Results obtained in animal models suggested that engrafted MSCs, in response tothe growth factors produced within the local microenvironment, could give rise to unwanted cells,mainly osteocytes and chondrocytes [ 6,7]. Due to the low surface expression of major histocompatibilityclass (MHC) I and II antigens, MSCs were considered as “hypoimmunogenic” or “immune privileged”cells [ 8]. However, transplantation of allogeneic MSCs induced activation of immune responses in
several MHC mismatched recipients [ 8]. Therefore, transplantation of MSCs still raises safety concernsin clinical settings [5].The vast majority of MSC-based beneﬁcial e ﬀects were relied on the activity of MSC-derivedimmunosuppressive, angiomodulatory, and trophic factors [ 9]. Additionally, side e ﬀects relatedto the clinical application of MSCs were not observed in animals and patients that were treatedwith MSC-derived secretome [ 5]. Therefore, therapeutic use of MSC-sourced secretome is currentlyconsidered as a potential substitution for MSC-cell based therapy [9].MSC-sourced secretome contains MSC-derived bioactive molecules which are either dissolvedin medium or enveloped within encapsulated extracellular vesicles (MSC-EVs): apoptotic bodies,microvesicles, and exosomes (Exos), distinguishable by their size [ 9]. While apoptotic bodies representthe biggest EVs ( >1000 nm), MSC-derived microvesicles (100–1000 nm) and Exos (30–200 nm) have
overlapping size ranges (100–200 nm) and methods currently used to separate these two sub-populationsof EVs had varying degrees of success. Therefore, when separation could not be completely ascertained,these two MSC-sourced encapsulated products were collectively designated as MSC-derived EVs [ 9].On the contrary, when MSC-Exos, as the smallest MSC-EVs originated via the inward budding of thelate endosome membranes, were successfully isolated and characterized (mostly by the expressionof tetraspanin proteins CD9, CD63, and CD81), therapeutic e ﬀects of MSC-sourced secretome wasattributed to the activity of MSC-Exo-delivered factors [9].Due to their nano-sized dimension, MSC–Exos, distributed via biological ﬂuids, easily penetratethrough the tissues and reach the target cells (even distant one), enabling both paracrine and endocrineeﬀects [ 10]. MSC-Exos have lipid bilayers enriched with integrins and ligands for cell surface
receptors [ 11]. Therefore, MSC-Exos deliver their content to the cytosol of target cells either through thedirect fusion with the plasma membrane or through the ligand-based activation of membrane-boundreceptors which results in activation of cytoskeletal proteins leading to the creation of internalizedvacuole and internalization of MSC-Exo-sourced content [9].Therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos is relied on the e ﬀects of MSC-sourced bioactive molecules(lipids, proteins (enzymes, cytokines, chemokines, immunoregulatory proteins, and trophic and growthfactors), microRNAs (miRNAs),) which e ﬃciently modulate immune response and promote tissuerepair and regeneration (Figure 1) [ 10]. In line with these ﬁndings, a large number of experimental andclinical studies investigated signaling pathways, molecular and cellular mechanisms responsible forthe beneﬁcial e ﬀects of MSC-Exos [ 9]. In this review article, we emphasized current knowledge and
future perspectives related to the therapeutic use of MSC-Exos in the treatment of inﬂammatory anddegenerative diseases.
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 3 of 17Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, x 3 of 17   Figure 1. Composition of Mesenchymal stem cells - exosomes ( MSC -Exos ) and their role in MSC -Exo-mediated biological effects. MSC -Exos contain a large number of biologically active molecules (lipids, proteins (enzymes, cytokines, immunoregulatory proteins,  growth factors , and miRNAs) which are responsible for MSC -Exo-based therapeutic effects.  2. Components of MSC -Exos and Their Role in MSC -Exo-Mediated Biological Effects  MSC -Exos contain a broad spectrum of monounsaturated, polyunsaturated , and multiple saturated fatty acids, fatty acid binding proteins (FABP) , and lipoproteins  [12]. MSC-Exo-derived leukotrienes, arachidonic acid (AA), phosphatidic acid, prostaglandins lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) , and enzymes that regulate lipid metabolism (phospholipase A2, D2, and diglyceride kinase) play important role i n the MSC -Exo-based modulation of
homeostasis in target tissues . Phosphatidylserine and LPC, expressed on MSC -Exos, are recognized by recipient cells through TIM (T cell/transmembrane, immunoglobulin, and mucin) and G protein coupled receptors. Once they e nter in the target cell, MSC -Exo-sourced FABP and AA form FABP–AA complex which enters in the nucleus by binding to the nuclear receptor Peroxisome proliferator -activated  receptor gamma (PPARγ). Within the nucleus of recipient cell, MSC -Exo-derived FABP –AA complex regulates expression of genes involved in cell growth, apoptosis and metabolism, affecting survival of target cell  [12]. More than 2000 proteins, including membr ane-bound molecules, enzymes , and signaling molecules, are identified in MSC -Exos  [12,13 ]. Tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, CD82, and CD81), receptors for cytokines, proteins involved in antigen -presentation ( MHC  class I and II  proteins  and
co-stimulatory molecule s (CD80, CD86)) and adhesion proteins (integrins) ) are expressed on the membrane of MSC -Exos  [14]. Heat shock proteins and chaperones (HSP20, HSP60, HSP70, HSP90, and aB-crystalline), transcription and translation -related proteins  (ubiquitin, histones, tra nscription factors, and ribosomal proteins), cell structure and motility proteins (actin, myosin, and tubulin) and proteins involved in trafficking and membrane fusion (Annexins and Rab family members) are present in MSC -Exos  [12]. Additionally, MSC -Exos c ontain large number of cytokines  (transforming growth factor beta (TGF -β), interleukin ( IL)-10, IL -6, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF -α), etc.), chemokines (CCL2, CCL7, CXCL12, CXCL14, etc.) and trophic factors (vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hepatocyte growth factor, fibrob last growth factor (FGF), and insulin -growth Figure 1. Composition of Mesenchymal stem cells- exosomes (MSC-Exos) and their role in
MSC-Exo-mediated biological e ﬀects. MSC-Exos contain a large number of biologically active molecules(lipids, proteins (enzymes, cytokines, immunoregulatory proteins, growth factors, and miRNAs) whichare responsible for MSC-Exo-based therapeutic e ﬀects.2. Components of MSC-Exos and Their Role in MSC-Exo-Mediated Biological E ﬀectsMSC-Exos contain a broad spectrum of monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, and multiplesaturated fatty acids, fatty acid binding proteins (FABP), and lipoproteins [ 12]. MSC-Exo-derivedleukotrienes, arachidonic acid (AA), phosphatidic acid, prostaglandins lysophosphatidylcholine(LPC), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and enzymes that regulate lipid metabolism (phospholipase A2,D2, and diglyceride kinase) play important role in the MSC-Exo-based modulation of homeostasis intarget tissues. Phosphatidylserine and LPC, expressed on MSC-Exos, are recognized by recipient cells
through TIM (T cell /transmembrane, immunoglobulin, and mucin) and G protein coupled receptors.Once they enter in the target cell, MSC-Exo-sourced FABP and AA form FABP–AA complex which
through TIM (T cell /transmembrane, immunoglobulin, and mucin) and G protein coupled receptors.Once they enter in the target cell, MSC-Exo-sourced FABP and AA form FABP–AA complex whichenters in the nucleus by binding to the nuclear receptor Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorgamma (PPAR γ). Within the nucleus of recipient cell, MSC-Exo-derived FABP–AA complex regulatesexpression of genes involved in cell growth, apoptosis and metabolism, a ﬀecting survival of targetcell [12].More than 2000 proteins, including membrane-bound molecules, enzymes, and signalingmolecules, are identiﬁed in MSC-Exos [ 12,13]. Tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, CD82, and CD81), receptors forcytokines, proteins involved in antigen-presentation (MHC class I and II proteins and co-stimulatorymolecules (CD80, CD86)) and adhesion proteins (integrins)) are expressed on the membrane ofMSC-Exos [ 14]. Heat shock proteins and chaperones (HSP20, HSP60, HSP70, HSP90, and aB-crystalline),
transcription and translation-related proteins (ubiquitin, histones, transcription factors, and ribosomalproteins), cell structure and motility proteins (actin, myosin, and tubulin) and proteins involved intraﬃcking and membrane fusion (Annexins and Rab family members) are present in MSC-Exos [ 12].Additionally, MSC-Exos contain large number of cytokines (transforming growth factor beta (TGF- β),interleukin (IL)-10, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF- α), etc.), chemokines (CCL2, CCL7, CXCL12,
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 4 of 17CXCL14, etc.) and trophic factors (vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hepatocyte growth factor,ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF), and insulin-growth factor-1) that regulate signaling pathways involvedin cell growth, proliferation, survival, motility, and immune response [ 14]. Proteomic studies revealedthat MSC-Exos contain ﬁve glycolytic enzymes (glyceraldehyde-3Pdehydrogenase, phosphoglyceratekinase, phosphoglucomutase, enolase, and pyruvate kinase m2 isoform) and are, therefore, able togenerate glycolytic adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Interestingly, ATP-generating potential of MSC-Exoscould be enhanced by culture conditioning [ 12]. MSCs pretreated with oligomycin (which inhibitsmitochondrial ATPase), produce MSC-Exos with enhanced activity of glycolytic enzymes. Accordingly,Exos, obtained from oligomycin-treated MSCs, signiﬁcantly increase ATP generation after injection
in ischemic microenvironment. Hypoxic culture conditions signiﬁcantly up-regulated expressionof angiogenesis-related factors (platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, FGF) inMSC-Exos, enhancing their angio-modulatory properties [12].In addition to lipids and proteins, MSC-Exos are also enriched in miRNAs, small, noncoding RNAmolecules, which regulate cell growth and survival (miR-17-92, miR-19a, miR-21, miR-181-5p, miR-221),inﬂammation (miR-24, miR-146a, miR-233), ﬁbrosis (miR-29), and angiogenesis (miR-494) [13].3. Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Responsible for Immunomodulatory E ﬀects of MSC-ExosA large number of experimental studies demonstrated that MSC-Exos e ﬃciently inhibited e ﬀectorfunction of inﬂammatory M1 macrophages, alleviated antigen presenting properties of DCs, suppressedgeneration of inﬂammatory CD4 +Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes and induced expansion of regulatory and
immunosuppressive Tregs, tolerogenic DCs and alternatively activated macrophages, contributing tothe attenuation of on-going inﬂammation [14].3.1. MSC-Exo-Based Inhibition of Inﬂammatory MacrophagesSigniﬁcantly reduced expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and inﬂammatorycytokines (TNF- α, IL-1 β, and IL-6) were observed in MSC-Exo-treated macrophages [ 15,16].As demonstrated by Wu and colleagues, MSC-Exos delivered microRNA-146a (miR-146a) in thecytosol of macrophages and, in miR-146a-dependent manner inhibited TNF receptor-associatedfactor 6 (TRAF6) and IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1), resulting in the down-regulatedphosphorylation of NF- κB p65 [ 15]. Suppression of NF- κB signaling pathway alleviated expressionof iNOS, TNF- α, IL-1 β, and IL-6 genes and inhibited generation of inﬂammatory M1 phenotypein MSC-Exo-treated macrophages [ 15]. Additionally, MSC-Exos suppressed production of IL-7
and prevented IL-7:IL-7R-dependent migration of circulating monocytes in inﬂamed tissues [ 16].In line with these ﬁndings, Mao and coworkers demonstrated that 12h after intravenous injection,MSC-Exos accumulated in the inﬂamed colons of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-treated mice andeﬃciently suppressed e ﬀector functions of inﬂammatory, M1 colonic macrophages leading to thealleviation of DSS-induced colitis [16].Similarly, MSC-Exos suppressed production of inﬂammatory cytokines (TNF- α, IL-1 β, and IL-6)in liver macrophages (Kup ﬀer cells) and reduced their cross-talk with pro-ﬁbrotic hepatic stellatecells (HSCs) [ 17]. By preventing generation of inﬂammatory phenotype in Kup ﬀer cells and bysuppressing expression of pro-ﬁbrotic genes (collagen I, vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle actin ( α-SMA),and ﬁbronectin) in HSCs, MSC-Exos signiﬁcantly alleviated liver ﬁbrosis in mice [ 17]. Qu andcolleagues engineered miR-181-5p-overexpressing MSCs-Exos which induced enhanced expression of
autophagy-related Beclin-1 and suppressed expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 in HSCs, resulting intheir increased apoptosis loss [ 17]. Signiﬁcantly reduced number of M1 macrophages and HSCs
autophagy-related Beclin-1 and suppressed expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 in HSCs, resulting intheir increased apoptosis loss [ 17]. Signiﬁcantly reduced number of M1 macrophages and HSCsin the injured livers of MSCsmiR-181-5p-Exos-treated mice led to the attenuation of chronic liverinﬂammation and ﬁbrosis [17].
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 5 of 173.2. E ﬀects of Aging on MSC-Exo-Dependent Generation of Immunosuppressive Phenotype in MacrophagesIn addition to the suppression of M1 macrophages, MSC-Exos induced generation ofimmunosuppressive M2 phenotype in macrophages by enhancing expression of Arginase-1 [ 18].Signiﬁcantly higher number of IL-10 and TGF- β-producing, alternatively activated M2 alveolarmacrophages were found in the lungs of MSC-Exo-treated mice leading to the alleviation ofischemia /reperfusion (I /R) lung injury [ 18]. Importantly, aging negatively a ﬀected MSC-Exos-basedmodulation of macrophage function [ 19]. As recently demonstrated by Huang and coworkers,Aging MSC-Exos (obtained from 72-years old donor) expressed di ﬀerent levels of immunoregulatorymiRNAs compared to the young MSC-Exos (obtained from 25-years old donor) and were not able toinduce generation of immunosuppressive phenotype in macrophages in the same manner as young
MSC-Exos [ 19]. Aging MSC-Exos did not manage to induce expression of Arginase 1 and failed tooptimally suppress production of nitric oxide (NO), TNF- α, IL-1 β, and IL-6 in macrophages [ 19].The di ﬀerence in the content of miR-223-5p, miR-127-3p, and miR-125b-5p, which regulate macrophagepolarization, was responsible for impaired capacity of aging MSC-Exos in modulation of macrophagefunction. In MSC-Exos, expression of M2-inducing miR-223-5p decreased, while expression ofM1-inducing miR-127-3p and miR-125b-5p increased with aging [ 19], suggesting that only MSC-Exosobtained from younger donors should be used for the attenuation of macrophage-driven inﬂammatorydiseases. It is well known that aging impairs capacity of MSCs to produce immunomodulatorymiRNAs [ 20]. The content of miRNAs that regulated inﬂammation, oxidative stress and mitochondrialfunction (miR-132, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-294, and miR-872-3p) in MSC-Exos decreased with
the age of MSC donors [ 20]. Additionally, aging altered expression of MSC-sourced miRNAsthat regulate di ﬀerentiation and tissue regeneration [ 21]. Wang and colleagues revealed that,due to the down-regulated expression of miR-133b-3p and miR-294, MSC-Exos from older ratswere weaker in inhibiting epithelial–mesenchymal transition than younger rats [ 21]. Faﬁan-Labora andcoworkers compared expression of miRNAs in MSCs-Exos obtained from the newborn (0 days old) ,infant (7 days old), young (14 days old), pre-pubertal (35–38 days old), pubertal (45 days old), and adult(108 days old) rats and concluded that alteration of miRNA levels in MSC-Exos might serve as a markerof aging [ 22]. They observed that levels of miR-146a, miR-155, and miR-132 signiﬁcantly decreasedwith aging. The lowest expression of miR-335 was noticed in Exos derived from young MSC donors,while the high expression of miR-21 was a hallmark of MSC-Exos obtained from the pre-pubertaldonors [22].
donors [22].3.3. MSC-Exo-Mediated Generation of Immunosuppressive Phenotype in Microglial CellsIn a similar manner as it was observed in the colon, liver, and alveolar macrophages, MSC-Exosinduced generation of anti-inﬂammatory M2 phenotype in microglial cells, as well [ 23]. Capacity forproduction of immunosuppressive cytokines (IL-10 and TGF- β) signiﬁcantly increased while expressionof inﬂammatory cytokines (TNF- αand IL-1 β) decreased in MSC-Exo-treated BV2 murine microgliacells [ 23]. Results obtained in several experimental studies suggested that MSC-Exos-mediatedgeneration of anti-inﬂammatory M2 phenotype in microglia cells crucially contributed to theattenuation of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and multiple sclerosis (MS) [ 23,24]. Systemically infusedMSC-Exos induced expansion of Arginase-1 and Mannose receptor C type 1 (MRC1)-expressing M2microglia cells and reduced accumulation of the amyloid- βpeptide (A β) in the brains of A βPP/PS1
transgenic mice, used as a murine model of AD [ 23]. Through the secretion of A β-degrading
microglia cells and reduced accumulation of the amyloid- βpeptide (A β) in the brains of A βPP/PS1transgenic mice, used as a murine model of AD [ 23]. Through the secretion of A β-degradingenzymes (Neprilysin (NEP) and Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE)), M2 microglial cells preventedaccumulation of A βin the brains, while in IL-10 and TGF- β-dependent manner attenuated on-goinginﬂammation, resulting in the improvement of cognitive function in experimental animals [ 23].In similar manner, MSC-Exos altered cytokine proﬁle of Iba-1-expressing microglial cells in the brainsof Theiler’s murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV)-infected mice, used as a model of MS [ 24].Remarkably improved motor function, observed in TMEV +MSC-Exo-treated animals, correspondedto the alleviated production of inﬂammatory cytokines (TNF- α, IL-1- β, IL-18, IL-6, and IL-12) in
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 6 of 17MSC-Exo-treated microglial cells [ 24]. A signiﬁcantly decreased concentration of Th1 cell-sourcedIFN-γand Th17 cell-derived IL-17 in the brains of MSC-Exo-treated animals, suggested that MSC-Exos,in addition to microglial cells, also suppressed inﬂammatory properties of brain-inﬁltrating CD4 +Tcells [24].3.4. E ﬀects of MSC-Exos on Antigen-Presenting Properties of DCsMSC-Exos-mediated suppression of Th1 and Th17 cells was mainly a consequence of theireﬀect on antigen-presenting properties of DCs (Figure 2) [ 14]. Shahir and colleagues recentlydemonstrated that MSC-Exos alleviated T cell-driven inﬂammatory diseases by inducing generationof immunosuppressive, tolerogenic phenotype in murine DCs [ 25]. Signiﬁcantly reduced expressionof co-stimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86, and CD40) were observed on the membranes ofMSC-Exo-treated DCs, suggesting their reduced capacity for activation of naïve T cells. In line
with these ﬁndings, remarkably lower proliferation of T lymphocytes was observed in the presence ofDCs which were previously primed by MSC-Exos [ 25]. Additionally, signiﬁcantly higher productionof immunosuppressive cytokines (IL-10 and TGF- β) and notably reduced release of inﬂammatoryIL-6 were observed in DCs that were cultured with MSC-Exos, suggesting that MSC-Exos enhancedimmunosuppressive properties of DCs [25].Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, x 6 of 17  3.4. Effects of MSC -Exos on Antigen -Presenting Properties of DCs  MSC -Exos -mediated suppression of Th1 and Th17 cells was mainly a consequence of their effect on antigen -presenting properties of DCs (Figure 2) [14]. Shahir and colleagues recently demonstrated that MSC -Exos alleviated T cell -driven inflammatory diseases by inducing generation of immunosuppre ssive, tolerogenic phenotype in murine DCs [2 5]. Significantly reduced expression
of co -stimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86 , and CD40) were observed on the membranes of MSC -Exo-treated DCs, suggesting their reduced capacity for activation of naï ve T cells. I n line with these findings, remarkably lower proliferation of T lymphocytes was observed in the presence of DCs which were previously primed by MSC -Exos [2 5]. Additionally, significantly higher production of immunosuppressive cytokines (IL -10 and TGF -β) and notably reduced release of inflammatory IL-6 were observed in DCs that were cultured with MSC -Exos, suggesting that MSC -Exos enhanced immunosuppressive properties of DCs [2 5].  Figure 2. Immunomodulatory effects of MSC -Exos. MSC -Exos modulated effector function of dendritic cells (DCs) , macrophages, T and B lymphocytes. MSC -Exos attenuated antigen -presenting properties of DCs, inhibited proliferation of B lymphocytes, suppressed generation of inflammatory
M1 macrophages, Th1, Th2 , and Th17 cells  and induced enhanced expansion of immunosuppressive Tregs, tolerogenic DCs , and alternatively activated, M2 macrophages in experimental animals.  MSC -Exo-primed DCs had reduced capacity for generation of inflammatory Th1, Th2 , and Th17 effector T cells [2 6,27]. MSC -Exo-mediated modulation of antigen -presenting properties of lung DCs resulted in attenuated activation of CD4+Th2 cells and consequently led to the alleviation of Th2-driven immune response towards Aspergillus protease antigen [2 6]. In the inflam ed kidneys, MSC -Exo-sourced miR -21 inhibited maturation of renal DCs by suppressing activation of NF -κB signaling pathway [2 7]. MSC -Exo-primed immature DCs were not able to optimally activate renal -infiltrating inflammatory Th1 and Th17 cells. Therefore, sign ificantly alleviated Th1 and Th17 cell-driven renal inflammation and attenuated acute kidney injury were noticed in animals that were
treated with miR -21-expressing MSC -Exos [2 7]. Similarly, MSC -Exos significantly reduced expression of co -stimulatory molec ules and MHC class II proteins on retinal DCs and
treated with miR -21-expressing MSC -Exos [2 7]. Similarly, MSC -Exos significantly reduced expression of co -stimulatory molec ules and MHC class II proteins on retinal DCs and down -regulated their capacity for pro duction of Th1 and Th17 -related cytokines (IL -1β, IL -6, and IL-12) leading to the alleviation of Th1 and Th17 cell -driven experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU) [2 8]. Fathollahi and coworkers analyzed expression of genes that regulate MSC -Exo-based suppression of effector CD4+Th1, Th2 , and Th17 cells [2 9]. Effects of MSC -Exos were analyzed in MSC -Exo-treated CD4+T lymphocytes that were isolated from experimental autoimmune Figure 2. Immunomodulatory e ﬀects of MSC-Exos. MSC-Exos modulated e ﬀector function of dendriticcells (DCs), macrophages, T and B lymphocytes. MSC-Exos attenuated antigen-presenting properties ofDCs, inhibited proliferation of B lymphocytes, suppressed generation of inﬂammatory M1 macrophages,
Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells and induced enhanced expansion of immunosuppressive Tregs, tolerogenicDCs, and alternatively activated, M2 macrophages in experimental animals.MSC-Exo-primed DCs had reduced capacity for generation of inﬂammatory Th1, Th2, and Th17eﬀector T cells [ 26,27]. MSC-Exo-mediated modulation of antigen-presenting properties of lung DCsresulted in attenuated activation of CD4 +Th2 cells and consequently led to the alleviation of Th2-drivenimmune response towards Aspergillus protease antigen [ 26]. In the inﬂamed kidneys, MSC-Exo-sourcedmiR-21 inhibited maturation of renal DCs by suppressing activation of NF- κB signaling pathway [ 27].MSC-Exo-primed immature DCs were not able to optimally activate renal-inﬁltrating inﬂammatoryTh1 and Th17 cells. Therefore, signiﬁcantly alleviated Th1 and Th17 cell-driven renal inﬂammationand attenuated acute kidney injury were noticed in animals that were treated with miR-21-expressing
MSC-Exos [ 27]. Similarly, MSC-Exos signiﬁcantly reduced expression of co-stimulatory molecules and
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 7 of 17MHC class II proteins on retinal DCs and down-regulated their capacity for production of Th1 andTh17-related cytokines (IL-1 β, IL-6, and IL-12) leading to the alleviation of Th1 and Th17 cell-drivenexperimental autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU) [28].Fathollahi and coworkers analyzed expression of genes that regulate MSC-Exo-based suppressionof eﬀector CD4 +Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells [ 29]. Eﬀects of MSC-Exos were analyzed in MSC-Exo-treatedCD4+T lymphocytes that were isolated from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) miceand in vitro re-stimulated by EAE-inducing peptide (MOG35-55). MSC-Exos treatment signiﬁcantlydown-regulated expression of Tbx21 and Gata3 genes which acted as the master regulators for Th1 andTh2 immune responses. Similarly, generation of inﬂammatory Th17 subset of CD4 +lymphocytes wasinhibited by MSC-Exos, as evidenced by signiﬁcantly reduced expression of Rorc gene that regulated
diﬀerentiation of naïve T cells in e ﬀector Th17 cells [ 29]. MSC-Exo-mediated suppression of Th1and Th17 cells also showed beneﬁcial e ﬀects in alleviation of streptozotocin-induced model of type-1diabetes mellitus (STZ-T1DM) in which these inﬂammatory CD4 +T cells play pathogenic role [30].3.5. MSC-Exo-Dependent Modulation of T CellsIn addition to the suppression of Th1 and Th17 cell-driven inﬂammation, MSC-Exo-primed DCshad increased capacity to induce generation of CD4 +FoxP3-expressing immunosuppressive Tregs [ 31].MSC-Exo-mediated, DC-dependent expansion of Tregs was crucially important for the alleviationof graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and collagen-induced arthritis in mice [ 31,32]. Interestingly,MSC-Exos more e ﬃciently suppressed proliferation of inﬂammatory Th1 and Th17 cells and inducedexpansion of immunosuppressive Tregs than their parental MSC. Although the main reason for
this di ﬀerential activity is still unknown, several research groups indicated important role of TGF- βsignaling for this phenomenon [ 32]. Alvarez and colleagues [ 33] and Crain and coworkers [ 34] recentlyrevealed that MSC-Exos mainly suppressed proliferation of activated CD4 +T cells in TGF- βdependentmanner. TGF- βwas expressed on the membranes of MSC-Exos in the complex with betaglycan.After entering in the cytosol of T cells, MSC-Exo-sourced TGF- βsuppressed activation of Jak-Statsignaling pathway and caused the G1 cell cycle arrest in inﬂammatory CD4 +T cells, resulting in theirreduced expansion [ 34,35]. Use of TGF- βRI antagonist or neutralizing antibodies to TGF- β, completelydiminished immunosuppressive properties of MSC-Exo against activated CD4 +T cells, conﬁrmingcrucially important role of TGF- βfor MSC-Exo-based inhibition of CD4 +T cell proliferation [ 34]. On the
contrary, simultaneous, DC-dependent, activation of T cell receptor (TCR) and TGF- βreceptor on naïveCD4+CD25- T cells triggers IL-2 and Foxp3 expression, resulting in the generation of FoxP3-expressingTregs [ 36]. Passive transfer of TGF- β-generated Tregs e ﬃciently inhibited innate inﬂammatory responsein pancreatic islets and enhance survival of diabetic mice, conﬁrming crucially important role ofMSC-derived TGF- βfor generation of regulatory phenotype in CD4 +T cells [14,36].Zhang and colleagues recently revealed that in addition to TGF- β, indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase(IDO) also played important role in MSC-Exo-mediated enhanced generation of Tregs [ 37].IDO, produced either by MSCs or MSC-primed DCs, degrades tryptophan to kynurenine andother metabolites (quinolinic acid and 3-hydroxy-anthranillic acid) [ 38]. During TCR-mediatedactivation of resting Tregs, simultaneous activation of protein kinase B (PKB /Akt) and mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways induce reprogramming of Tregs into a pro-inﬂammatoryTh17 phenotype [ 39]. Increased IDO activity signiﬁcantly attenuates tryptophan levels in the local
target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways induce reprogramming of Tregs into a pro-inﬂammatoryTh17 phenotype [ 39]. Increased IDO activity signiﬁcantly attenuates tryptophan levels in the localmicroenvironment which activates stress-response pathways in Tregs, including activation of generalcontrol nonderepressible 2 (GCN2) kinase. GCN2, in turn, inhibits Akt /mTOR2 signaling pathways andprevents transdi ﬀerentiation of Tregs in Th17 cells [ 39]. Accordingly, MSC-Exos in IDO /Kynureninedependent manner maintain anti-inﬂammatory phenotype of Tregs and support TGF- β-inducedexpansion of these immunosuppressive cells in inﬂamed tissues [14].MSC-Exo-dependent expansion of Tregs had crucially important role in alleviation ofstreptozotocin-induced type-1 diabetes mellitus (STZ-T1DM) in mice [ 30]. MSC-Exos inducedexpansion of immunosuppressive, IL-10 and TGF- β-producing Tregs that resulted in elevated
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 8 of 17serum levels of anti-inﬂammatory IL-10 and TGF- βand, consequently, led to the alleviation ofinﬂammation in pancreatic islets. Additionally, administration of MSC-Exos signiﬁcantly reducedpresence of Th1 and Th17 cells in pancreatic islets of STZ-treated mice that was followed by decreasedserum levels of inﬂammatory cytokines (IFN- γand IL-17) [ 30]. Body weight, blood glucose levels,and survival were maintained stable in MSC-Exo-treated T1DM mice while signiﬁcant increase in thetotal number of un-injured islets were observed in MSC-Exo-treated T1DM mice in comparison toMSC-Exo-untreated T1DM animals [ 30]. By using asthmatic mice, Du and colleagues demonstratedthat MSC-Exos e ﬃciently alleviated chronic airway inﬂammation by promoting expansion of TGF- βand IL-10-producing Tregs in the lungs [ 40]. Similarly, signiﬁcantly lower number of inﬂammatoryTh1 and Th17 cells and remarkably higher presence of IL-10-producing FoxP3-expressing Tregs
were observed in the lungs of cigarette smoke (CS)-exposed mice that received Exos obtained fromamniotic ﬂuid-derived MSCs (Exo-dMAPPS) [ 41]. Exo-dMAPPS-based therapy signiﬁcantly improvedrespiratory function, down-regulated serum levels of inﬂammatory cytokines (TNF- α, IL-1 β, IL-12,and IFN- γ), increased serum concentration of immunosuppressive IL-10 and attenuated chronic airwayinﬂammation in CS-exposed mice [41].3.6. E ﬀects of MSC-Exos on Phenotype and Function of B CellsAs recently revealed by Khare and colleagues [ 42], MSC-Exos inhibited proliferation of Blymphocytes and alleviated their capacity for IgM production. MSC-Exos a ﬀected expressionof 186 genes in activated B lymphocytes. Most of them are involved in maturation, tra ﬃcking,antigen-presenting and e ﬀector function of B lymphocytes. Through the delivery of miRNAs,MSC-Exos down-regulated expression of Joining Chain Of Multimeric IgA And IgM (JCHAIN),
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthase 2 (PTGS2), POU Class 2 Homeobox Associating Factor 1(POU2AF1), TNF Receptor Superfamily Member 13B (TNFRSF13B), and Lymphotoxin Alpha (LTA)genes that resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced production of IgM in activated B lymphocytes. Interestingly,MSC-Exos increased expression of CXCL8 (IL-8) in B lymphocytes. IL-8 acts as a chemo-attractantfor activated, follicular CD4 +T cells enabling their interaction with antigen-presenting B cells [ 42].Additionally, B cell-derived IL-8, in autocrine and paracrine manner, increased expression of MHCclass II molecules, enhancing capacity of B cells for the presentation of protein antigens to the activatedCD4+T cells [ 42]. It is still unclear whether MSC-Exo-induced increased expression of IL-8 gene in Bcells could enhance their capacity for generation of immunosuppressive phenotype in CD4 +T cellsand this hypothesis should be conﬁrmed in future experimental studies.
In addition to their e ﬀect on phenotype and function of immune cells (Table 1), MSC-Exos alsomodulated migratory properties of inﬂammatory cells [ 43]. As evidenced by Bai and colleagues,MSC-Exos signiﬁcantly alleviated EAU in rats by suppressing CCL2 and CCL21-dependent homingof circulating leukocytes in the inﬂamed eyes [ 43]. A remarkably lower number of inﬂammatory M1macrophages and Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes were observed in injured retinas of MSC-Exo-treatedrats as a consequence of MSC-Exo-mediated inhibition of CCL2 and CCL21 production [43].Table 1. Eﬀects of MSC-Exos on immune cells.Target Cell Molecular MechanismEﬀect on Cell Phenotypeand FunctionTherapeuticPotentialRef.M1 macrophagesmiR-146a-dependent inhibitionTRAF6 /IRAK1 /NF-κB-signalingReduced expression of iNOSand inﬂammatory cytokines(TNF- α, IL-1 β, IL-6)DSS-inducedcolitis[15]HSCsmiR-181-5p-dependentinduction of autophagyand apoptosisIncreased expression ofBeclin-1 and suppression
Beclin-1 and suppressionof Bcl-2Liver ﬁbrosis [17]M2 macrophagesand microglial cellsmiR-223-5p-dependent
HSCsmiR-181-5p-dependentinduction of autophagyand apoptosisIncreased expression ofBeclin-1 and suppressionof Bcl-2Liver ﬁbrosis [17]M2 macrophagesand microglial cellsmiR-223-5p-dependentexpression of Arginase-1Increased secretion of IL-10and TGF- βI/R-inducedlung injury;AD and MS[18,23,24]
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 9 of 17Table 1. Cont.Target Cell Molecular MechanismEﬀect on Cell Phenotypeand FunctionTherapeuticPotentialRef.DCsmiR-21-based suppression ofNF-κB signalingReduced expression ofco-stimulatory molecules(CD40, CD80, CD86),decreased production of Th1and Th17-related cytokines(IL-1 β, IL-6, and IL-12)EAU; EAE;STZ-T1DM[28–30]Th1 and Th17 cellsTGF- β-dependent inhibition ofJAK/STAT signalingG1 cell cycle arrest andreduced proliferationEAE;STZ-T1DM[29,30]TregsTGF- βand IDO-dependentactivation of GCN2 kinaseReduced transdi ﬀerentiationof Tregs in Th17 cellsSTZ-T1DM;chronic airwayinﬂammation[30,40]B cellsmiR-dependentdown-regulation of JCHAIN,PTGS2, POU2AF1, TNFRSF13B,SH2D1A, LTA genesSuppressed proliferationand reduced productionof IgM.B cell-mediatedautoimmunediseases[42]Abbreviations: TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6); IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1); inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS); tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF- α); dextran sulfate sodium (DSS); hepatic stellatecells (HSCs); transforming growth factor beta (TGF- β); ischemia /reperfusion (I /R); Alzheimer’s disease (AD);multiple sclerosis (MS); dendritic cells (DCs); experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU); experimentalautoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE); streptozotocin-induced model of type-1 diabetes mellitus (STZ-T1DM);indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO); indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase; general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2) kinase.4. Signaling Pathways Responsible for MSC-Exo-Dependent Enhanced Survival andRegeneration of Injured Parenchymal CellsThrough the delivery of miRNAs which interfere with cell death signaling pathways, MSC-Exosprevent apoptosis and promote survival of un-damaged parenchymal cells during the progression oftissue injury and inﬂammation (Figure 3) [13,14].Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, x 9 of 17  and Th17 -related cytokines
and Th17 -related cytokines (IL-1β, IL -6, and IL -12) Th1 and Th17 cells  TGF -β-dependent inhibition of JAK/STAT signaling  G1 cell cycle arrest and reduced proliferation  EAE; STZ-T1DM  [29,30]  Tregs  TGF -β and IDO -dependent activation of GCN2 kinase  Reduced transdifferentiation of Tregs in Th17 cells  STZ-T1DM;  chronic airway inflammation  [30,40]  B cells  miR-dependent down -regulation of JCHAIN, PTGS2, POU2AF1, TNFRSF13B, SH2D1A, LTA genes  Suppressed proliferation and reduced production of IgM.  B cell-mediated autoimmune diseases  [42] Abbreviations: TNF receptor -associated factor 6 (TRAF6); IL -1 receptor -associated kinase 1 (IRAK1); inducible nitric oxide syntha se (iNOS); tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF -α); dextran sulfate sodium (DSS); hepatic stellate cells (HSCs); transforming growth factor beta (TGF -β); ischemia/reperfusion (I/R); Alzheimer’s disease (AD); multiple sclerosis (MS); dendritic cells (DCs); expe rimental
autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU); experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE); streptozotocin -induced model of type -1 diabetes mellitus (STZ -T1DM); indoleamine -2,3-dioxygenase (IDO); indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase ; general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2) kinase.  4. Signaling Pathways Responsible for MSC -Exo-Dependent Enhanced Survival and Regeneration o f Injured Parenchymal Cells  Through the delivery of miRNAs which interfere with cell death signaling pathways, MSC -Exos prevent apoptosis and promo te survival of un -damaged parenchymal cells during the progression of tissue injury and inflammation (Figure 3) [13,14].  Figure 3. Beneficial effects of MSC -Exos in tissue repair and regeneration. MSC -Exos, in miR -19, miR-21, let -7c miR, miR -21-5p, miR -17-92, and miR-233-dependent manner, prevented apoptosis of lung and renal tubular epithelial cells, increased survival of cardiomyocytes in ischemic hearts,
enhanced axonal regeneration and promoted hepatocyte growth and proliferation.
lung and renal tubular epithelial cells, increased survival of cardiomyocytes in ischemic hearts, enhanced axonal regeneration and promoted hepatocyte growth and proliferation.  Figure 3. Beneﬁcial e ﬀects of MSC-Exos in tissue repair and regeneration. MSC-Exos, in miR-19, miR-21,let-7c miR, miR-21-5p, miR-17-92, and miR-233-dependent manner, prevented apoptosis of lung andrenal tubular epithelial cells, increased survival of cardiomyocytes in ischemic hearts, enhanced axonalregeneration and promoted hepatocyte growth and proliferation.
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 10 of 174.1. MSC-Exo-Based Protection of Lung Epithelial Cells, Renal Tubular Cells, and HepatocytesLi and coworkers emphasized important role of miR-21-5p for the MSC-Exo-dependent inhibitionof cell death signaling pathways in lung epithelial cells (LECs) [ 18]. Pro-apoptotic proteins Phosphataseand tensin homolog (PTEN) and Programmed cell death protein 4 (PDCD4) were the main intracellulartargets of miR-21-5p in MSC-Exo-based protection of LECs [ 44]. Pre-treatment of MSCs with miR-21-5pantagomir signiﬁcantly abrogated capacity of MSC-Exos to suppress PTEN and PDCD4-inducedapoptosis of LECs and completely diminished MSC-Exo-mediated therapeutic e ﬀects in alleviation ofI/R-induced lung injury [18,44].As suggested by Bruno and colleagues [ 45,46], mRNAs which regulate transcription (CLOCK,IRF6, and LHX6), cell cycle regulation (SENP2, RBL1, and CDC14B) and DNA /RNA repair (HMGN4,
TOPORS, and ESF1) were mainly responsible for increased proliferation and suppressed apoptosisof renal tubular cells in cisplatin-injured kidneys of MSC-Exo-treated animals. Due to their capacityto modulate expression of apoptosis-related genes (CCNA2, CDC34, AURA /STK6, AURKB /STK12,E2F5, and CDK8), members of the let-7 miR family were also considered important for anti-apoptoticproperties of MSC-Exos [ 47]. Importantly, MSC-Exo-based renoprotection was completely diminishedby RNase pretreatment [ 48], conﬁrming the hypothesis that beneﬁcial e ﬀects of MSCs-Exos weremainly relied on the activity of MSC-Exo-delivered mRNA.Intravenous injection of MSC-Exos prevented hepatocyte cell death in animal models of acuteliver failure and autoimmune hepatitis [ 49,50]. Hepatoprotective e ﬀects of MSC-Exos were relied onthe suppression of caspase-3-driven apoptosis and on inhibition of caspase-1-induced pyroptosis of
hepatocytes [ 49,50]. MSC-Exos-dependent delivery of miR-233 induced degradation of NLRP3 mRNAin hepatocytes and suppressed NLRP3:caspase-1-induced pyroptosis [ 50]. Additionally, MSC-Exosincreased hepatocyte number by inducing sphingosine kinase (SK1)-dependent activation ofsphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) which promoted hepatocyte growth, survival and proliferation [ 51].Inhibition of either SK1 or S1P completely abrogated MSC-Exos-dependent expansion of hepatocytes,conﬁrming crucially important role of SK1:S1P signaling pathway for hepatoproliferative e ﬀects ofMSC-Exos [52].4.2. MSC-Exo-Dependent Modulation of Apoptosis and Autophagy in Injured Parenchymal CellsSeveral lines of evidence suggested that MSC-Exo-mediated activation of autophagy protectedagainst apoptotic cell death [ 53]. MSC-Exo-dependent delivery of trophic factor 14-3-3 ζand consequentactivation of autophagy associated protein ATG-16L inhibited apoptosis in cisplatin-injured proximal
tubular epithelial cells [ 54]. Huang and colleagues revealed that MSC-Exos, through the delivery ofpigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), increased expression of autophagy related protein LC3 andsuppressed caspase-3-driven apoptosis in neurons, signiﬁcantly reducing I /R-induced brain injury [ 55].These MSC-Exo-mediated beneﬁcial e ﬀects were completely abrogated by autophagy inhibitor,3-methyladenine, conﬁrming crucially important role of autophagy induction for anti-apoptoticeﬀects of MSC-Exos [ 55,56]. In addition to their anti-apoptotic properties, MSC-Exos were also ableto promote neuritogenesis [ 57]. Mead and Tomarev analyzed the e ﬀects of MSC-Exos on retinalganglion cells (RGCs) and demonstrated that MSC-Exos, through the delivery of miR-17-92 andmiR21, which down-regulated expression of PTEN (well-known suppressor of RGC axonal growth),promoted axonal regeneration, and survival of RGCs [57].
In line with these ﬁndings are results obtained by Wang and coworkers who demonstrated thatmiR-21 and miR-19-dependent inhibition of PTEN-driven apoptosis was crucially responsible for
In line with these ﬁndings are results obtained by Wang and coworkers who demonstrated thatmiR-21 and miR-19-dependent inhibition of PTEN-driven apoptosis was crucially responsible forcardioprotective e ﬀects of MSC-Exos in animal model of acute myocardial infarction [ 58]. Through thedelivery of miR-19, MSC-Exos down-regulated activation of PTEN and induced phosphorylation andactivation of Akt kinase which, in turn, up-regulated anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein and reduced apoptoticloss of cardiomyocytes [ 58]. Additionally, MSC-Exos, in miR-21-dependent manner, improved cardiacfunction by inducing neoangiogenesis in ischemic hearts through the enhanced expression of VEGF [ 58].Similar ﬁndings were reported by Shiue and colleagues who demonstrated that VEGF-dependent
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 11 of 17neovascularization was, at least partially, responsible for improved functional recovery from nerveligation-induced injury in MSC-Exo-treated rats [59].5. Clinical Use of MSC-ExosExperimental studies indicated beneﬁcial e ﬀects of MSC-Exos in the treatment of inﬂammatory anddegenerative diseases and suggested their superiority to cell-based therapy in terms of safety. However,therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos had been explored in only several on-going or already conductedclinical trials. A relatively small number of MSC-Exo-related clinical studies could be explained bythe fact that the optimal culture conditions and protocols for isolation, storage, and application ofMSC-Exos are not deﬁned yet [ 60]. Additionally, critical technological considerations related to theroute and dose of MSC-Exos administration still need to be addressed [ 60]. Experimental ﬁndings
indicated that route of administration and treatment schedule signiﬁcantly a ﬀected therapeutic dose ofMSC-Exos. Neuroprotection elicited by local, intravitreal injection of 3 ×109MSC-Exos was achievedby ﬁve times higher dose of intravenously injected MSC-Exos (15 ×109MSC-Exos). MSC-Exos residein the eye up to 30 days and, accordingly, neurotrophic e ﬀects, elicited by single intravitreal injectionof MSC-Exos, were completely diminished one month after application. On the contrary, permanentMSC-Exo-based neuroprotection was achieved by multiple, weekly injections of MSC-Exos, suggestingthat repetitive or sustained delivery of MSC-Exos signiﬁcantly enhanced their bioavailability andeﬃcacy [ 61]. Therefore, the optimal therapeutic dose of MSC-Exos should be determined for eachclinical condition and has to be based on the treatment schedule, route of administration and longevityof MSC-Exos in the target tissue.
of MSC-Exos in the target tissue.The therapeutic e ﬃcacy of MSC-Exos in attenuation of chronic renal inﬂammation andMSC-Exo-mediated improvement of kidney function have been conﬁrmed in the clinical studyrecently published by Nassar and colleagues [ 62]. MSC-Exos e ﬃciently alleviated chronic kidneydisease (grade III-IV) in 20 patients that received two doses (1 week apart) of MSC-Exos (100 µg/kg/dose).The ﬁrst dose was injected intravenously and the second dose was administered via renalartery [ 62]. MSC-Exos alleviated TNF- α-driven inﬂammation and induced TGF- βand IL-10-dependentanti-inﬂammatory response that signiﬁcantly improved estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR)and urinary albumin creatinine ratio. Importantly, any signiﬁcant adverse events related to theadministration of MSC-Exos were not reported during the one year of follow-up [62].These promising results provided a rationale for the clinical use of MSC-Exos in a wide spectrum
of diseases. Therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos in the treatment of acute ischemic stroke has beeninvestigated in the clinical trial conducted at Isfahan University of Medical Sciences (NCT03384433).MSC-Exos were engineered to expressed miR-124 which already showed beneﬁcial e ﬀects in animalmodel of ischemic stroke [ 63]. A single dose of miR-124-expressing MSC-Exos (200 mg of total protein)were injected into the ischemic area via stereotactic guidance. Incidence of treatment emergent adverseevents (stroke recurrences, brain edema, and seizures) and degree of disability were monitored duringthe one year of follow-up. The study was completed in December 2019 and the results are still expecting.IDO-containing MSC-Exos showed beneﬁcial e ﬀects in the attenuation of Th17 cell-driveninﬂammatory diseases, including dry eye disease (DED) [64]. MSC-Exo-based attenuation of DED inpatients su ﬀering from chronic GvHD will be examined in a clinical trial that is currently recruiting
patients in China (NCT04213248). Total number of 27 patients will receive artiﬁcial tears for 2 weeks,followed by MSC-Exos (10 µg/drop, four times a day) for 14 days. Changes in Ocular Surface Disease
followed by MSC-Exos (10 µg/drop, four times a day) for 14 days. Changes in Ocular Surface DiseaseIndex (OSDI) score, Tear break time, Ocular Surface Staining, Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA),Conjunctiva Redness Score (CRS), tear meniscus height and amount of tear secretion will be monitoredduring the 12 weeks of follow-up.Therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos in the healing of large and refractory macular holes (MH) inthe eyes was the main aim of clinical trial initiated in March 2017 (NCT03437759). Total number of44 patients should receive 50 or 20 µg MSC-Exos (dissolved in 10 µL of Phosphate-bu ﬀered saline).After air-liquid exchange, MSC-Exos will be dripped into vitreous cavity around MH. MSC-Exo-treated
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 12 of 17patients will be followed up for at least 6 months via BCVA, fundoscopy, optical coherence tomographyand physical examination.A tolerance clinical study on aerosol inhalation of MSC-Exos in healthy volunteers is currentlyrecruiting participants (NCT04313647). According to the study protocol, 10 healthy volunteers(18–45 year old, males and non-pregnant females) will receive one aerosol inhalation of MSCs-Exos(2.0×108nano vesicles /3 mL) and will be followed-up during the next 7 days. In addition to thephysical examination and chest imaging, lymphocyte count and concentration of C-reactive protein,D-dimer, IL-1 β, IL-2R, IL-6, and IL-8 will be determined. Another clinical trial which will use aerosolinhalation of MSCs-Exos is going to recruit patients in China (NCT04276987). Since animal studiesdemonstrated that MSC-Exos may promote anti-microbial properties of lung-inﬁltrated immune
cells [ 65], therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos in alleviation of SARS-CoV-2 infection will be analyzedin this trial. Total number of 30 patients su ﬀering from SARS-CoV-2 infection will receive aerosolinhalation of MSC-Exos (2.0 ×108nano vesicles /3 mL /daily, for 5 consecutive days). Safety andeﬃciency of MSC-Exo-based therapy (weaning from mechanical ventilation, improved organ failure,and decreased mortality) will be analyzed during the 28 days of follow-up.Therapeutic potential of allogeneic MSC-Exos in the treatment of Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB)lesions will be evaluated in the up-coming clinical trial that will recruit 10 patients (NCT04173650).MSC-Exos will be applied topically, once a day for a period of two months. The study will examine adose limiting toxicity and e ﬃcacy of MSC-Exos. The level of healing and scaring of MSC-Exo-treatedlesions as well as the change in itching and pain will be bi-weekly assessed during the 60 days of
follow-up. The trial will be launched in September 2020 and the estimated study completion date isNovember 2021.MSC-Exos may be used as an adjuvant therapy to support and complement other therapeuticmodalities. Clinical trial which will investigate MSC-Exos-based prevention and treatment of multipleorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS) in patients who underwent surgical repair of acute type A aorticdissection (SRATAAD) will be conducted in China in up-coming years (NCT04356300). MSC-Exos-basedprevention of MODS will be evaluated in 15 patients who will receive MSC-Exos immediately afterSRATAAD. Therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos in the treatment of severe MODS (sequential organfailure assessment score (SOFA) ≥10) will be evaluated in another 15 SRATAAD patients who willreceive MSC-Exos immediately after the onset of MODS. MSC-Exos will be intravenously injected at adose of 150 mg, once a day, for 14 days. MODS-related biochemical indexes and SOFA score will be
monitored during the 6 months of follow-up.6. Concluding Remarks and Future PerspectivesResults obtained in a large number of preclinical studies strongly suggested therapeutic potentialof MSC-Exos in the cell-free treatment of inﬂammatory and degenerative diseases. Since MSC-Exoshad intrinsic homing capabilities similar to their parental cells and were able to protect their cargofrom extracellular degradation, these immunoregulatory agents were considered as a new, promisingtool for the modulation of local and systemic detrimental immune response. Due to their capacity todeliver genetic material, immunomodulatory proteins, enzymes, and growth factors directly to therecipient cells, MSC-Exos represent an ideal multifunctional delivery system which could modulateintracellular signaling pathways in the speciﬁc target cells.Despite these encouraging ﬁndings, it should be noted that there is still a lot of experimental
work to be done before MSC-Exos could be widely used in clinical practice. Since a various
Despite these encouraging ﬁndings, it should be noted that there is still a lot of experimentalwork to be done before MSC-Exos could be widely used in clinical practice. Since a variousnumber of anti-apoptotic and immunosuppressive molecules have been proposed as cruciallyimportant for therapeutic e ﬀects of MSC-Exos, further experimental studies should identify theexact disease-speciﬁc MSC-Exo-contained molecule(s) responsible for enhanced tissue repair andregeneration. Bioengineering and cellular modiﬁcation techniques should be used to further modifysurface of MSC-Exos in other to enhance their ability for cell-speciﬁc targeting and, accordingly,to avoid side e ﬀects related to the accumulation of MSC-Exos in non-desired cells. Finally, protocols
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 13 of 17for isolation, storage, and application of MSC-Exos should be optimized for each clinical condition.The exact disease-speciﬁc therapeutic dose, the appropriate treatment schedule and route of MSC-Exosadministration have to be deﬁned before MSC-Exos will be o ﬀered as universal human remedy for thetreatment of inﬂammatory and degenerative diseases.Supplementary Paragraph: An extensive literature review was carried out in March 2020across several databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, Google Scholar, and ClinicalTrials.gov), from 1990to present. Keywords used in the selection were: “mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)”, “exosomes(Exos)”, “immunomodulation”, “signaling pathways”, “inﬂammation”, “autoimmune diseases”,“regeneration”, and “therapy”. All journals were considered, and an initial search retrieved 1192articles. The abstracts of all these articles were subsequently reviewed by two of the authors (C.R.H. and
V .V .) to check their relevance to the subject of this manuscript. Eligible experimental and clinical studieshad to delineate molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the beneﬁcial e ﬀects of MSC-Exos,and their ﬁndings were analyzed in this review.Author Contributions: C.R.H.: manuscript writing and editing; collection of data; N.J.: manuscript writing,creation of ﬁgures; V .D.: manuscript writing and editing; V .V .: conception and design, manuscript writing;collection of data; interpretation of data. All authors have read and agreed to the published version ofthe manuscript.Funding: This work was supported by European Crohn’s and Colitis Organization (ECCO) (grant “The role ofgalectin 3 in acute colitis”), ECLAT, spin o ﬀof the University of Catania (Replica grant), Swiss National ScienceFoundation (IZSEZ0 185546), Serbian Ministry of Science (ON175069, ON175103) and Faculty of Medical SciencesUniversity of Kragujevac (MP01 /18).
University of Kragujevac (MP01 /18).Acknowledgments: This work was supported by European Crohn’s and Colitis Organization (ECCO) (grant “Therole of galectin 3 in acute colitis”), ECLAT, spin o ﬀof the University of Catania (Replica grant), Swiss NationalScience Foundation (IZSEZ0 185546), Serbian Ministry of Science (ON175069, ON175103) and Faculty of MedicalSciences University of Kragujevac (MP01 /18).Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. Carl Randall Harrell is from RegenerativeProcessing Plant, LLC, the company had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses,or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.References1. Volarevic, V .; Ljujic, B.; Stojkovic, P .; Lukic, A.; Arsenijevic, N.; Stojkovic, M. Human stem cell research andregenerative medicine-present and future. Br. Med. Bull. 2011 ,99, 155–168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Fu, Y.; Karbaat, L.; Wu, L.; Leijten, J.; Both, S.K.; Karperien, M. Trophic E ﬀects of Mesenchymal Stem Cells inTissue Regeneration. Tissue Eng. Part B Rev. 2017 ,23, 515–528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]3. Harrell, C.R.; Jankovic, M.G.; Fellabaum, C.; Volarevic, A.; Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, A.; Volarevic, V . MolecularMechanisms Responsible for Anti-inﬂammatory and Immunosuppressive E ﬀects of Mesenchymal StemCell-Derived Factors. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2019 ,1084 , 187–206. [PubMed]4. Gazdic, M.; Volarevic, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Stojkovic, M. Mesenchymal stem cells: A friend or foe inimmune-mediated diseases. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 2015 ,11, 280–287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]5. Volarevic, V .; Markovic, B.S.; Gazdic, M.; Volarevic, A.; Jovicic, N.; Arsenijevic, N.; Armstrong, L.; Djonov, V .;Lako, M.; Stojkovic, M. Ethical and Safety Issues of Stem Cell-Based Therapy. Int. J. Med. Sci. 2018 ,15, 36–45.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]6. Breitbach, M.; Bostani, T.; Roell, W.; Xia, Y.; Dewald, O.; Nygren, J.M.; Fries, J.W.; Tiemann, K.; Bohlen, H.;Hescheler, J.; et al. Potential risks of bone marrow cell transplantation into infarcted hearts. Blood 2007 ,110,
Hescheler, J.; et al. Potential risks of bone marrow cell transplantation into infarcted hearts. Blood 2007 ,110,1362–1369. [CrossRef]7. Yoon, Y.S.; Park, J.S.; Tkebuchava, T.; Luedeman, C.; Losordo, D.W. Unexpected severe calciﬁcation aftertransplantation of bone marrow cells in acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 2004 ,109, 3154–3157.[CrossRef] [PubMed]8. Berglund, A.K.; Fortier, L.A.; Antczak, D.F.; Schnabel, L.V . Immunoprivileged no more: Measuring theimmunogenicity of allogeneic adult mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2017 ,8, 288. [CrossRef]
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 14 of 179. Harrell, C.R.; Fellabaum, C.; Jovicic, N.; Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V . Molecular MechanismsResponsible for Therapeutic Potential of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Secretome. Cells 2019 ,8, 467.[CrossRef]10. Phinney, D.G.; Pittenger, M.F. Concise Review: MSC-Derived Exosomes for Cell-Free Therapy. Stem Cells2017 ,35, 851–858. [CrossRef]11. Vizoso, F.J.; Eiro, N.; Cid, S.; Schneider, J.; Perez-Fernandez, R. Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome: TowardCell-Free Therapeutic Strategies in Regenerative Medicine. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1852. [CrossRef][PubMed]12. Deng, H.; Sun, C.; Sun, Y.; Li, H.; Yang, L.; Wu, D.; Gao, Q.; Jiang, X. Lipid, Protein, and MicroRNAComposition Within Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes. Cell. Reprogram. 2018 ,20, 178–186.[CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Qiu, G.; Zheng, G.; Ge, M.; Wang, J.; Huang, R.; Shu, Q.; Xu, J. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular
vesicles a ﬀect disease outcomes via transfer of microRNAs. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2018 ,9, 320. [CrossRef][PubMed]14. Harrell, C.R.; Jovicic, N.; Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V . Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomesand Other Extracellular Vesicles as New Remedies in the Therapy of Inﬂammatory Diseases. Cells 2019 ,8,1605. [CrossRef]15. Wu, H.; Fan, H.; Shou, Z.; Xu, M.; Chen, Q.; Ai, C.; Dong, Y.; Liu, Y.; Nan, Z.; Wang, Y.; et al.Extracellular vesicles containing miR-146a attenuate experimental colitis by targeting TRAF6 and IRAK1.Int. Immunopharmacol. 2019 ,68, 204–212. [CrossRef]16. Mao, F.; Wu, Y.; Tang, X.; Kang, J.; Zhang, B.; Yan, Y.; Qian, H.; Zhang, X.; Xu, W. Exosomes Derivedfrom Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells Relieve Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease in Mice.Biomed. Res. Int. 2017 ,2017 , 5356760. [CrossRef]17. Vannella, K.M.; Wynn, T.A. Mechanisms of Organ Injury and Repair by Macrophages. Annu. Rev. Physiol.2017 ,79, 593–617. [CrossRef]
2017 ,79, 593–617. [CrossRef]18. Li, J.W.; Wei, L.; Han, Z.; Chen, Z. Mesenchymal stromal cells-derived exosomes alleviate ischemia /reperfusioninjury in mouse lung by transporting anti-apoptotic miR-21-5p. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2019 ,852, 68–76. [CrossRef]19. Huang, R.; Qin, C.; Wang, J.; Hu, Y.; Zheng, G.; Qiu, G.; Ge, M.; Tao, H.; Shu, Q.; Xu, J. Di ﬀerential e ﬀects ofextracellular vesicles from aging and young mesenchymal stem cells in acute lung injury. Aging (Albany NY)2019 ,11, 7996–8014. [CrossRef]20. Boulestreau, J.; Maumus, M.; Rozier, P .; Jorgensen, C.; Noël, D. Mesenchymal Stem Cell Derived ExtracellularVesicles in Aging. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2020 ,8, 107. [CrossRef]21. Wang, Y.; Fu, B.; Sun, X.; Li, D.; Huang, Q.; Zhao, W.; Chen, X. Di ﬀerentially expressed microRNAs in bonemarrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived microvesicles in young and older rats and their e ﬀect on tumor
growth factor- β1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition in HK2 cells. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2015 ,6, 185.[CrossRef] [PubMed]22. Faﬁán-Labora, J.; Lesende-Rodriguez, I.; Fern ández-Pernas, P .; Sangiao-Alvarellos, S.; Monserrat, L.;Arntz, O.J.; van de Loo, F.J.; Mateos, J.; Arufe, M.C. E ﬀect of age on pro-inﬂammatory miRNAs contained inmesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 43923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]23. Ding, M.; Shen, Y.; Wang, P .; Xie, Z.; Xu, S.; Zhu, Z.; Wang, Y.; Lyu, Y.; Wang, D.; Xu, L.; et al. ExosomesIsolated From Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells Alleviate Neuroinﬂammation and ReduceAmyloid-Beta Deposition by Modulating Microglial Activation in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurochem. Res.2018 ,43, 2165–2177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]24. Laso-Garc ía, F.; Ramos-Cejudo, J.; Carrillo-Salinas, F.J.; Otero-Ortega, L.; Feli ú, A.; G ómez-de Frutos, M.;
Mecha, M.; D íez-Tejedor, E.; Guaza, C.; Guti érrez-Fern ández, M. Therapeutic potential of extracellularvesicles derived from human mesenchymal stem cells in a model of progressive multiple sclerosis. PLoS ONE2018 ,13, e0202590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
vesicles derived from human mesenchymal stem cells in a model of progressive multiple sclerosis. PLoS ONE2018 ,13, e0202590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]25. Shahir, M.; Mahmoud Hashemi, S.; Asadirad, A.; Varahram, M.; Kazempour-Dizaji, M.; Folkerts, G.;Garssen, J.; Adcock, I.; Mortaz, E. E ﬀect of mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes on the induction ofmouse tolerogenic dendritic cells. J. Cell Physiol. 2020 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]26. Cho, K.S.; Kang, S.A.; Kim, S.D.; Mun, S.J.; Yu, H.S.; Roh, H.J. Dendritic cells and M2 macrophage play animportant role in suppression of Th2-mediated inﬂammation by adipose stem cells-derived extracellularvesicles. Stem Cell Res. 2019 ,39, 101500. [CrossRef]
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 15 of 1727. Song, N.; Zhang, T.; Xu, X.; Lu, Z.; Yu, X.; Fang, Y.; Hu, J.; Jia, P .; Teng, J.; Ding, X. miR-21 Protects AgainstIschemia /Reperfusion-Induced Acute Kidney Injury by Preventing Epithelial Cell Apoptosis and InhibitingDendritic Cell Maturation. Front. Physiol. 2018 ,9, 790. [CrossRef]28. Shigemoto-Kuroda, T.; Oh, J.Y.; Kim, D.K.; Jeong, H.J.; Park, S.Y.; Lee, H.J.; Park, J.W.; Kim, T.W.; An, S.Y.;Prockop, D.J.; et al. MSC-derived Extracellular Vesicles Attenuate Immune Responses in Two AutoimmuneMurine Models: Type 1 Diabetes and Uveoretinitis. Stem Cell Rep. 2017 ,8, 1214–1225. [CrossRef]29. Fathollahi, A.; Hashemi, S.M.; Haji Molla Hoseini, M.; Yeganeh, F. In vitro analysis of immunomodulatoryeﬀects of mesenchymal stem cell- and tumor cell –derived exosomes on recall antigen-speciﬁc responses.Int. Immunopharmacol. 2019 ,67, 302–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Nojehdehi, S.; Soudi, S.; Hesampour, A.; Rasouli, S.; Soleimani, M.; Hashemi, S.M. Immunomodulatory e ﬀectsof mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes on experimental type-1 autoimmune diabetes. J. Cell Biochem.2018 ,119, 9433–9443. [CrossRef]31. Zhang, B.; Yeo, R.W.Y.; Lai, R.C.; Sim, E.W.K.; Chin, K.C.; Lim, S.K. Mesenchymal stromal cellexosome-enhanced regulatory T-cell production through an antigen-presenting cell-mediated pathway.Cytotherapy 2018 ,20, 687–696. [CrossRef] [PubMed]32. Cosenza, S.; Toupet, K.; Maumus, M.; Luz-Crawford, P .; Blanc-Brude, O.; Jorgensen, C.; Noël, D. Mesenchymalstem cells-derived exosomes are more immunosuppressive than microparticles in inﬂammatory arthritis.Theranostics 2018 ,8, 1399–1410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]33. Álvarez, V .; S ánchez-Margallo, F.M.; Mac ías-Garc ía, B.; G ómez-Serrano, M.; Jorge, I.; V ázquez, J.; Bl ázquez, R.;Casado, J.G. The immunomodulatory activity of extracellular vesicles derived from endometrial mesenchymal
stem cells on CD4 +T cells is partially mediated by TGFbeta. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 2018 ,12, 2088–2098.[CrossRef] [PubMed]34. Crain, S.K.; Robinson, S.R.; Thane, K.E.; Davis, A.M.; Meola, D.M.; Barton, B.A.; Yang, V .K.; Ho ﬀman, A.M.Extracellular Vesicles from Wharton’s Jelly Mesenchymal Stem Cells Suppress CD4 Expressing T CellsThrough Transforming Growth Factor Beta and Adenosine Signaling in a Canine Model. Stem Cells Dev.2019 ,28, 212–226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]35. Bright, J.J.; Kerr, L.D.; Sriram, S. TGF-beta inhibits IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and activation ofJak-1 and Stat 5 in T lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 1997 ,159, 175–183. [PubMed]36. Fu, S.; Zhang, N.; Yopp, A.C.; Chen, D.; Mao, M.; Chen, D.; Zhang, H.; Ding, Y.; Bromberg, J.S. TGF-betainduces Foxp3 +T-regulatory cells from CD4 +CD25—Precursors. Am. J. Transplant. 2004 ,4, 1614–1627.[CrossRef]
[CrossRef]37. Zhang, Q.; Fu, L.; Liang, Y.; Guo, Z.; Wang, L.; Ma, C.; Wang, H. Exosomes originating from MSCs stimulatedwith TGF- βand IFN- γpromote Treg di ﬀerentiation. J. Cell. Physiol. 2018 ,233, 6832–6840. [CrossRef]38. Volarevic, V .; Gazdic, M.; Simovic Markovic, B.; Jovicic, N.; Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N. Mesenchymal stemcell-derived factors: Immuno-modulatory e ﬀects and therapeutic potential. Biofactors 2017 ,43, 633–644.[CrossRef]39. Acovic, A.; Gazdic, M.; Jovicic, N.; Harrell, C.R.; Fellabaum, C.; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V . Role ofindoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in pathology of the gastrointestinal tract. Therap. Adv. Gastroenterol. 2018 ,11,1756284818815334. [CrossRef]40. Du, Y.M.; Zhuansun, Y.X.; Chen, R.; Lin, L.; Lin, Y.; Li, J.G. Mesenchymal stem cell exosomes promoteimmunosuppression of regulatory T cells in asthma. Exp. Cell Res. 2018 ,363, 114–120. [CrossRef]
41. Harrell, C.R.; Miloradovic, D.; Sadikot, R.; Fellabaum, C.; Simovic Markovic, B.; Miloradovic, D.; Acovic, A.;Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V . Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Responsible for Beneﬁcial
Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V . Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Responsible for BeneﬁcialEﬀects of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Derived Product “Exo-d-MAPPS” in Attenuation of Chronic AirwayInﬂammation. Anal. Cell. Pathol. 2020 ,3153891 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]42. Khare, D.; Or, R.; Resnick, I.; Barkatz, C.; Almogi-Hazan, O.; Avni, B. Mesenchymal Stromal Cell-DerivedExosomes A ﬀect mRNA Expression and Function of B-Lymphocytes. Front. Immunol. 2018 ,9, 3053.[CrossRef] [PubMed]43. Bai, L.; Shao, H.; Wang, H.; Zhang, Z.; Su, C.; Dong, L.; Yu, B.; Chen, X.; Li, X.; Zhang, X. E ﬀects ofMesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes on Experimental Autoimmune Uveitis. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 4323.[CrossRef]
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 16 of 1744. Liu, A.; Zhang, X.; He, H.; Zhou, L.; Naito, Y.; Sugita, S.; Lee, J.W. Therapeutic potential of stem /stromalcell-derived secretome and vesicles for lung injury and disease. Expert. Opin. Biol. 2020 ,20, 125–140.[CrossRef] [PubMed]45. Bruno, S.; Grange, C.; Deregibus, M.C.; Calogero, R.A.; Saviozzi, S.; Collino, F.; Morando, L.; Busca, A.;Falda, M.; Bussolati, B.; et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived microvesicles protect against acute tubularinjury. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2009 ,20, 1053–1067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]46. Bruno, S.; Tapparo, M.; Collino, F.; Chiabotto, G.; Deregibus, M.C.; Soares Lindoso, R.; Neri, F.; Kholia, S.;Giunti, S.; Wen, S.; et al. Renal Regenerative Potential of Di ﬀerent Extracellular Vesicle Populations Derivedfrom Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stromal Cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 2017 ,23, 1262–1273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Johnson, C.D.; Esquela-Kerscher, A.; Stefani, G.; Byrom, M.; Kelnar, K.; Ovcharenko, D.; Wilson, M.; Wang, X.;Shelton, J.; Shingara, J.; et al. The let-7 microRNA represses cell proliferation pathways in human cells.Cancer Res. 2007 ,67, 7713–7722. [CrossRef]48. Gatti, S.; Bruno, S.; Deregibus, M.C.; Sordi, A.; Cantaluppi, V .; Tetta, C.; Camussi, G. Microvesicles derivedfrom human adult mesenchymal stem cells protect against ischaemia-reperfusion-induced acute and chronickidney injury. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 2011 ,26, 1474–1483. [CrossRef]49. Chen, L.; Xiang, B.; Wang, X.; Xiang, C. Exosomes derived from human menstrual blood-derived stem cellsalleviate fulminant hepatic failure. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2017 ,8, 9. [CrossRef]50. Wu, J.; Lin, S.; Wan, B.; Velani, B.; Zhu, Y. Pyroptosis in Liver Disease: New Insights into Disease Mechanisms.Aging Dis. 2019 ,10, 1094–1108. [CrossRef]
Aging Dis. 2019 ,10, 1094–1108. [CrossRef]51. Nojima, H.; Freeman, C.M.; Schuster, R.M.; Japtok, L.; Kleuser, B.; Edwards, M.J.; Gulbins, E.; Lentsch, A.B.Hepatocyte exosomes mediate liver repair and regeneration via sphingosine-1-phosphate. J. Hepatol. 2016 ,64, 60–68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]52. Du, Y.; Li, D.; Han, C.; Wu, H.; Xu, L.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, J.; Chen, X. Exosomes from Human-InducedPluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (hiPSC-MSCs) Protect Liver against HepaticIschemia /Reperfusion Injury via Activating Sphingosine Kinase and Sphingosine-1-Phosphate SignalingPathway. Cell Physiol. Biochem. 2017 ,43, 611–625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]53. Jakovljevic, J.; Harrell, C.R.; Fellabaum, C.; Arsenijevic, A.; Jovicic, N.; Volarevic, V . Modulation of autophagyas new approach in mesenchymal stem cell-based therapy. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2018 ,104, 404–410.[CrossRef] [PubMed]
[CrossRef] [PubMed]54. Jia, H.; Liu, W.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Wu, P .; Tandra, N.; Liang, Z.; Ji, C.; Yin, L.; Hu, X.; et al. HucMSCexosomes-delivered 14-3-3 ζenhanced autophagy via modulation of ATG16L in preventing cisplatin-inducedacute kidney injury. Am. J. Transl. Res. 2018 ,10, 101–113. [PubMed]55. Huang, X.; Ding, J.; Li, Y.; Liu, W.; Ji, J.; Wang, H.; Wang, X. Exosomes derived from PEDF modiﬁedadipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury by regulation ofautophagy and apoptosis. Exp. Cell Res. 2018 ,371, 269–277. [CrossRef]56. Wang, B.; Jia, H.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Ji, C.; Zhu, X.; Yan, Y.; Yin, L.; Yu, J.; Qian, H.; et al. Pre-incubation withhucMSC-exosomes prevents cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity by activating autophagy. Stem Cell Res. Ther.2017 ,8, 75. [CrossRef]57. Mead, B.; Tomarev, S. Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells-Derived Exosomes Promote Survival
of Retinal Ganglion Cells Through miRNA-Dependent Mechanisms. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2017 ,6,1273–1285. [CrossRef]58. Wang, K.; Jiang, Z.; Webster, K.A.; Chen, J.; Hu, H.; Zhou, Y.; Zhao, J.; Wang, L.; Wang, Y.; Zhong, Z.;et al. Enhanced Cardioprotection by Human Endometrium Mesenchymal Stem Cells Driven by ExosomalMicroRNA-21. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2017 ,6, 209–222. [CrossRef]
et al. Enhanced Cardioprotection by Human Endometrium Mesenchymal Stem Cells Driven by ExosomalMicroRNA-21. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 2017 ,6, 209–222. [CrossRef]59. Shiue, S.J.; Rau, R.H.; Shiue, H.S.; Hung, Y.W.; Li, Z.X.; Yang, K.D.; Cheng, J.K. Mesenchymal stem cellexosomes as a cell-free therapy for nerve injury-induced pain in rats. Pain 2019 ,160, 210–223. [CrossRef]60. Mendt, M.; Rezvani, K.; Shpall, E. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes for clinical use.Bone Marrow Transplant. 2019 ,54, 789–792. [CrossRef]61. Mead, B.; Amaral, J.; Tomarev, S. Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Small Extracellular Vesicles PromoteNeuroprotection in Rodent Models of Glaucoma. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018 ,59, 702–714. [CrossRef][PubMed]
Pharmaceutics 2020 ,12, 474 17 of 1762. Nassar, W.; El-Ansary, M.; Sabry, D.; Mostafa, M.A.; Fayad, T.; Kotb, E.; Temraz, M.; Saad, A.N.; Essa, W.;Adel, H. Umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells derived extracellular vesicles can safely ameliorate theprogression of chronic kidney diseases. Biomater. Res. 2016 ,20, 21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]63. Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Chen, X.; Wang, L.; Yang, G. Exosome Mediated Delivery of miR-124 PromotesNeurogenesis after Ischemia. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids. 2017 ,7, 278–287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]64. Harrell, C.R.; Simovic Markovic, B.; Fellabaum, C.; Arsenijevic, A.; Djonov, V .; Arsenijevic, N.; Volarevic, V .Therapeutic Potential of Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes in the Treatment of Eye Diseases.Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2018 ,1089 , 47–57. [PubMed]65. Hao, Q.; Gudapati, V .; Monsel, A.; Park, J.H.; Hu, S.; Kato, H.; Lee, J.H.; Zhou, L.; He, H.; Lee, J.W.
Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicles Decrease Lung Injury in Mice. J. Immunol. 2019 ,203,1961–1972. [CrossRef] [PubMed]©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open accessarticle distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
