REVIEW ARTICLENatural anti-aging skincare: role and potentialIdris Adewale Ahmed .Maryam Abimbola Mikail .Norhisam Zamakshshari .Al-Shwyeh Hussah AbdullahReceived: 3 January 2020 / Accepted: 22 February 2020 / Published online: 11 March 2020/C211Springer Nature B.V. 2020Abstract The deterioration of the skin morphologyand physiology is the ﬁrst and earliest obviousharbinger of the aging process which is progressivelymanifested with increasing age. Such deteriorationaffects the vital functions of the skin such as home-odynamic regulation of body temperature, ﬂuid bal-ance, loss of electrolytes and proteins, production ofvitamin D, waste removal, immune surveillance,sensory perception, and protection of other organsagainst deleterious environmental factors. There are,however, harmful chemicals and toxins found ineveryday cosmetics that consumers are now awareof. Thus, the natural beauty industry is on the rise withinnovative technology and high-performance ingredi-
ents as more consumers demand healthier options.Therefore, the aims of this review are to give somecritical insights to the effects of both intrinsic andextrinsic factors on excessive or premature skin agingand to elaborate on the relevance of natural beauty andnatural anti-aging skincare approaches that will helpconsumers, scientists and entrepreneurs make theswitch. Our recent investigations have shown thepotential and relevance of identifying more resourcesfrom our rich natural heritage from various plantsources such as leaves, fruits, pomace, seeds, ﬂowers,twigs and so on which can be explored for naturalanti-aging skincare product formulations. Thesetrending narratives have started to gain tractionamong researchers and consumers owing to thesustainability concern and impact of synthetic ingre-dients on human health and the environment. Thenatural anti-aging ingredients, which basically followhormetic pathways, are potentially useful as moistur-
izing agents; barrier repair agents; antioxidants, vita-mins, hydroxy acids, skin lightening agents, anti-inﬂammatory ingredients, and sunblock ingredients.I. A. Ahmed ( &)/C1N. ZamakshshariCentre for Natural Products Research and Drug Discovery(CENAR), University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur,Malaysiae-mail: idrisahmed@um.edu.myI. A. Ahmed /C1M. A. MikailMimia Sdn. Bhd., Selangor, MalaysiaA.-S. H. AbdullahDepartment of Biology, College of Science, ImamAbdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, SaudiArabia123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310https://doi.org/10.1007/s10522-020-09865-z (0123456789().,-volV) (0123456789().,-volV)
Graphic abstractGood an/g415-aging skincareAvoidance of overexposure to sunHealthy balanced diet & lifestyleKeywords Aging /C1Anti-aging /C1Homeodynamic /C1Hormesis /C1Hormetins /C1Skincare /C1Natural beautyAbbreviationsMMP Matrix metalloproteinasesCav-1 Caveolin-1NLCS Nanostructured lipid carriersUVB Ultraviolet BSPF Sun protecting factorIntroductionAging is a time-dependent event that is governed bytwo separate clocks, a mechanical clock and a biologicclock which determine our chronologic age and ourbiologic age, respectively (Malik and Hoenig 2019 ).The ﬁrst and earliest obvious harbingers of the agingprocess are progressively manifested in the deteriora-tion of the skin morphology and physiology withincreasing age (Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b). It is also abasic concept that the skin is a barrier to thetranscutaneous penetration of external harmful agents.The skin barrier mainly resides in the stratum
The skin barrier mainly resides in the stratumcorneum, comprising the corneocytes, surrounded bythe intercellular lipid lamellae and attached by thecorneodesmosome. Other components of the skinbarrier are the tight junctions attaching to the lateralwalls of the keratinocytes in the upper part of thestratum granulosum as well as the intercellular lipids,such as cholesterol, ceramides and free fatty acidswhich prevent transepidermal water loss (Choi 2019 ).Thus, the skin is not only vital for the homedynamicregulation of body temperature, ﬂuid balance, loss ofelectrolytes and proteins, production of vitamin D,waste removal, immune surveillance, and sensoryperception but also a protecting organ against delete-rious environmental factors (Wang and Wu 2019 ;Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).The skin is the human body’s largest and fastest-growing organ. The skin is considered an organbecause it assumes and regulates several important
physiological processes such as environmental andmechanical protection, sensing stimuli, thermoregu-lation, vitamin D synthesis immune surveillance andmoisture regulation (Anderson et al. 2015 ). The skinalso represents a social interface between an individ-ual and other members of society (Yagi and Yonei2017 ).In view of the fact that the skin is the keypersonal identity, many are now searching for reme-dies against theaging process of the skin, and thusopens the door for a new exploration of the so-called123294 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
‘‘anti-aging products’’. The anti -aging cosmeticindustry is booming. The possibility of ﬁnding anti-aging treatments is at the forefront of the dermato-logical research and cosmetic industry. Individual’ssense of self-identity and physical appearance areinseparable. Thus, self-esteem and self-consistencyare the two basic self-concept motives that deﬁneconsumers’ attitudes towards cosmetics as well asother personal care products and services (Dai andPelton 2018 ).On the other hand, consumers nowadays areincreasingly concerned about their health, thusdemanding and advocating for the incorporation ofnatural bioactive or functional ingredients into cos-metics and other formulations to enhance their healthstatus (Aguiar et al. 2016 ; Wen et al. 2017 ). Thoughthe modern skincare products development requiresrelevant and extensive knowledge of the ingredients,natural products chemistry and skin biology (Ander-son et al. 2015 ), there is also a continuous and
son et al. 2015 ), there is also a continuous andsigniﬁcant increase in the research involving the use ofbiodegradable materials mainly due to the increasingenvironmental concerns and the ecological impacts ofthe use of synthetic counterparts (Mir et al. 2018 ). Forinstance, besides the Mediterranean diet and IndianAyurvedic system, both the therapeutic effects andminimal side effects of traditional Chinese medicineshave been known for thousands of years as a valuableresource for the development of several novel com-pounds used for the treatment of many skin diseases(Xu et al. 2018 ). As of 2018, it has been estimated thatthe global demand for natural and organic skincareproducts alone would have reached $13.2 billion withthe general market demand keep growing at a fast rate.Similarly, the largest category in the beauty businesshas always been the personal care product categorywith global value sales over $630 billion (Emerald
et al. 2016 ). Therefore, the aim of this review is tocritically review the effect of skin aging, biochemicaland morphological changes in connective tissues inaging skin, intrinsic and extrinsic aging factors as wellas hormesis in skin aging. Better approaches to preventexcessive dermal aging and the relevance of naturalskincare products are also presented.Biochemical changes in aging skinAging disrupts the sensitive balance between thoseenzymes that regulate remodeling and repair of thedermal matrix, contributing to the loss of collagenproduction and other connective tissues (Farage et al.2013 ). Though an aged dermis is obviously vulnera-ble, there are, however, other invisible risks associatedwith aging. One of the highly-studied risks is cellularsenescence which occurs in culture as well as in theorganism as a response to both excessive extracellularor intracellular stress. Senescent cells are known to
accumulate during the lifetime in various animalsincluding humans. In most cases, the senescenceprogram only drives the cells into a cell-cycle arrestwithout eliminating them from the tissues, thus,leaving them viable and functional. Senescence mayalso lead to extensive changes in gene expression ofaffected cells otherwise known as senescence-associ-ated secretory phenotypes involving several familiesof soluble and insoluble factors such as growth factors,interleukins, and chemokines (Strnadova et al. 2019 ).On the other hand, the largest component ofnormal skin is the extracellular matrix, a complexmeshwork of proteins and carbohydrates, composed ofcollagens, proteoglycans/glycosaminoglycans, elas-tin, ﬁbronectin, laminins, and several other glycopro-teins (Calleja-Agius et al. 2013 ; Lee et al. 2016 ).Collagen, elastin and hyaluronic acid are the majorcomponents of the dermis that contribute to supple,
smooth and elastic skin. The skin’s strength andﬁrmness depend on collagen. The elasticity of the skinis maintained by elastin .Hyaluronic acid plays a rolein maintaining the moisture of the skin by ﬁlling thefree space of the
is maintained by elastin .Hyaluronic acid plays a rolein maintaining the moisture of the skin by ﬁlling thefree space of theskin matrix with water and giving it afuller, ﬁrmer and youthful appearance (Calejja-Agiuset al. 2007 ). As human ages, both natural (intrinsic)and environmental (extrinsic) factors cause decreasesin the production of these important elements and skinbecomes prone to damage, wrinkles and sagging(Farage et al. 2008 ). The weakening of the bondbetween the epidermis and dermis of extrinsically ageskin also contributes to wrinkling formation due to thereduction in collagen type VII content and a markedloss of ﬁbrillin-positive structures. The role of MMP,serine, and other proteases in the increased degrada-tion of collagen is also responsible for the sparsedistribution as well as a decrease in collagen content inphotoaged skin. A continuous loss of collagen I inolder skin does not only make collagen looks disor-
ganized and irregular but also causes an increase in theratio of collagen III to collagen I (Lee et al. 2016 ;Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 295
In addition, adult dermis contains more decorinwhich mainly regulates collagen ﬁbrillogenesis whilevarious models of skin aging also suggest a progres-sive accumulation of senescent ﬁbrocytes in an ageddermis as well as a dramatic reduction in theproduction of collagen I, loss of its volume, and localoverproduction of matrix metalloproteinases [MMP](Strnadova et al. 2019 ). A continuous increase and anupregulation of caveolin-1(Cav-1) expression levelshave also been demonstrated by human cornealepithelial in aged subjects as a result of oxidativestress. This has also been linked to the development ofpremature cellular senescence. In addition, skinﬁbroblasts, both in chronological and UV-inducedaging, demonstrate an up-regulation of Cav-1 expres-sion, in vitro as well as in vivo (Kruglikov et al. 2019 ).Furthermore, the pH range for normal healthy skin is5.4–5.9 for normal bacterial ﬂora. The use of soap withhigh pH, however, can cause an increase in the skin
pH, thus, leading to an alteration in the skin bacterialﬂora, irritability, and an increase in dehydration(Tarun et al. 2014 ). According to Lambers et al.(2006 ), skin with pH values less than 5.0 is in a bettercondition compared to skin with pH values more than5.0 using the biophysical parameters such as barrierfunction, scaling, and moisturization. The authors alsosuggest that acidic skin pH (4–4.5) supports the ﬁrmattachment of resident skin bacterial ﬂora while analkaline skin pH (8–9) promotes their dispersal fromthe skin. The stratum corneum has a normal acidic pHwhich greatly contributes to the skin protectivefunctions such as permeability barrier homeostasis,the integrity, and cohesion of the stratum corneum,primary cytokine activation, and epidermal antimi-crobial defense. The three endogenous pathways andexogenous insults which contribute to the acidicenvironment of the stratum corneum are the free fattyacids generated from phospholipids by secretory
acids generated from phospholipids by secretoryphospholipase A2, the sodium ion/hydrogen ion(Na?/H?) antiporter-1 (NHE1), and the urocanicacid degraded by histidase from histidine. The dete-rioration of any of these pathways is mainly respon-sible for the increase in stratum corneum pH and thusan alteration in the skin protective functions. Gener-ally, those with black skin, women, and youngerpeople tend to have lower skin pH compared withthose with white skin, men, and older individuals(Choi 2019 ). Therefore, cosmetic formulators andconsumers should give due consideration to the pHfactor especially when dealing with sensitive skin andacne-prone skin. Excellent and effective skincareproducts should be more skin and hair-friendly (Tarunet al. 2014 ).Morphological changes in aging skinAging is undoubtedly a natural process of biochemicalevents responsible for the gradual damage accumula-tion which eventually leads to disease and ultimately
death. The skin, however, appears to be the ﬁrst bearerof the marks of time passage as well as an easilyaccessible model for the determination and assessmentof the molecular mechanism involved in the agingprocess (Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b). As we get older,the skin starts to become drier, paler, clear (translu-cent) and more fragile (Poljs ˇak et al. 2012 ). Theepidermis and dermis become naturally thinner andﬂatter. As the skin ages, it doesn’t stay as plump andsmooth as it once was. Easy bruising is a commonissue for all old skins. Fine lines, pigmented spots,sagging, telangiectasia, and wrinkles are aninevitable consequence of aging (Tobin 2017 ; Liuet al. 2019a ,b). The complex physiology andbiochemistry as well as structural integrity of thedermis, in aged skin, are dramatically altered due tothe cumulative and combined effects of both intrinsicand extrinsic aging (Choi 2019 ). The genetic predis-position, qualitative and quantitative hormonal alter-
ations, and cellular metabolic pathways are the mainfactors of the complex biologic intrinsic factors
position, qualitative and quantitative hormonal alter-ations, and cellular metabolic pathways are the mainfactors of the complex biologic intrinsic factors(Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).Though evidence of dermal aging is sometimeshighly prevalent in routine histology, the principalenvironmental factor responsible for skin damage isultraviolet (UV) radiation that is accumulated by thetissues over the years of life from both natural andartiﬁcial sources. This photodamage is linked to astructural complexity known as solar elastosis (oractinic elastosis, dermal elastosis) which clinicallymanifests as thickened, yellowish and coarsely wrin-kled skin. This visual aspect has a substantial impacton tissue esthetics and health. Other ionizing radiationtypes (such as microwaves, and X-rays), chemicalpollution, reactive oxygen radicals, smoking, lifestyleand diet, poor nutrition, and overeating are also known
to accelerate or intensify signs of aging with clinicaland subclinical manifestations such as deep wrinkles,reduced elasticity, uneven pigmentation, benign123296 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
neoplasms, and xerosis, (Godoy et al. 2019 ; Kruglikovet al. 2019 ; Safdar et al. 2019 ; Strnadova et al. 2019 ).Similarly, an aged epidermis is characterized by asigniﬁcant increase in the number of stratum corneumlayers in addition to other remarkable structuralchanges such as epidermal thinning, orthokeratosisﬂattening of the rete ridges, uneven distribution ofmelanocytes in the basal layer, and a signiﬁcantdecrease in Langerhans cells, as well as variouschanges and impairment of the skin barrier impair-ment such as a decrease in the tight junction compo-nents (such as claudin-1 and occluding), increasedsensitivity to irritants, increased transdermal drugdelivery, development of pruritus, and aggravation ofxerosis (Choi 2019 ). The degenerative changes thatoccur in aging skin have always been increasinglystudied. In older adults, about 20–80% of dermalthickness disappears.Intrinsic and extrinsic skin aging factorsThe skin and hair aging is caused by intrin-
The skin and hair aging is caused by intrin-sic (inevitable, genetically determined process orinternal physiological factors) and extrinsic (declina-tion process caused by external factors) mechanisms(Vierko ¨tter et al. 2016 ; Cavinato et al. 2017 ). Intrinsic(chronologic) aging is the natural skin declining pro-cess that is generally controlled by genetics (Assafet al. 2016 ). Extrinsic or photoaging (environmentally-induced) aging is caused by external factors. Thecommon characteristics of intrinsic aging throughadvancing age include, but not limited to, ﬁne wrinklesand a thinned epidermis while photoaging which ismainly caused by chronic sun exposure is character-ized by skin laxity, the appearance of lentigines, deepwrinkles, and telangiectasias (Lee et al. 2016 ). Nev-ertheless, aging is known to be a continuous processwhich is very difﬁcult to measure precisely owing to
the complexity of the frequently subtle, structural andphysiologic changes occurring over time. Thoughintrinsic and extrinsic aging types follow differentpathways and mechanisms their effects are synergisticfor every individual and both the internal and externalfactors inﬂuence the onset of age-related changesincluding the skin (Strnadova et al. 2019 ). The chiefculprit of skin weakening, however, is extrinsic aging.A few of the key factors that cause extrinsic aginginclude UV radiation, diet, cigarette smoking, airpollution, lack of sleep, topical applications, alcoholconsumption, lifestyle, repetitive muscle movements,among others. Scientiﬁcally, only 10% of aging isintrinsic. Some studies suggest that as little as 3% ofthe skin-aging processes are caused by genetic factorswhile the rest is all lifestyle-based. Extrinsic aging iswhat you do to your skin (Tsatsou et al. 2012 ).Aging, hormesis, and homeodynamicsThe concept of aging, senescence, as well as the origin
of the various age-related disorders and death, havebeen directly linked to the progressive shrinking ofhuman buffering capacity otherwise referred to ashomeodynamic space which ultimately determinesindividual’s survival chance and capability to main-tain a healthy state. The homeodynamic space, in turn,is a product of interactions between several genes andvarious other cellular, molecular and physiologicalprocesses such as detoxiﬁcation mechanisms, freeradical counteracting mechanisms, nuclear and mito-chondrial DNA repair pathways, protein turnover andrepair, as well as immune and stress responses (Rattan2008 ).Hormesis is the new paradigm being employed tocharacterize and understand the concept of homeody-namic space and the beneﬁcial nonlinear biphasicdose–response effects of numerous foods and foodcomponents. Hormesis basically refers to life-sup-porting beneﬁcial effects from the cellular responsesto mild stress (Rattan 2008 ; Demirovic and Rattan
2013 ; Agathokleous and Calabrese 2019 ; Kadlecova ´et al. 2019 ). Generally, in hormesis, a low dose causes
to mild stress (Rattan 2008 ; Demirovic and Rattan2013 ; Agathokleous and Calabrese 2019 ; Kadlecova ´et al. 2019 ). Generally, in hormesis, a low dose causesstimulation while a high dose leads to inhibition. Andusually, hormetic dose responses occur either througha direct stimulation or as an overcompensation (Cal-abrese 2020 ). In other words, the consequences ofstress can either be beneﬁcial or harmful depending onthe duration, frequency, and intensity of the stress aswell as the responses to stress such as metabolicdisturbances and energy utilization. The homeody-namics disruption, modest overcompensation, as wellas the eventual reestablishment of homeodynamics arethe key conceptual features of hormesis. The stressorswhich strengthen the homeodynamic space, otherwisereferred to as hormetins, on the other hand, aregenerally categorized as physical, psychological,biological, metabolic, and nutritional hormetins.Nutritional hormetins (such as dark chocolate, ferulic
acid, ﬂavonoids, geranylgeranyl, kinetin, phenolic123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 297
acids, polyphenols, rosmarinic acid, saffron, spinach,tea extracts, and zinc), particular of plant origin, havemyriads of beneﬁcial health effects (Demirovic andRattan 2013 ).Both hormesis and its quantitative features describ-ing biological plasticity are highly generalizable andapplicable to all life kingdoms and all biologicalorganization levels, depending neither on the stressor,or endpoint nor the cell type or the underpinningbiological mechanisms. It has also challenged both theproportionality rule (the linear non-threshold) and thethreshold models (Agathokleous et al. 2019 ; Calabreseet al. 2019 ).Prevention of age-related changes in skinFactors or mild stresses such as acetaldehydes, alco-hol, exercise, food restriction, heavy metals, hyper-gravity, irradiation, pro-oxidants, temperature shock,have been reportedly studied and proved to be capableof prolonging longevity, delaying aging in cells andanimals, extending replicative lifespan, maintaining
youthful morphology, improving angiogenesis,wound healing and differentiation as well as enhanc-ing stress tolerance and reducing the levels ofglycoxidatively- and oxidatively-damaged proteins(Demirovic and Rattan 2013 ). There are many naturaland sustainable ways or approaches which are beingsuccessfully adopted for the prevention of excessiveand premature dermal aging. The most relevant threeapproaches are illustrated in Fig. 1.Avoidance of overexposure to the sunSeveral varieties of both acute and chronic responsesare known to be induced by human skin exposure toterrestrial solar radiation. Sunlight, principally, UV isthe major skin aging extrinsic factor responsible forthe generation of free radical generation throughhomolytic cleavage, which, in turn, initiates DNAstrand break, lipid peroxidation, and other inﬂamma-tory responses such as premature aging and cancer(Cavinato et al. 2017 ; Lan et al. 2019 ). UV alsoinduces skin aging through the activation of MMP,
induces skin aging through the activation of MMP,which is known to digest the various components ofthe extracellular matrix such as collagens, ﬁbronectin,and elastin (Lee et al. 2016 ; Kruglikov et al. 2019 ).Speciﬁcally, an increase in the synthesis of MMP 1, 2,3 and 9 as well as other cell activities linked to adecrease in type I procollagen synthesis are triggeredby the activation of a key transcription factor in cellsupon acute exposure to UV (Limbert et al. 2019 ).There are several epidemiologic studies implicatingthe role of chronic sun exposure in the increasingincidence of both melanoma and nonmelanoma skincancer. UV radiation induces DNA damage, thus,causing the development of mutations and the con-secutive skin carcinogenesis. The UV radiation is notonly a potent inducer of stress in the epidermis tissuebut also and penetrates deep and reaches the dermis(Cavinato et al. 2017 ). The cumulative exposure to UVlight has, thus, been linked with basal cell carcinoma,
malignant melanoma, and squamous cell carcinoma(Strnadova et al. 2019 ).Premature photoaging is directly linked to pigmen-tary changes such as uneven pigmentation and wrin-kling due to DNA damage. Thus, the best strategies toprevent photo-aging are by avoiding exposure to sun,especially during peak sun hours of 10 am to 4 pm,wearing of clothing, hats, and sunglasses that are ableto block UV radiation, in addition to the use ofantioxidants, use of retinoids to promote collagenproduction and inhibit collagenase synthesis, avoid-ance of indoor tanning beds as well as the use ofsunscreens to reduce or block skin exposure to UVradiation (Trojahn et al. 2015 ; Malik and Hoenig2019 ; Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).Healthy balanced diet and lifestyle habitsA signiﬁcant reduction in the cell proliferative capac-ity is known to be the most prominent physiologicalchange underlying aging because it inevitably results
in cellular senescence, thus, altering the biosyntheticactivity of the various skin-derived cells and compo-
change underlying aging because it inevitably resultsin cellular senescence, thus, altering the biosyntheticactivity of the various skin-derived cells and compo-nents. Though intrinsic factors such as geneticsdetermine the skin aging rate through the ultimatecontrol of the essential factors, the roles of othertriggers such as chromosomes’ telomere shorteningand DNA damage are indisputable in the agingprocess. This shows the importance of other externalfactors such as environmental, mechanical (e.g.repetitive muscle actions such as squinting andfrowning) and lifestyle [e.g. sleep patterns and dietssuch as poor nutrition and overeating] (Limbert et al.2019 ). A healthy balanced diet and good lifestylehabits are, therefore, essential not only to delay skin123298 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
aging but also to improve skin conditions (Schagenet al. 2012 ).Nutritional antioxidants are mainly free radicalscavengers that act in different body compartmentsthrough different mechanisms (Mikail et al. 2016 ;Ahmed et al. 2017 ,2019 ; Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).Nutritional antioxidants, on the other hand, fall undernutritional hormetins with remarkable health beneﬁ-cial effects (Demirovic and Rattan 2013 ). Thus, theprevention of skin damage responsible for prematureaging can be achieved through healthy eating, well-balanced diet such as Mediterranean diet in combina-tion with antioxidant supplements (such as vitamin Cand vitamin E, exercise, proper sleep, avoidance offoods with high glycemic index, and avoidance ofalcohol consumption (Ahmed et al. 2019 ; Malik andHoenig 2019 ).Topical anti-aging skin careBoth the intrinsic and extrinsic factors are majorlyresponsible for the structural rearrangement of elastinand collagen as well as the decrease in their contents,
reduction in skin moisture content, increase in trans-epidermal water loss, vessel walls thinning, dimin-ished production of sebum, arteriosclerosis of bothsmall and large vessels, reduction in mast cells,Langerhans’s cells, melanocytes, Merkel cells, Meiss-ner cells, and Pacinian corpuscles as well as anincrease in the skin surface pH (Limbert et al 2019 ).An effective topical anti-aging skincare product,however, helps one age well, naturally (Gancevicieneet al. 2012 ).Role of topical anti-aging skin careA good topical anti-aging skincare regimen is thepanacea for natural graceful aging. The major rolesand functions of good topical anti-aging skincareproducts are, thus, illustrated in Fig. 2.Strengthen the skin’s barrier functionThe role and importance of a functioning and healthyskin barrier are to protect the body against dehydrationas well as the penetration of various microorganisms,irritants, allergens, radiation, and reactive oxygen
species. Daily skincare is thus essential not only toenhance and strengthen skin, elasticity, regeneration,and smoothness but also to prevent the formation ofwrinkles through the prevention of the degradation ofcollagen and elastin (Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b).The lipids in the skin’s barrier that provide a thickerlayer are the best defense against damaging factors.The strength and integrity of this barrier not onlyprovide softness and bind skin cells together but alsohelp in making our skin look healthy and moisturizedby keeping water molecules and natural moisturizerfactors locked inside the stratum corneum, ensuringﬁrmness and plumpness. The agents that strengthenthe skin’s barrier function are generally categorizedinto (1) Emollients, which soften and smoothen theskin, such as, avocado oil (Lode ´n2003 ). (2) Occlu-sives, which provide a barrier that sits on the surface ofthe skin and prevent transepidermal water loss, such
as, beeswax and jojoba oil (Stamatas et al. 2008 ). (3)Humectants, such as glycerin, draw water from thedermis (deep down skin layer) up to the epidermis(outer layer) that can be dry, itchy and perhaps dulllooking, too (Sethi et al. 2016 ).Provide antioxidant propertiesHuman skin is naked and constantly directly exposedto the UV rays , radiation , air, cigarette smoke,automobile exhaust, pesticides, other environmentalpollutants, or other mechanical and chemical insults,which stimulate free-radical production (Howard2018 ).Free radicals are unstable atoms, to becomemore stable, they take electrons from other atoms.Free radicals thus adversely cause damages to lipids,proteins, cell membranes, and DNA (Ahmed et al.2015 ; Mikail et al. 2016 ; Ibrahim et al. 2018 ). WhenExcessive dermal aging prevention Avoidance of  overexposure to the sunTopical anti-aging skin careHealthy balanced diet  and lifestyleFig. 1 Natural and sustainable ways to prevent excessive
dermal aging123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 299
atoms are taken away from molecules in the skin, itcauses damage to our skin’s DNA which results inwrinkles, lines, dehydration, and loss of youthfulvolume. It is estimated that among all these environ-mental factors, UV rays contribute up to 80%.The use of antioxidants in skincare products is agreat approach to attenuate the damaging effects offree radicals and to help maintain healthy skin(Rajagopalan et al. 2018 ). Topical and systemicantioxidants can thus be employed whether alone orin combination with retinoids and sunscreens toprevent wrinkle formation through the reduction ofinﬂammation (Zouboulis et al. 2019a ,b). Antioxidantshelp to delay or prevent lipid oxidation, a major causeof spoilage in foods, cosmetics, and other lipids-containing formulations. The effects of lipid oxidationinclude off-ﬂavors and rancidity development, loss ofnutritional quality due to degradation of polyunsatu-
rated fatty acid and formation of toxic aldehydes.Antioxidants are also being recently applied in activepackaging (Ganiari et al. 2017 ).Encourage epidermal rejuvenation and/or thickeningCommon skin processes such as regeneration, ﬁbrosisand scarless wound healing depend on many factorswhich include the phylogenetic scale of the organism,the inﬂammatory response, the organism’s sex, age, aswell as the interaction with the environment (Abarca-Buis et al. 2018 ). However, as we age, the slowing ofthe epidermal turnover rate, reduction in lipid pro-duction on the skin’s surface and cellcycle lengthen-ing are certain. For this reason, the use of alphahydroxy acid (such as glycolic, lactic, and citric acids)and beta hydroxy acid (such as salicylic acid) is oftenrecommended, although these would need to be usedwith care. Hydroxy acids are a group of plant andanimal-derived chemical compounds used as skinrejuvenating ingredients, in many skincare products.
They are often used in cosmetics to increase skincellular renewal, slough off rough and dead skin cellsand enhance the skin’s moisture -retaining ability(Farris 2018 ). Lactic acid, in particular, hasStrengthen the skin’s barrier function Encourage epidermal rejuvenation and/or thickening Boost connective tissue productionTackle age-related pigmentationProvide antioxidant properties Fig. 2 Functions of good anti-aging skincare products123300 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
antimicrobial, rejuvenating, and moisturizing effectson the skin (Martinez et al. 2013 ). Hyaluronan, a linearglycosaminoglycan and a major extracellular matrixcomponent, is also responsible for water balanceregulation in the skin, keratinocyte differentiation andproliferation in the epidermis as well as the mainte-nance of the cell structure in the dermis (Kawada et al.2015 ; Lee et al. 2016 ).Tackle age-related pigmentationSkin pigmentation is a remarkable and one of the moststrongly selected phenotypes and strikingly variablesamong human populations. Our variable exposure toUV radiation is mainly responsible for the creation ofopposing selective forces for folate protection andvitamin D production. This undoubtedly results inglobal pigmentation differentiation and variablemelanin production such that lighter pigmentation isobserved at high latitudes while darker skin isobserved closer to the equator (Martin et al. 2017 ).
Melanin is the pigment that determines skin color.Modiﬁcation of skin pigmentation is also seen in agingskin (Casadevall 2018 ). Hyper pigmentation is one ofthe common conditions associated with aging .Hyper-pigmentation is a condition in which melanin isoverproduced in certain spots on the skin, causing thatarea to become darker in color than other normalsurrounding parts (Goodman et al. 2018 ).Sunexpo-sure deﬁnitely triggers melanin production, so it is bestto avoid excessive sun exposure or use sunscreen.Premature photoaging causes uneven pigmentationand wrinkling due to DNA damage. The wearing ofclothing and sunglasses to block UV radiation, use ofantioxidants, use of retinoids to promote collagenproduction and inhibit collagenase synthesis, use ofsunscreens are some of the recommended strategies inaddition to reduced exposure to sun (Trojahn et al.2015 ; Malik and Hoenig 2019 ; Zouboulis et al.2019a ,b). Furthermore, a number of results-driven -
glow-boosters that fade dark spots by reducingmelanin production have also emerged in recent years.Boost connective tissue productionThe top layer of the skin is a strong protector thatprevents the absorption of many agents into thebloodstream and binds in moisture when necessary.Many skincare products do not have the capacity topenetrate deeply enough into the lower layers of theskin to combat wrinkles and other ﬂaws. No productsare known to replenish the components of dermis, suchas collagen, that are responsible for warding offwrinkles and treating stretch marks. Anti-aging orstretchmark products should, however, contain someingredients, such as vitamin C or retinoids that areknown to stimulate collagen synthesis (D’Anielloet al. 2017 ; Li et al. 2017 ).Collagen is an essential building block for theentire body including the skin. Skincare products thatstimulate collagen synthesis will not only revive butalso completely renew skin complexion and fend off
signs of aging (Humbert et al. 2018 ). Both vitamin Cand retinoids are capable of penetrating the skin andefﬁciently target skincare concerns such as hyperpig-mentation or signs of aging. Numerous other agents,that have been found useful for facial skin rejuvena-tion, are too large a molecule to ﬁt through the stratumcorneum. A skin is a fascinatingly complicatedsystem. Fortunately, current research is designingnew delivery systems and natural nanocompoundswhich carry high-performance ingredients past theepidermis into the dermis in order to have an effect onthe skin’s connective tissue network (Hameed et al.2018 ).Role of nanotechnology and encapsulationPhenolic compounds from natural products are sus-ceptible to various environmental factors such as heat,light, oxidant, and metal ions during processing andstorage, thus, reducing their biological efﬁciency andstability. These problems can be promisingly solved
through nanoencapsulation technology (Liu et al.2019a ,b). Nanotechnology is the science of manip-
stability. These problems can be promisingly solvedthrough nanoencapsulation technology (Liu et al.2019a ,b). Nanotechnology is the science of manip-ulating atoms and molecules in the nanoscale—80,000times smaller than the width of a human hair.Encapsulation, on the other hand, is a process ofentrapping biochemical compounds within an immis-cible solid or liquid substance. In general, nanoencap-sulation yields nanocapsules with less than 1000 nm(Assadpour and Jafari 2018 ; Rehman et al. 2019 ).Furthermore, many ingredients in skincare arebiologically active macromolecules that cannot pen-etrate through the skin. Despite the potential thera-peutic effect of natural products and their puriﬁedcompounds, their skin impenetrability,123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 301
environmental-instability, gastric-degradation, poorsolubility, poor bioavailability, uncontrolled-release,rapid metabolism, systemic elimination issues as wellas unspeciﬁc delivery seriously limit and hinder theirbiological activities (Patra et al. 2018 ). A potentialtool popularly used to overcome these limitations isthe use of different delivery systems using food-gradematerials from proteins, polysaccharides, and lipidsowing to their safety and biodegradability. Protein-based include whey proteins, caseins, gelatins, soyproteins, cereal proteins, and pulse proteins whilecarbohydrate-based include, starch, cellulose, pectins,chitosan, alginate, and gums. Lipid-based nano-en-capsulation systems, however, are extensively applieddue to their excellent functionality on encapsulation,stability, controlled release as well as sustained releaseproﬁle. Liposomes, for instance, are commonly usedfor the protection and encapsulation of both lipophilic
and hydrophilic compounds and thus have a widerange of potential applications in cosmetics, foodformulations, and drug delivery. A liposome is simplya self-assembling and cell-resembling sphericalbilayer vesicles lipid-based colloidal delivery system(Pan et al. 2018 ; Shishir et al. 2018 ,2019 ). Thehydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail of liposomesconfer on them both hydrophilic and lipophiliccharacteristics and thus make possible for them toencapsulate a wide range of bioactive compounds(Zhao et al. 2019 ).Therefore, liposomes and niosomes are used in thecosmetic industry to encapsulate active ingredientsand act as delivery vehicles for various drugsandcosmetic formulations. Nevertheless, factors suchas the core material, wall material, microencapsulationTable 1 List of bioactive compounds enhanced by delivery systemsS. no Compounds Delivery system Findings References1 Astaxanthin Liposome Encapsulation leads to enhancedantioxidant activityPan et al.(2018 )
antioxidant activityPan et al.(2018 )2 Lycopene Encapsulation using dextran,whey protein concentrate andchitosanSigniﬁcant protection against moistureand thermal degradationPe´rez-Masia ´et al.(2015 )3 Curcumin Nanostructures lipid carriers(NLC)Acceptable NLC and curcumin stability(C95%) in SGMBehbahaniet al.(2019 )4 Glutathione Liposome Increased therapeutic efﬁciency anddecreased systemic side-effectsKadry(2019 )5 Phyllanthus urinariaphenolic compoundsNanoparticles Enhanced antioxidant activity and pH-dependent compounds releaseLiu et al.(2019a ,b)6 Alpha-tocopherol Encapsulation with differenthydrocolloid matricesMatrices protected the bioactivecompound from degradationFabra et al.(2016 )7 Vitamins A and E Gelatin nanoﬁbers Better wound healing performance andless degradation during the releaseprocessLi et al.(2016 )8 Fish oil (Omega-3polyunsaturated fattyacids (PUFA))Encapsulation using coaxial
acids (PUFA))Encapsulation using coaxialelectrospinningImproved oxidative stability and shelf life Yang andCiftci(2017 )9 Curcumin, diclofenac andvitamin B12Encapsulation using chitosan/phospholipid nanoﬁbersSustained-release behavior withoutsigniﬁcant burst effectMendeset al.(2016 )10 Ferulic acid Encapsulation using modiﬁedcoaxial electrospinningUseful for the development of thetargeted delivery systemWang et al.(2015 )11 Rosehip seed oil Encapsulation using coaxialelectrospinningSigniﬁcant and prolonged shelf-life Yao et al.(2016 )12 Cinnamon essential oil Encapsulation using polyvinylalcohol and b-cyclodextrinmatrixProlonged shelf-life and betterantimicrobial activityWen et al.(2016 )123302 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
technique, release mechanism, and microparticlesapplication should be given adequate considerationwhen adopting microencapsulation (Aguiar et al.2016 ). Different encapsulation systems are suit-able and thus applicable to different active compounds(Shishir et al. 2018 ). Pomegranate bioactive com-pounds, for instance, have been used in the develop-ment of several nanostructures such as nanoemulsion,nanoparticles, phytosomes, nanoliposomes, nanovesi-cles and niosomes (Karimi et al. 2017 ). Some exam-ples of bioactive compounds that have beensuccessfully encapsulated using liposomes are pre-sented in Table 1.Solid lipid nanoparticles and nanostructured lipidcarriers (NLCs) that are of higher drug loadingcapacity have now been found to be better performersthan liposomes (Ray and Gupta 2018 ). Nanostructuredlipid carriers, in particular, have gained much interestinscientiﬁc research and commercial industries dur-ing the last few decades. Likewise, NLCs have been
identiﬁed as a potentially attractive and mar-ketable next-generation cosmetic delivery agent thatcan provide enhanced skin hydration, better therapeu-tic prospects, bioavailability, the stability of bioactivesand occlusive effects (Mahant et al. 2018 ).Why going natural?Natural products have been traditionally used in thepursuit of health and well-being and thus offerpotential promising nutritional and medicinal valuewith little or no side effect (Ahmed et al. 2017 ; Shishiret al. 2019 ). Natural products do not only servecomplementary medicine purposes but also create apotential resource platform for both drug discoveryand development (Moeini et al. 2019 ). On the otherhand, conventional personal care products that areused on a regular basis are loaded with potentiallytoxic chemicals that do not only harm human healthbut also the environment (Ramalhete et al. 2018 ). Nat-ural products are basically chemical compoundswhich are derived from living organisms found in
which are derived from living organisms found innature, such as microbes, algae, plants, and animals.These compounds include, but not limited to proteins,carbohydrates, essential fatty acids, crude ﬁbers,vitamins, minerals, squalene and antioxidants suchas tocochromanols, polyphenols, terpenoids,organosulfur, and phytosterols (Kowalska et al. 2017 ).Essentially, natural skincare uses topical creams,lotions, and serums made of ingredients found innature. Thus, natural skincare products use plant-derived ingredients, which may include, fruits, ﬂow-ers, vegetables, cereals, legumes, nuts, roots, oils,pulses, herbs, and spices as well as animal-derivedproducts such as beeswax in their formulations(Ibrahim et al. 2017 ; Hughes 2018 ). Organic skincare,however, contains these ingredients grown without theuse of pesticides, herbicides, synthetic fertilizers,genetically modiﬁed organisms, and so on and oftencome with an organic certiﬁcation. Organic skincare
products tend to offer the added beneﬁts of decreasedrisk of skin irritation, allergies, and diseases (Ibrahimet al. 2018 ). There are abundant and sustainableseveral plant sources that could be explored andharnessed by the cosmetics industry to create adifferent innovative combination of ingredients. Nat-ural products, particularly plant, have several speciﬁcpharmacological actions which include but not limitedto anti-aging, antioxidants, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-carcinogenic, anti-allergy, as well as moisturizing,anti-hyperpigmentation, pro-collagen, and UV pro-tective (Charles Dorni et al. 2017 ). According to theWorld Health Organization, there are more than20,000 different medicinal plants available acrossthe globe in 91 different countries, including theglobal 12 mega-biodiversity countries (Patra et al.2018 ).Natural anti-aging ingredients groupsNatural anti-aging ingredients are basically biologicaland nutritional hormetins with many potential and
and nutritional hormetins with many potential andbeneﬁcial health effects (Demirovic and Rattan 2013 ).
Natural anti-aging ingredients groupsNatural anti-aging ingredients are basically biologicaland nutritional hormetins with many potential andbeneﬁcial health effects (Demirovic and Rattan 2013 ).The various categories of natural anti-aging ingredi-ents include moisturizing agents; barrier repair agents;antioxidants, vitamins, hydroxy acids, skin lighteningagents, anti-inﬂammatory ingredients, and sunblockingredients.Moisturizing agentsThere are three main types of skin moisturizingagents- occlusives, emollients and humectants. Occlu-sives work through providing a physical epidermalbarrier to prevent trans-epidermal water loss. Organicingredients with occlusive properties include waxes123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 303
and oils such as beeswax, candelilla wax, jojoba oil,olive or coconut oil (Stamatas et al. 2008 ). Emollientsare substances that make skin soft, smooth and supplewhich help reduce rough, ﬂaky skin. Emollients maybe ﬂuid or thick in texture. Examples include sheabutter, cocoa butter, mango butter, cupuacu butter,Kombo butter, murumuru butter, almond oil, argan oil,avocado oil, babassu oil, borage oil, broccoli oil,castor bean oil, chia seed oil, coconut oil, eveningprimrose oil, palm oil, olive oil, passion fruit oil,pomegranate oil, rapeseed oil, raspberry oil, safﬂoweroil, sunﬂower oil, and many more. Some emollientssuch as coconut oil or castor oil can also function asocclusives. Humectants work by pulling water fromthedermis toward the stratum corneum (outer layer ofthe epidermis) as well as binding water vapour fromthe atmosphere (Sethi et al. 2016 ). Examples ofhumectants include hydration-boosting superstarshyaluronic acid, glycerine, glycerol, honey, and sor-
bitol. The antimicrobial, rejuvenating, and moisturiz-ing effects of lactic acid on the skin has also made it asought after ingredient in the cosmetic industry for themanufacture of hygiene and esthetic products. Somederivatives of lactic acid such as lactate esters are alsocommonly used owing to their emulsifying andhygroscopic properties (Martinez et al. 2013 ).Barrier repair agentsNatural oils contain fatty acids that play key roles inmaintaining the skin barrier as well as having anti-inﬂammatory and anti-irritancy activities. The twomain essential fatty acids are omega-3s (such asﬂaxseed (linseed) oil, walnut oil, and chia oil) andomega-6s (such as grapeseed oil, safﬂower oil,sunﬂower oil, blackcurrant seed oil, evening primroseoil, and borage oil). They are the building blocks ofhealthy cell membranes. Barrier repair agents arefantastic ingredients in the skincare regimen forstrengthening skin barrier function and overall health
of the skin. Barrier repair agents also include ceramideand cholesterol (Vaughn et al. 2018 ). Ceramide is oneof the best skin barrier-boosting ingredients that holdthe skin together and keep its appearance ﬁrm andplump. Topical application of a ceramide-containingskincare ointment reduced IL-31 induced impairmentsof the physical skin barrier and skin barrier function inan in vitro model of the disrupted skin barrier (Huthet al. 2018 ).AntioxidantsWhen it comes to anti-aging ingredients, antioxidantsare excellent additions. A ntioxidants nurture the skinand shield it from the damaging effects of free radicalsby acting as a substitute for the skin molecules thatfree radicals usually destroy (Mikail et al. 2016 ;Petruk et al. 2018 ).There are so many differentantioxidants, which can be categorized as water-soluble and oil-soluble antioxidants. Water-solubleantioxidants include vitamin C (ascorbic acid), glu-tathione, coffeeberry, resveratrol, and green tea. Oil-
soluble ones include vitamin A, vitamin E andcoenzyme Q10 (Brewer 2011 ). In a study, treatmentwith vitamin E restored expression of corniﬁn A,antileukoproteinase and suprabasin that were alteredafter exposure of primary skin keratinocytes to dieselparticulate extract and its vapor (Rajagopalan et al.2018 ).The consumption of tree nuts have also beenreported to potentially mitigate the effects of pro-inﬂammatory Western diets, diminish the inﬂamma-tion process by decreasing the levels of inﬂammatorymolecules and reactive oxygen/nitrogen species, pre-sent cytoprotection, stimulate detox enzyme andantioxidant systems, promote mitochondrial biogene-sis and energy homeostasis, and prevent mitochondrialdysfunctions (Rusu et al. 2019 ). Plant extracts containother numerous amounts of compounds which havebeen classiﬁed into primary and secondary metabo-lites. Some of these metabolites have high biological
activities such as anticancer, anti-microbial as well asanti-aging. In the last decade, scientists have
lites. Some of these metabolites have high biologicalactivities such as anticancer, anti-microbial as well asanti-aging. In the last decade, scientists haveresearched plant extracts containing several com-pounds with the ability to scavenge free radicals andanti-aging properties. Resveratrol found in red wineshowed a good anti-aging property and had been usedin antioxidant skincare formulations (Farris et al.2013 ). Furthermore, resveratrol-based skincare for-mulation had 17 times greater antioxidant activity thanidebenone, a synthetic analog of ubiquinone (Baxter2008 ). Besides resveratrol, biochanin A, an O-methy-lated isoﬂavanoid found in peanuts and alfalfa sprouts,can be used for the treatment and prevention of agingand wrinkles (Gorbach et al. 2000 ).123304 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
VitaminsVitamins play a crucial role in good skincare. Vitaminsare natural miraculous nutrients tha a more radiant,healthy and youthful glow. The most commonly foundvitamins in skincare include vitamin C (AscorbicAcid—water-soluble), vitamin E (Tocopherol—oil-soluble), vitamin A (Retinol—oil-soluble) and vita-min B3 (Niacinamide—water-soluble) (Pullar et al.2017 ). Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) helps the bodysynthesize collagen toﬁrm up and plump skin anddiminish ﬁne lines , wrinkles or scars. Vitamin E(tocopherol) is a powerful antioxidant and a condi-tioning active that may be effective at neutralizing freeradicals as well as softening the skin (Thiele andEkanayake-Mudiyanselage 2007 ). Vitamin A (retinol)stimulates the production of new skin cells. Vitamin Ais important to healthy skin cell production andgrowth. Vitamin A increases collagen production;therefore, improves the wrinkles associated withnatural aging, minimize scars, burns and stretch marks
(Shapiro and Saliou 2001 ). Vitamin B3 (niacinamide)is an anti- aging ingredient which is very crucial incarrying out skin functions like maintaining oilbalance, reducing ﬁne lines or wrinkle, treating andpreventing solar keratoses (‘‘sun spots’’), retainingmoisture and lot more (Watson et al. 2018 ). An anti-aging skincare system, containing alpha-hydroxyacids and vitamins, signiﬁcantly improves wrinkles,skin texture and elasticity in ﬁfty-two volunteers (Tranet al. 2015 ).Hydroxy acidsHydroxy acids also are known as fruit acids , aretopical exfoliants that have been used for years as skinrejuvenating ingredients that reverse some of theeffects of aging such as ﬁne wrinkles , discolored skin,dryness, and spots. The best-known compound in thisgroup is Alpha-Hydroxy Acid which includes citricacid (from citrus fruits), glycolic acid (from sugarcane), lactic acid (from fermented fruits), malic acid(from fruits) and tartaric acid (from grapes) (Ditre
et al. 1996 ).Beta-Hydroxy Acid refers to the ingredientof salicylic acid. Alpha-hydroxy acids are water-soluble, while Beta-hydroxy acid is lipid (oil) soluble.Alpha-hydroxy acids are best for dry skin and agingskin. Beta-hydroxy acid is better used on oily skin andacne (Farris 2018 ; Khuphe et al. 2018 ). Lactic acid hasbeen reported to have repaired artiﬁcially UV dam-aged human dermal ﬁbroblast cell lines by enhancingthe amount and integrity of elastin ﬁbers while somederivatives of lactic acid have also been widely useddue to their hygroscopic and emulsifying properties(Martinez et al. 2013 ; Jarrar 2018 ).Skin lightening agentsSkin lightening agents work by reducing the concen-tration of skin’s pigment called melanin. Less melaninmeans lighter and more even skin tone. Tyrosinase, acopper-containing enzyme, is one of the key enzymesrequired in the biosynthesis of melanin. The action of
the skin whitening agents occurs at various levels ofmelanin production where they act as competitiveinhibitors to tyrosinase, the key enzyme in melano-genesis. Other whitening agents, however, inhibiteither tyrosinase maturation or pigment granules(melanosomes) the transportation from melanocytesto the surrounding keratinocytes (Smit et al. 2009 ).Voluntary depigmentation through the use of prepa-rations to lighten skin tone has become a commonpractice, particularly in African countries. In mostcases, the procedure is achieved by the use of illegalcosmetics or preparations which are not regulated byany cosmetics laws or drug laws. The commonly usedactive ingredients include steroids, kojic acid, hydro-quinone, and its derivatives, as well as mercuryderivatives. These ingredients are harmful and causemany undesirable effects such as diabetes, hypercor-ticism, arterial hypertension skin atrophy, osteoporo-
sis, and family member such as children may alsobecome poisoned by proxy (Couteau and Coiffard2016 ).Furthermore, most lightening agents make it all the
sis, and family member such as children may alsobecome poisoned by proxy (Couteau and Coiffard2016 ).Furthermore, most lightening agents make it all theway down to the hypodermis and act as tyrosinaseinhibitors. Lightening agents are usually used tocombat skin problems like melasma, Dark Age spots,hyperpigmentation, and dullness (Jin et al. 2018 ;Pillaiyar et al. 2017 ; Shin et al. 2018 ). Many organicagents, however, have been shown to be safe andeffective in skin lightening include citrus extracts,licorice extract, kojic acid, bearberry extract, whitemulberry extract, vitamin C (ascorbic acid), vitaminB3 (niacinamide), Indian gooseberry, hydroquinoneand its derivatives such as retinoids, alpha- and beta-hydroxy acids, ascorbic acid, divalent ion chelators,123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 305
azelaic acid, as well as diverse herbal extracts(Couteau and Coiffard 2016 ).Anti-inﬂammatory ingredientsInﬂammation has long been recognized as one of themost signiﬁcant factors in the pathogenesis of acne.An anti-inﬂammatory ingredient curbs pain, swellingand redness in the skin. Several different plant specieshave demonstrated anti-inﬂammatory activity. Theseplants include turmeric, licorice root, oats, feverfew,willow bark, lavender, calendula, chamomile, witchhazel, yarrow and oak bark (Maione et al. 2016 ). Treenuts also have the potential to diminish the inﬂamma-tion process by decreasing the levels of inﬂammatorymolecules and free radicals, stimulate detox enzymeand antioxidant systems, and prevent mitochondrialdysfunctions (Rusu et al. 2019 ).Sunblock ingredientsDermatologists now say that nothing is as importantfor your skin, in slowing the signs of aging, as being
sun smart. Ultraviolet B (UVB) is the shorter wave UVray that causes sunburn, discolorations and dark spots,skin reddening, sagging or leathery skin, wrinkles andeven skin cancer (Nguyen et al. 2018 ). Sun ProtectionFactor (SPF rating, introduced in 1974) is a relativemeasure of a sunscreen’s protection against UVB rays.Most sunscreens with an SPF of 15 or higher doanexceptional job in preventing photoaging and skincancer. Many sunscreen products contain the pow-dered mineral called titanium dioxide or zinc oxidewhich sits on top of the skin to reﬂect and absorb thesun’s harmful rays (Joshi and Fedders 2018 ). Suncareproducts require extensive SPF testing as many do notprovide adequate protection as claimed. There aremany natural and organic ingredients that have beenshown to offer a small number of photoprotectiveproperties for anti-aging skincare products. Theseplants include Aloe Vera, caffeic acid, calendula,coconut oil, ginger, green tea resveratrol, shea butter,
tamanu oil and tocopherol (vitamin E).Future perspectives and conclusionGraceful, positive and healthy aging is the goal ofalmost everyone, everywhere thus, providing acatalyst for the ever-blooming and continuouslygrowing anti-aging market . Graceful aging can beachieved through several means such as avoidance ofoverexposure to the sun, healthy balanced diet andlifestyle habits as well as good topical anti-agingskincare practices. Therefore, skincare formulationstakeholders should not only harness the versatilepotential of natural anti-aging skincare ingredientsbut adopt them holistically to appease the growingawareness and concerns of consumers. Natural prod-ucts are characteristically safe and effective forvarious pharmacological activities such as anti-aging,antioxidants, anti-inﬂammatory, anti-carcinogenic,anti-allergy, as well as moisturizing, anti-hyperpig-mentation, pro-collagen, and UV protective. Naturalproducts are also abundant as well as sustainable in
nature.Acknowledgements No funding was provided for thisresearch. The Centre for Natural Products Research and DrugDiscovery (CENAR), and the Research Management &Innovation Complex, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpurare, however, greatly acknowledged.Author contributions IAA and MAM were involved in thereview conceptualization and ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. IAA,MAM, NHZ and AHA were involved in the ﬁrst review andsubsequent completion of the review. All the authors were theninvolved in the critical review of the manuscript, ﬁnal reviewand editing.Compliance with ethical standardsConﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have noknown competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationshipsthat could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in thispaper.ReferencesAbarca-Buis RF, Martı ´nez-Jime ´nez A, Vera-Go ´mez E, Contr-eras-Figueroa ME, Garciadiego-Ca ´zares D, Paus R,Robles-Tenorio A, Kro ¨tzsch E (2018) Mechanisms of
epithelial thickening due to IL-1 signalling blockade andTNF-aadministration differ during wound repair and
Robles-Tenorio A, Kro ¨tzsch E (2018) Mechanisms ofepithelial thickening due to IL-1 signalling blockade andTNF-aadministration differ during wound repair andregeneration. Differentiation 99(2018):10–20Agathokleous E, Calabrese EJ (2019) Hormesis: The doseresponse for the 21st century: the future has arrived. Tox-icology 425(2019):152249Agathokleous E, Kitao M, Calabrese EJ (2019) Hormesis: acompelling platform for sophisticated plant science.Trends Plant Sci 24(4):318–327Aguiar J, Estevinho BN, Santos L (2016) Microencapsulation ofnatural antioxidants for food application: the speciﬁc case123306 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
of coffee antioxidants: a review. Trends Food Sci Technol58(2016):21–39Ahmed IA, Mikail MA, Ibrahim M (2017) Baccaurea angulatafruit juice ameliorates altered hematological and bio-chemical biomarkers in diet-induced hypercholesterolemicrabbits. Nutr Res 42(2017):31–42Ahmed IA, Mikail MA, Bin Ibrahim M, Bin Hazali N, RasadMS, Ghani RA, Wahab RA, Arief SJ, Yahya MN (2015)Antioxidant activity and phenolic proﬁle of various mor-phological parts of underutilized Baccaurea angulata fruit.Food Chem 172:778–787Ahmed IA, Mikail MA, Mustafa MR, Ibrahim M, Othman R(2019) Lifestyle Interventions for nonalcoholic fatty liverdisease. Saudi J Biol Sci 2019:1–6Anderson J, Anderson Y, Diyabalanage T (2015) Paving theway with actives for skincare. Planta Med 81:IL23Assadpour E, Jafari SM (2018) A systematic review onnanoencapsulation of food bioactive ingredients andnutraceuticals by various nanocarriers. Crit Rev Food SciNutr 2018:1–23
Nutr 2018:1–23Assaf H, Adly MA, Hussein MR (2016) Aging and intrinsicaging: pathogenesis and Manifestations. In: Farage MA,Miller KW, Maibach HI (eds) Textbook of aging skin.Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 1–12Baxter RA (2008) Anti-aging properties of resveratrol: reviewand report of a potent new antioxidant skin care formula-tion. J Cosmet Dermatol 7(1):2–7Behbahani ES, Ghaedi M, Abbaspour M, Rostamizadeh K,Dashtian K (2019) Curcumin loaded nanostructured lipidcarriers: in vitro digestion and release studies. Polyhedron164(2019):113–122Brewer M (2011) Natural antioxidants: sources, compounds,mechanisms of action, and potential applications. ComprRev Food Sci Food Saf 10(4):221–247Calabrese EJ (2020) Stimulating hair growth via hormesis:Experimental foundations and clinical implications. Phar-macol Res 152(2020):104599Calabrese EJ, Dhawan G, Kapoor R, Mattson MP, Rattan SIS(2019) Curcumin and hormesis with particular emphasis on
neural cells. Food Chem Toxicol 129(2019):399–404Calejja-Agius J, Muscat-Baron Y, Brincat MP (2007) Skinageing. Menopause Int 13(2):60–64Calleja-Agius J, Brincat M, Borg M (2013) Skin connectivetissue and aging. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol27(5):727–740Casadevall A (2018) Melanin triggers antifungal defences.Nature 555:319–320Cavinato M, Waltenberger B, Baraldo G, Grade CVC, StuppnerH, Jansen-Du ¨rr P (2017) Plant extracts and natural com-pounds used against UVB-induced photoaging. Biogeron-tology 18(2017):499–516Charles Dorni AI, Amalraj A, Gopi S, Varma K, Anjana SN(2017) Novel cosmeceuticals from plants: an industryguided review. J Appl Res Med Aromat Plants7(2017):1–26Choi EH (2019) Aging of the skin barrier. Clin Dermatol37(4):336–345Couteau C, Coiffard L (2016) Overview of skin whiteningagents: drugs and cosmetic products. Cosmetics 3(3):27Dai B, Pelton LE (2018) Exploring consumers’ skincare retail
patronage. J Retail Consum Serv 43(2018):269–277D’Aniello C, Cermola F, Patriarca EJ, Minchiotti G (2017)Vitamin C in stem cell biology: impact on extracellularmatrix homeostasis and epigenetics. Stem Cells Int. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/8936156Demirovic D, Rattan SIS (2013) Establishing cellular stressresponse proﬁles as biomarkers of homeodynamics, healthand hormesis. Exp Gerontol 48(1):94–98Ditre CM, Grifﬁn TD, Murphy GF, Sueki H, Telegan B, JohnsonWC, Yu RJ, Van Scott EJ (1996) Effects of a-hydroxyacids on photoaged skin: a pilot clinical, histologic, andultrastructural study. J Am Acad Dermatol 34(2):187–195Emerald M, Emerald A, Emerald L, Kumar V (2016) Perspec-tive of natural products in skincare. Pharm Pharm Int J4(3):00072Fabra MJ, Lo ´pez-Rubio A, Lagaron JM (2016) Use of theelectrohydrodynamic process to develop active/bioactivebilayer ﬁlms for food packaging applications. FoodHydrocolloids 55(2016):11–18
Hydrocolloids 55(2016):11–18Farage M, Miller KW, Elsner P, Maibach HI (2008) Intrinsicand extrinsic factors in skin aging: a review. Int J CosmetSci 30(2):87–95Farage MA, Miller KW, Elsner P, Maibach HI (2013) Charac-
Farage M, Miller KW, Elsner P, Maibach HI (2008) Intrinsicand extrinsic factors in skin aging: a review. Int J CosmetSci 30(2):87–95Farage MA, Miller KW, Elsner P, Maibach HI (2013) Charac-teristics of the aging skin. Adv Wound Care 2(1):5–10Farris, P.K. (2018). Topical skin care cosmetic patient mastertechniques in facial rejuvenation, second edition. E-Book,pp 68–72.e62Farris P, Krutmann J, Li YH, McDaniel D, Krol Y (2013)Resveratrol: a unique antioxidant offering a multi-mecha-nistic approach for treating aging skin. J Drugs Dermatol12(12):1389–1394Ganceviciene R, Liakou AI, Theodoridis A, Makrantonaki E,Zouboulis CC (2012) Skin anti-aging strategies. Dermato-Endocrinology 4(3):308–319Ganiari S, Choulitoudi E, Oreopoulou V (2017) Edible andactive ﬁlms and coatings as carriers of natural antioxidantsfor lipid food. Trends Food Sci Technol 68(2017):70–82Godoy RS, Lane ´s LEK, Castro BD, Weber V, Wingen N, PiresMM, Oliveira GT, Maltch L (2019) Oxidative stress
MM, Oliveira GT, Maltch L (2019) Oxidative stressresistance in a short-lived Neotropical annual killiﬁsh.Biogerontology 2019:1–13Goodman GJ, Armour KS, Kolodziejczyk JK, Santangelo S,Gallagher CJ (2018) Comparison of self-reported signs offacial aging among Caucasian women in Australia versusthose in the USA, the UK and Canada. Australas J Der-matol 59(2):108–117Gorbach SL (2000) Isoﬂavonoids for treatment and preventionof aging skin and wrinkles. Google PatentsHameed A, Fatima GR, Malik K, Muqadas A, Fazal-ur-RehmanM (2018) Scope of nanotechnology in cosmetics: derma-tology and skin care products. J Med Chem Sci 2(1):9–16Howard D (2018) What is a free radical? Dostupno na adresi:Datum pristupa, 3. https://www.dermalinstitute.com/us/library/22_article_What_Is_A_Free_Radical_.htmlHughes B (2018) Going natural. Professional Beauty (Mar/Apr2018), p 110Humbert P, Louvrier L, Saas P, Viennet C (2018) Vitamin C,aged skin, skin health. Vitamin C. IntechOpen, Rijeka,
pp 1–20Huth S, Schmitt L, Marquardt Y, Heise R, Lu ¨scher B, AmannPM, Baron JM (2018) Effects of a ceramide containingwater-in-oil ointment on skin barrier function and allergen123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 307
penetration in an IL-31 treated 3D model of the disruptedskin barrier. Exp Dermatol 27(9):1009–1014Ibrahim M, Ahmed IA, Mikail MA, Ishola AA, Draman S, IsaML, Yusof AM (2017) Baccaurea angulata fruit juicereduces atherosclerotic lesions in diet-induced hyperc-holesterolemic rabbits. Lipids Health Dis 16(134):1–8Ibrahim M, Mikail MA, Ahmed IA, Abdul Ghani R (2018)Phenolic-rich Baccaurea angulata modulates inﬂamma-tory biomarkers of atherosclerosis. J Nutr Metab 2018:1–8Jarrar MH (2018) Anti-aging effectsofretinol and alpha hydroxyacid on elastin ﬁbers of artiﬁcially photo-aged humandermal ﬁbroblast cell lines. World Acad Sci Eng TechnolInt J Med Health Biomed Pharm Eng 9(4):1–4Jin Y, Kim JH, Hong HD, Kwon J, Lee EJ, Jang M, Lee SY, HanAR, Nam TG, Hong SK, Huh TL (2018) Ginsenosides Rg5and Rk1, the skin-whitening agents in black ginseng.J Funct Foods 45:67–74Joshi K, Fedders J (2018) Increase SPF efﬁciency and enablebetter aesthetics. S Afr Pharm Cosmet Rev 45(7):30–31
Kadlecova A, Makova B, Artal-Sanz M, Strnad M, Voller J(2019) The plant hormone kinetin in disease therapy andhealthy aging. Ageing Res Rev 55(2019):100958Kadry MO (2019) Liposomal glutathione as a promising can-didate for immunological rheumatoid arthritis therapy.Heliyon 5(7):e02162Karimi M, Sadeghi R, Kokini J (2017) Pomegranate as apromising opportunity in medicine and nanotechnology.Trends Food Sci Technol 69:59–73Kawada C, Kimura M, Masuda Y, Nomura Y (2015) Oraladministration of hyaluronan prevents skin dryness andepidermal thickening in ultraviolet irradiated hairless mice.J Photochem Photobiol B 153(2015):215–221Khuphe M, Ingram N, Thornton PD (2018) Exploiting poly ( a-hydroxy acids) for the acid-mediated release of doxoru-bicin and reversible inside–out nanoparticle self-assembly.Nanoscale 10(29):14201–14206Kowalska H, Czajkowska K, Cichowska J, AndrzejLenart A(2017) What’s new in biopotential of fruit and veg-
etable by-products applied in the food processing industry?Trends Food Sci Technol 67(2017):150–159Kruglikov IL, Zhang Z, Scherer PE (2019) Caveolin-1 in skinaging from innocent bystander to major contributor. Age-ing Res Rev. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2019.100959Lambers H, Piessens S, Bloem A, Pronk H, Finkel P (2006)Natural skin surface pH is on average below 5, which isbeneﬁcial for its resident ﬂora. Int J Cosmet Sci28(5):359–370Lan CCE, Hung YT, Fang AH, Wu CS (2019) Effects of irra-diance on UVA-induced skin aging. J Dermatol Sci94(1):220–228Lee DH, Oh JH, Chung JH (2016) Glycosaminoglycan andproteoglycan in skin aging. J Dermatol Sci 83(3):174–181Li H, Wang M, Williams GR, Wu J, Sun X, Lv Y, Zhu LM(2016) Electrospun gelatin nanoﬁbers loaded with vitaminsA and E as antibacterial wound dressing materials. RSCAdv 55(6):50267–50277Li WH, Wong HK, Serrano J, Randhawa M, Kaur S, Southall
MD, Parsa R (2017) Topical stabilized retinol treatmentinduces the expression of HAS genes and HA production inhuman skin in vitro and in vivo. Arch Dermatol Res309(4):275–283Limbert G, Masen MA, Pond D, Graham HK, Sherratt MJ,Jobanputra R, McBride A (2019) Biotribology of the age-ing skin: why we should care. Biotribology17(2019):75–90Liu Y, Liao Y, Wei S, Zhang H, Wang X (2019a) Nanoparticlesbased on sodium alginate and b-conglycinin: self-assemblyand delivery of Phyllanthus urinaria phenolic compounds.J Food Process Preserv 43(1):1–8Liu Y, Gao W, Koellmann C, Le Clerc S, Hu ¨ls A, Li B, Peng Q,Wu S, Ding A, Yang Y, Jin L (2019b) Genome-wide scanidentiﬁed genetic variants associated with skin aging in aChinese female population. J Dermatol Sci 96(1):42–49Lode´n M (2003) Role of topical emollients and moisturizers inthe treatment of dry skin barrier disorders. Am J ClinDermatol 4(11):771–788Mahant S, Rao R, Nanda S (2018) Nanostructured lipid carriers:
Revolutionizing skin care and topical therapeutics. Designof nanostructures for versatile therapeutic applications.Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 97–136
Revolutionizing skin care and topical therapeutics. Designof nanostructures for versatile therapeutic applications.Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 97–136Maione F, Russo R, Khan H, Mascolo N (2016) Medicinalplants with anti-inﬂammatory activities. Nat Prod Res30(12):1343–1352Malik A, Hoenig LJ (2019) Can aging be slowed down? ClinDermatol 37(4):306–311Martin AR, Lin M, Granka JM, Myrick JW, Liu X, Sockell A,Atkinson EG, Werely CJ, Mo ¨ller M, Sandhu MS, KingsleyDM (2017) An unexpectedly complex architecture for skinpigmentation in Africans. Cell 171(6):1340–1353Martinez FAC, Balciunas EM, Salgado JM, Gonza ´lez JMD,Converti A, de Souza Oliveira RP (2013) Lactic acidproperties, applications and production: a review. TrendsFood Sci Technol 30(1):70–83Mendes AC, Gorzelanny C, Halter N, Schneider SW, ChronakisIS (2016) Hybrid electrospun chitosan-phospholipidsnanoﬁbers for transdermal drug delivery. Int J Pharm510(1):48–56Mikail MA, Ahmed IA, Ibrahim M, Hazali N, Rasad MS, Ghani
RA, Hashim R, Wahab RA, Arief SJ, Isa ML, Draman S(2016) Baccaurea angulata fruit inhibits lipid peroxidationand induces the increase of antioxidant enzymes activities.Eur J Nutr 55:1435–1444Mir SA, Dar BN, Wani AB, Shah MA (2018) Effect of plantextracts on the techno-functional properties of biodegrad-able packaging ﬁlms. Trends Food Sci Technol80(2018):141–154Moeini R, Memariani Z, Asadi F, Bozorgi M, Gorji N (2019)Pistacia genus as a potential source of neuroprotectivenatural products. Planta Med 85(17):1326–1350Nguyen TN, Rajapakshe K, Avdieiev S, Nicholas C, Chitsaz-zadeh V, Welsh E, Fang B, Koomen J, Coarfa C, EinspahrJ, Tsai KY (2018) A proteome-transcriptome-miRnomeintegrated analysis identiﬁes similarity between UV-ex-posed skin and wounding skin (abstract): In: Proceedingsof the American Association for Cancer Research AnnualMeeting 2018; 2018 Apr 14–18. AACR, Chicago, IL.Philadelphia (PA); Cancer Res 2018;78(13 Suppl):Ab-stract nr 406
stract nr 406Pan L, Zhang S, Gu K, Zhang N (2018) Preparation of astax-anthin-loaded liposomes: characterization, storage stabilityand antioxidant activity. CyTA 16(1):607–618123308 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
Patra JK, Das G, Lee S, Kang SS, Shin HS (2018) Selectedcommercial plants: a review of extraction and isolation ofbioactive compounds and their pharmacological marketvalue. Trends Food Sci Technol 82(2018):89–109Pe´rez-Masia ´R, Lagaron JM, Lopez-Rubio A (2015) Morphol-ogy and stability of edible lycopene-containing micro- andnanocapsules produced through electrospraying and spraydrying. Food Bioprocess Technol 8(2):459–470Petruk G, del Giudice R, Rigano MM, Monti DM (2018)Antioxidants from plants protect against skin photoaging.Oxid Med Cell Longev. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1454936Pillaiyar T, Manickam M, Namasivayam V (2017) Skinwhitening agents: medicinal chemistry perspective oftyrosinase inhibitors. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem32(1):403–425Poljsˇak B, Dahmane R, Godic A (2012) Intrinsic skin aging: Therole of oxidative stress. Acta Dermatovenerol21(2012):1–4Pullar J, Carr A, Vissers M (2017) The roles of vitamin C in skinhealth. Nutrients 9(8):866
health. Nutrients 9(8):866Rajagopalan P, Jain AP, Nanjappa V, Patel K, MangalaparthiKK, Babu N, Cavusoglu N, Roy N, Soeur J, Breton L,Pandey A (2018) Proteome-wide changes in primary skinkeratinocytes exposed to diesel particulate extract: a rolefor antioxidants in skin health. J Dermatol Sci91(3):239–249Ramalhete C, Mulhovo S, Lage H, Ferreira MJU (2018)Triterpenoids from Momordica balsamina with a collateralsensitivity effect for tackling multidrug resistance in cancercells. Planta Med 84(18):1372–1379Rattan SIS (2008) Hormesis in aging. Ageing Res Rev7(2008):63–78Ray L, Gupta KC (2018) Role of Nanotechnology in SkinRemedies. Photocarcinog Photoprot 2018:141–157Rehman A, Ahmad T, Aadil RM, Spotti MJ, Bakry AM, KhanIM, Zhao L, Riaz T, Tong Q (2019) Pectin polymers as wallmaterials for the nano-encapsulation of bioactive com-pounds. Trends Food Sci Technol 90(2019):35–46Rusu MA, Simedrea R, Gheldiu AM, Mocan A, Vlase L, Popa
DS, Ferreira ICFR, I.C.F.R. (2019) Beneﬁts of tree nutconsumption on aging and age-related diseases: mecha-nisms of actions. Trends Food Sci Technol88(2019):104–120Safdar A, Zakaria R, Ab Aziz CB, Rashid U, Azman KF, K.(2019) Goat milk attenuates mimetic aging related memoryimpairment via suppressing brain oxidative stress, neu-rodegeneration and modulating neurotrophic factors inD-galactose-induced aging model. Biogerontology2019:1–14Schagen SK, Zampeli VA, Makrantonaki E, Zouboulis CC(2012) Discovering the link between nutrition and skinaging. Dermato-Endocrinology 4(3):298–307Sethi A, Kaur T, Malhotra SL, Gambhir ML (2016) Moistur-izers: the slippery road. Indian J Dermatol 61(3):279–287Shapiro SS, Saliou C (2001) Role of vitamins in skincare.Nutrition 17(10):839–844Shin HJ, Beak HS, Kim SI, Joo YH, Choi J (2018) Development
and evaluation of topical formulations for a novel skinwhitening agent (AP736) using Hansen solubilityparameters and PEG-PCL polymers. Int J Pharm552(1–2):251–257Shishir MRI, Karim N, Gowd V, Zheng X, Chen W (2019)Liposomal delivery of natural product: a promisingapproach in health research. Trends Food Sci Technol85(2019):177–200Shishir MRI, Xie L, Sun C, Zheng X, Chen W (2018) Advancesin micro and nano-encapsulation of bioactive compoundsusing biopolymer and lipid-based transporters. TrendsFood Sci Technol 78(2018):34–60Smit N, Vicanova J, Pavel S (2009) The Hunt for Natural SkinWhitening Agents. Int J Mol Sci 10(12):5326–5349Stamatas GN, de Sterke J, Hauser M, von Stetten O, van der PolA (2008) Lipid uptake and skin occlusion following topicalapplication of oils on adult and infant skin. J Dermatol Sci50(2):135–142Strnadova K, Sandera V, Dvorankova B, Kodet O, Duskova M,Smetana K, Lacina L (2019) Skin aging: the dermal per-spective. Clin Dermatol 37(4):326–335
Tarun J, Susan J, Suria J, Susan VJ, Criton S (2014) Evaluationof pH of bathing soaps and shampoos for skin and hair care.Indian J Dermatol 59(5):442–444Thiele JJ, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S (2007) Vitamin E in
of pH of bathing soaps and shampoos for skin and hair care.Indian J Dermatol 59(5):442–444Thiele JJ, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S (2007) Vitamin E inhuman skin: organ-speciﬁc physiology and considerationsfor its use in dermatology. Mol Aspects Med28(5–6):646–667Tobin DJ (2017) Introduction to skin aging. J Tissue Viability26(1):37–46Tran D, Townley JP, Barnes TM, Greive KA (2015) An anti-aging skincare system containing alpha hydroxy acids andvitamins improves the biomechanical parameters of facialskin. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol 8(2015):9–17Trojahn C, Dobos G, Lichterfeld A, Blume-Peytavi U, Kottner J(2015) Characterizing facial skin aging in humans: disen-tangling extrinsic from intrinsic biological phenomena.BioMed Res Int. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/318586Tsatsou F, Trakatelli M, Patsatsi A, Kalokasidis K, Sotiriadis D(2012) Extrinsic aging: UV-mediated skin carcinogenesis.Dermato-Endocrinology 4(3):285–297Vaughn AR, Clark AK, Sivamani RK, Shi VY (2018) Natural
oils for skin-barrier repair: ancient compounds now backedby modern science. Am J Clin Dermatol 19(1):103–117Vierko ¨tter A, Hu ¨ls A, Yamamoto A, Stolz S, Kra ¨mer U, MatsuiMS, Morita A, Wang S, Li Z, Jin L, Krutmann J (2016)Extrinsic skin ageing in German, Chinese and Japanesewomen manifests differently in all three groups dependingon ethnic background, age and anatomical site. J DermatolSci 83(3):219–225Wang X, Wu J (2019) Modulating effect of fatty acids andsterols on skin aging. J Funct Foods 57(2019):135–140Wang X, Yu DG, Li XY, Bligh SW, Williams GR (2015)Electrospun medicated shellac nanoﬁbers for colon-tar-geted drug delivery. Int J Pharm 490(1–2):384–390Watson AD, Okano TN, Akira N (2018) Methods of regulatingskin health and appearance with a combination of ﬂavonoidand vitamin B3: United States, (US9913792B2), 1–22Wen P, Zhu DH, Wu H, Zong MH, Jing YR, Han SY (2016)
Encapsulation of cinnamon essential oil in electrospunnanoﬁbrous ﬁlm for active food packaging. Food Control59(2016):366–376123Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310 309
Wen P, Zong MH, Linhardt RJ, Feng K, Wu H (2017) Elec-trospinning: a novel nano-encapsulation approach forbioactive compounds. Trends Food Sci Technol70(2017):56–68Xu X, Xiao W, Zhang Z, Pan J, Yan Y, Zhu T, Tang D, Ye K,Paranjpe M, Qu L, Nie H (2018) Anti-pruritic and anti-inﬂammatory effects of oxymatrine in a mouse model ofallergic contact dermatitis. J Dermatol Sci 91(2):134–141Yagi M, Yonei YJ (2017) Glycative stress and anti-aging: 6.Glycative Stress Kidney Dis 4(1):275–278Yang J, Ciftci ON (2017) Encapsulation of ﬁsh oil into hollowsolid lipid micro- and nanoparticles using carbon dioxide.Food Chem 231(2017):105–113Yao ZC, Chang MW, Ahmad Z, Li JS (2016) Encapsulation ofrose hip seed oil into ﬁbrous zein ﬁlms for ambient and ondemand food preservation via coaxial electrospinning.J Food Eng 191(2016):115–123Zhao T, Yan X, Sun L, Yang T, Hu X, He Z, Liu F, Liu X (2019)Research progress on extraction, biological activities and
delivery systems of natural astaxanthin. Trends Food SciTechnol 91(2019):354–361Zouboulis CC, Makrantonaki E, Nikolakis D (2019a) When theskin is in the center of interest: An aging issue. Clin Der-matol 37(4):296–305Zouboulis CC, Ganceviciene R, Liakou AI, Theodoridis A,Elewa R, Makrantonaki E (2019b) Aesthetic aspects ofskin aging, prevention, and local treatment. Clin Dermatol37(4):365–372Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral withregard to jurisdictional claims in published maps andinstitutional afﬁliations.123310 Biogerontology (2020) 21:293–310
