REVIEWUse of Retinoids in Topical Antiaging Treatments:A Focused Review of Clinical Evidencefor Conventional and NanoformulationsDaniela Milosheska .Robert Ros ˇkarReceived: August 17, 2022 / Accepted: September 6, 2022 / Published online: October 11, 2022/C211The Author(s) 2022ABSTRACTNowadays, numerous skincare routines are usedto rejuvenate aging skin. Retinoids are one ofthe most popular ingredients used in antiagingtreatments. Among the representatives of reti-noids, tretinoin is considered the most effectiveagent with proven antiaging effects on the skinand can be found in formulations approved asmedicines for topical treatment of acne, facialwrinkles, and hyperpigmentation. Other reti-noids present in topical medicines are used forvarious indications, but only tazarotene is alsoapproved as adjunctive agent for treatment offacial ﬁne wrinkling and pigmentation. Themost commonly used retinoids such as retinol,
most commonly used retinoids such as retinol,retinaldehyde, and retinyl palmitate are con-tained in cosmeceuticals regulated as cosmetics.Since clinical efﬁcacy studies are not requiredfor marketing cosmetic formulations, there areconcerns about the efﬁcacy of these retinoids.From a formulation perspective, retinoids pose achallenge to researchers as a result of theirproven instability, low penetration, and poten-tial for skin irritation. Therefore, novel deliverysystems based on nanotechnology are beingdeveloped to overcome the limitations of con-ventional formulations and improve user com-pliance. In this review, the clinical evidence forretinoids in conventional and nanoformula-tions for topical antiaging treatments was eval-uated. In addition, an overview of thecomparison clinical trials between tretinoin andother retinoids is presented. In general, there isa lack of evidence from properly designed clin-ical trials to support the claimed efﬁcacy of the
most commonly used retinoids as antiagingagents in cosmeceuticals. Of the other retinoidscontained in medicines, tazarotene and ada-palene have clinically evaluated antiagingeffects compared to tretinoin and may be con-sidered as potential alternatives for antiagingtreatments. The promising potential of retinoidnanoformulations requires a more comprehen-sive evaluation with additional studies to sup-port the preliminary ﬁndings.Keywords: Antiaging; Clinical evidence;Cosmeceuticals; Nanoformulations; Retinoids;Retinol; TretinoinD. MilosheskaINSLAB, Maribor, SloveniaR. Ros ˇkar (&)University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy,Asˇkercˇeva cesta 7, 1000 Ljubljana, Sloveniae-mail: robert.roskar@ffa.uni-lj.siAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-022-02319-7
Key Summary PointsTretinoin is the retinoid present inmedicines for topical application with thestrongest clinical evidence of antiagingactivity.Tazarotene and adapalene may beconsidered as tretinoin alternatives forantiaging treatments.Clinical evidence is lacking for retinoidscontained in cosmeceuticals for topicalantiaging treatments.Novel formulations based onnanotechnology are being developed toovercome the major drawbacks of retinoiduse.Further evaluation with in vivo testing andclinical trials are needed to support thepreclinical results for the developednanoformulations containing retinoids.INTRODUCTIONSkin aging is manifested in clinical features suchas wrinkles, dermal atrophy, and decreasedelasticity as a result of various processes at themolecular level stimulated by intrinsic andextrinsic sources, leading to degenerativechanges and decreased amount of functionalcomponents of the skin [ 1,2]. Although skinaging is a natural process due to the chrono-
aging is a natural process due to the chrono-logical aging of the human body, photoaging byUV radiation is identiﬁed as the most importantextrinsic factor that accelerates the processthrough the effects of the generated reactiveoxygen species [ 3–5].Nowadays, antiaging skin treatments are ahot topic that encompasses various approachesto rejuvenate and improve skin condition andappearance. Among the variety of treatments,topical retinoids are one of the most commonlyused active ingredients for which there is clini-cal evidence. The well-known strategy againstphotoaging includes regular use of sunscreensand a combination of retinoids and antioxi-dants [ 6,7].The retinoid family consists of both natu-rally occurring and synthetic analogues of reti-nol (vitamin A). The anti-wrinkle effects oftopically applied formulations containing reti-noids are based on the promotion of ker-atinocyte proliferation and collagen synthesis,improvement of the epidermal barrier, inhibi-
improvement of the epidermal barrier, inhibi-tion of collagen degradation, transdermal waterloss (TEWL), and metalloproteinase activity[8,9]. Retinoids act through retinoic acid (RAR-a,-b,-c) and retinoid-X receptors (RXR- a,-b,-c)[1]. Considering the molecular structure andreceptor selectivity, retinoids are classiﬁed intofour generations as shown in Table 1.After topical application, retinyl esters arehydrolyzed to retinol; consequently, retinol isconverted to biologically active retinoic acid(tretinoin) via retinaldehyde by dehydrogenasesin a two-step oxidation process [ 10,11]. Accord-ing to their metabolic pathway, retinoid activityof the ﬁrst-generation representatives increases inthe following order: retinyl esters \\retinol \retinaldehyde \retinoicacid, while the toleranceranking is reversed: retinyl esters [retinol =retinaldehyde [[retinoic acid (Fig. 1)[11].Therefore, when topically applied, retinol, reti-naldehyde, and retinol esters must be converted
to a biologically active form—tretinoin, whileother retinoids are active compounds in theirspeciﬁc form [ 12].Tretinoin, alitretinoin, adapalene, tazar-otene, bexarotene, and trifarotene are found intopical formulations approved as medicines forvarious indications such as acne or psoriasis. Inaddition, tretinoin and tazarotene are the onlyretinoids with approved indications for treat-ment of photoaged skin as an adjunctivetreatment.Commercial cosmetics (cosmeceuticals) usu-ally contain retinol, retinaldehyde, or retinylesters. The term cosmeceuticals is used for cos-metic products with active ingredients forwhich ‘‘drug-like’’ effects on skin structure andfunction are claimed and are distinguished as asubgroup between cosmetic products and topi-cal prescription medicines [ 13]. However,because of their classiﬁcation as cosmeceuticals,5352 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
no rigorous pre-market safety or efﬁcacy testingis required [ 14]. Because retinoids present asactive ingredients in cosmeceuticals must beconverted to tretinoin after application,researchers question their efﬁcacy compared totretinoin [ 14].Although retinoids are among the mostcommonly used antiaging and depigmentingingredients in cosmetics [ 15], their use is asso-ciated with the issues of low penetration andcommon side effects such as skin irritation dueto their physicochemical properties and proveninstability. The side effects of topically appliedretinoids are generally dose-dependent andmanifest as ‘‘retinoid dermatitis’’ or skin irrita-tion at the application site [ 16]. In addition todermatitis, the application of retinoids aroundthe eyes may cause ocular discomfort and dryeye syndrome because of their inﬂuence on theocular surface and meibomian gland structure[17].Another issue associated with the use ofretinoids is potential teratogenicity. Retinoid
retinoids is potential teratogenicity. Retinoidteratogenicity has been conﬁrmed for orallyingested retinoids, while concerns about reti-noid embryopathy after topical application arebased on published case reports [ 18]. Panchaudet al. [ 18] conducted a prospective, controlled,multicenter observational study and evaluatedthe incidence of congenital malformationsassociated with topical retinoid use during theﬁrst trimester. Results did not conﬁrm anTable 1 Retinoid generations1st generation 2nd generation 3rd generation 4th generationTretinoin (all- trans -retinoic acid)Isotretinoin (13- cis-retinoic acid)Alitretinoin (9- cis-retinoic acid)Retinol (all- trans -retinol, vitamin A)Retinal (retinaldehyde)Retinyl palmitateRetinyl propionateRetinyl acetateRetinyl retinoateRetinyl N-formyl aspartamateEtretinateAcitretinMotretinateTazaroteneAdapaleneBexaroteneTrifaroteneSeletinoid G
AdapaleneBexaroteneTrifaroteneSeletinoid GFig. 1 Representation of retinoid activity and tolerance considering the metabolic pathwayAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5353
increased risk of retinoid embryopathy. Otherauthors also conducted meta-analyses andreviews of epidemiologic data and concludedthat retinoid embryopathy or other adversepregnancy outcomes are unlikely with topicalexposure during pregnancy [ 19,20]. However,on the basis of current knowledge and availabledata, it can be concluded that the use of topicalretinoids during pregnancy cannot be advisedbecause of lack of evidence to support thisdecision.The mechanisms of retinoid side effects atthe molecular level are not fully elucidated [ 21].Generally, in cases where the active ingredientis used in the formulation at a low concentra-tion and the patient’s skin shows intolerance, itis recommended to stop retinoid treatment [ 22].Representatives of non-selective retinoids (ﬁrstgeneration) are associated with a higher inci-dence of side effects [ 23].Researchers are continuously focusing on thedevelopment of new retinoid molecules and
development of new retinoid molecules andstable formulations that are effective and welltolerated to overcome the drawbacks associatedwith the use of retinoids.NanoformulationsNovel nanotechnology-based formulations arebeing developed and tested to improve retinoidefﬁcacy and overcome post-topical applicationproblems. In general, nanotechnology approa-ches are used to improve the chemical andphotochemical stability of the active ingredient,increase penetration, modify its release from theformulation, and achieve satisfactory efﬁcacywith minimal skin irritation [ 24–26].The use of nanotechnology in antiagingcosmetics is the fastest growing segment in theskin care industry. These formulations includelipid-based, polymer-based, metal-based, andother nanosystems (dendrimers, fullerenes, andnanocrystals) [ 27,28]. Among them, lipid-baseddelivery systems (solid lipid nanoparticles(SLNs), nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs),liposomes, and nanoemulsions) are considered
advantageous compared to other nanosystemsowing to their low toxicity, high drugloading capacity, biodegradability, large-scalemanufacturing, and diverse chemical and for-mulation landscape [ 29]. Various lipid-baseddelivery systems have been investigated fordifferent retinoids [ 30–32]. Liposomes are themost studied nanomaterial [ 26], while hydro-gels and nanoemulgels are the most promisingsemisolid cosmetic formulations for dermalapplication of lipid-based nanoparticles [ 33].The lipid-based nanoparticles are consideredsafe colloidal carriers for the delivery of poorlysoluble active ingredients through the skin,because the excipients used for the formulationare biodegradable and approved for topicalapplication [ 34,35]. However, there is stillcontroversy about the toxicity and safety ofusing nanomaterials in cosmeceuticals [ 36].Although nanomaterials may be present informulations as active ingredients, rheologymodiﬁers, or carriers, their use and role in
modiﬁers, or carriers, their use and role inmarketed cosmetics generally remain undis-closed because of the current mistrust towardstheir application [ 26]. Usually, nanoparticles arementioned in some technical informationabout the manufacturing process or on theproduct packaging if they are intentionallysynthesized or added to the formulation [ 26].Consequently, the identiﬁcation of commer-cially available cosmetics based on nanotech-nology is quite challenging. Moreover, there is arecognized need for research into the efﬁcacyand safety with precise guidelines for manufac-turing, advertising, nanotoxicological testing,and safe use of nanocosmetics [ 27,28,33,36,37].In this review, the clinical evidence for reti-noids used for topical antiaging treatments iscritically discussed. Also, an overview of thecomparison clinical trials between the topicalformulations with tretinoin as a gold standard
formulations with tretinoin as a gold standardand other retinoids is presented. In addition,the clinical evidence for the antiaging efﬁcacyof recently developed retinoid nanoformula-tions is addressed.This article is based on previously conducted
of recently developed retinoid nanoformula-tions is addressed.This article is based on previously conductedstudies and does not contain any new studieswith human participants or animals performedby any of the authors.5354 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
CLINICAL EVIDENCE1st GenerationTretinoinTretinoin (all -trans -retinoic acid) is consideredthe gold standard for clinically effective topicalretinoids used in antiaging treatments. Treti-noin is the most potent and best studied reti-noid for its antiaging properties [ 38]. Topicaltretinoin formulations (concentrations rangingfrom 0.01% to 0.1%; the most commonly usedare 0.025%, 0.05%, or 0.1%) are approved asprescription medicines for the treatment ofacne vulgaris, facial wrinkles, and hyperpig-mentation. Numerous clinical studies haveconﬁrmed the efﬁcacy of tretinoin in the treat-ment of photoaging skin [ 39–45]. The long-term safety and efﬁcacy of 0.05% tretinoin inthe treatment of moderate to severe facialphotodamage were evaluated in a 2-year pla-cebo-controlled clinical trial involving 204subjects [ 45]. The study results suggest thatlong-term use of 0.05% tretinoin emollientcream with a once-daily application is a safe andeffective treatment.
effective treatment.Although the most commonly used formu-lations for the treatment of aging skin contain0.05% tretinoin, the optimal concentration,application regimen, and duration of treatmentmust be individualized by considering the bal-ance between efﬁcacy and irritation [ 12]. Gen-erally, tretinoin at a concentration of 0.025% isconsidered therapeutically effective with a rea-sonable safety proﬁle [ 46]. Because the retinoidresponse is dose-dependent, some studies com-pared the performance of formulations withdifferent concentrations [ 42–44]. Generally, theformulations with lower concentrations resul-ted in less pronounced but signiﬁcantimprovement in the clinical and histologiccharacteristics of the treated photoaged skinwith a lower incidence of adverse effects com-pared to the higher concentrations. To avoid aretinoid dermatitis reaction, it is recommendedto start treatment with a lower concentration ofthe active ingredient and gradually increase the
the active ingredient and gradually increase theconcentration to a tolerable level by usingmoisturizers to keep the skin hydrated [ 47].There is no consensus on the duration of treti-noin therapy. It is recommended that initialtreatment is followed by long-term mainte-nance therapy with regular application of theretinoid at lower concentrations and/or lessfrequently [ 46].Besides formulations with low tretinoincontent, nanotechnology-based formulationsare also being tested to provide sustained releaseand minimize adverse effects. Another reasonfor developing nanoformulations of tretinoin isits proven instability in the presence of lightand oxygen [ 48]. Isotretinoin is the maindegradation product of tretinoin when exposedto light [ 49].Different types of nanocarriers with tretinoinhave been developed [ 50–60]. In most studies,in vitro permeation studies and drug releasetests were performed. Some authors have also
tests were performed. Some authors have alsoperformed in vivo skin irritation tests in rats[50,56] or rabbits [ 52] comparing the developednanoformulations with conventional formula-tions containing tretinoin. Overall, prolongedrelease of the active ingredient, improved sta-bility, and reduced irritation were achieved. Inaddition, Yamaguchi et al. [ 56], who developedCaCO3-coated nanomicelles containing treti-noin, evaluated the anti-wrinkle properties ofthe formulation by performing in vivo study inmice. The results showed better pharmacologi-cal effects of the nanoformulation (0.1%) com-pared to the tretinoin–Vaseline ointment(0.1%), including thicker epidermis and over-expression of heparin-binding epidermalgrowth factor mRNA as well as increased pro-duction of hyaluronan between epidermal lay-ers [56].Nasrollahi et al. [ 60] also studied for the ﬁrsttime in vivo the safety of two formulations
time in vivo the safety of two formulationscontaining tretinoin (0.05%)—nanoemulsionsand NLCs—by conducting a 1-week controlledclinical trial with 20 volunteers. The tested for-mulations were reasonably safe for topicalapplication on the basis of the evaluatedparameters: skin pH, erythema index, skin
clinical trial with 20 volunteers. The tested for-mulations were reasonably safe for topicalapplication on the basis of the evaluatedparameters: skin pH, erythema index, skinhydration, and TEWL. Similarly, Lima et al. [ 55]conducted a clinical study and evaluated skinirritation of the developed gel formulationcontaining tretinoin NLCs (0.05%) compared tothe marketed tretinoin (0.05%). Twenty-eightAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5355
participants were enrolled in the study over a4-week period, and by measuring TEWL, as anon-invasive physiological measure of skinbarrier function, it was shown that skin irrita-tion was higher with the conventional tretinoinformulation. Since the performed studiesincluded only a small number of participantsover a short time with application to the fore-arm, the formulations need furtherinvestigation.The main goal of developing innovativenano-delivery systems containing tretinoin is toprovide a safe formulation with satisfactory usercompliance [ 61]. However, to date, there is nocommercially available nanoformulation withtretinoin on the market.IsotretinoinIsotretinoin is a cis-isomer of retinoic acidapproved for oral administration in capsules forthe treatment of acne, with a well-documentedadverse effect proﬁle ranging from xerosis toteratogenicity [ 62]. The efﬁcacy of isotretinoin(0.1% or 0.05%) for topical application in anti-
(0.1% or 0.05%) for topical application in anti-aging treatments of photodamaged skin hasbeen investigated in several studies [ 63–66].Maddin et al. [ 63] conducted a 36-week, multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled studywith 800 patients and showed that the appli-cation of 0.1% isotretinoin cream improved theoverall appearance of photodamaged skincompared to the vehicle-controlled group.Similar results were presented by Grifﬁths et al.[66], who conducted a 6-month, multicenter,randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlledclinical trial involving 346 subjects with pho-todamaged skin. It was conﬁrmed that theapplication of 0.05% isotretinoin in combina-tion with sunscreens improved the appearanceof the ﬁne wrinkles associated with photoagedskin [ 66]. The results were consistent with pre-viously performed studies by other authors[64,65]. It can be concluded that most of theperformed studies about topical application ofisotretinoin for photodamaged skin showed
isotretinoin for photodamaged skin showedstatistically signiﬁcant improvement in theoverall appearance of the skin including ﬁnelines and pigmentation.However, the use of topical isotretinoin for-mulations is limited because of skin irritationpotential and physicochemical instability [ 67].Therefore, some authors have developednanoformulations with isotretinoin to over-come the problems associated with the use ofconventional topical formulations, but most areintended for acne treatment [ 67–73].Raza et al. [ 69] developed a hydrogel for-mulation containing isotretinoin-loaded NLCs(0.05%) for the treatment of photoaged skin.The formulation was evaluated by in vivo studyfor its antiaging efﬁcacy on extrinsically pho-toaged mouse skin by assessing the biochemicaland macroscopic properties of the skin incomparison to two commercially available for-mulations containing tretinoin and isotretinoin[69]. The nanoformulation with isotretinoin
[69]. The nanoformulation with isotretinoinwas better tolerated and more effective com-pared to the evaluated commercial formula-tions. However, the concentration of the activeingredients in the compared formulations wasnot clearly stated. Further studies are needed toconﬁrm the promising potential of the devel-oped nanoformulation.AlitretinoinAlitretinoin is a retinoid that binds to all sub-classes of RARs and RXRs [ 74]. Alitretinoin gel atdoses of 0.1% and 0.05% is approved as amedicine for the topical treatment of Kaposi’ssarcoma. To our knowledge, the efﬁcacy of 0.1%alitretinoin gel in the treatment of photoagedskin has been studied only in one small,16-week open-label pilot study with 20 partici-pants [ 75]. The formulation improved evaluatedskin parameters, but with a high incidence ofside effects.RetinolRetinol is a compound with multifunctionaleffects on photodamaged skin, includinginduced production of hyaluronic acid, colla-
induced production of hyaluronic acid, colla-gen, and elastin, as well as epidermal prolifera-tion and differentiation [ 76–78].Compared to tretinoin, retinol is about ten-fold less potent [ 10,14]. For example, retinol ata concentration of 0.25% is considered to be as
Compared to tretinoin, retinol is about ten-fold less potent [ 10,14]. For example, retinol ata concentration of 0.25% is considered to be aseffective as 0.025% tretinoin, without signiﬁ-cant side effects and irritation [ 79]. The maxi-mum recommended concentration of retinol in5356 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
hand and face creams and other leave-on orrinse-off cosmetics is 0.3% [ 80].Compared to other retinoids in cosmeceuti-cals, retinol is the most evaluated by random-ized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled, whole,or split-face clinical trials [ 81]. Formulationswith different retinol concentrations (from0.075% to 0.5%) have been evaluated for theirantiaging efﬁcacy. Some authors reported sta-tistically signiﬁcant improvements in theassessed parameters compared to vehicle[82–85], while others did not conﬁrm positivetreatment outcome [ 86]. However, as suggestedby Spierings [ 81], considering the limitations ofthe performed studies, the wide range of con-centrations used, and the declared conﬂicts ofinterest in the sponsored studies, it is ques-tionable whether the positive study results trulyreﬂect the efﬁcacy of the active ingredient inthe product.To prove the efﬁcacy of retinol, some authorshave also conducted comparison clinical studies
have also conducted comparison clinical studieswith tretinoin. Babcock et al. [ 87] conducted aclinical study and compared the efﬁcacy ofthree sustained-release cosmetic formulationscontaining 0.25%, 0.5%, or 1.0% retinol withprescription creams containing 0.025%, 0.05%,or 0.1% tretinoin. No statistically signiﬁcantdifferences were found in the assessed efﬁcacyparameters between retinol and tretinoin for-mulations [ 87] (Table 2). Recently, a 12-week,double-blind, controlled clinical trial was per-formed comparing the performance of threeretinol serums (0.25%, 0.5%, 1.0%) and treti-noin creams (0.025%, 0.05%, 0.1%) by follow-ing a step-up protocol to increase the dose ofthe applied formulation in combination with amoisturizer [ 88]. The retinol formulations per-formed equivalent to or better than the treti-noin creams.Kong et al. [ 89] evaluated the effects on theepidermis of the weekly application of 0.1%
epidermis of the weekly application of 0.1%tretinoin, 0.1% retinol, and a base formulationon the forearm under occlusion for 1 day duringa 4-week period in six participants. Comparedto the vehicle control group, both 0.1% retinoland 0.1% tretinoin formulation signiﬁcantlyincreased epidermal thickness and upregulatedthe genes for collagen type I and III [ 89]. How-ever, the retinol effects were approximatelytwo-fold lower compared to tretinoin. Addi-tionally, the efﬁcacy of 0.1% retinol formula-tion in the reduction of facial wrinkles wasconﬁrmed by facial image analysis in a 12-weekstudy that included 41 healthy women [ 89]. Thestudy did not include a control group.Retinol is often combined with other activeingredients to achieve synergistic effects andpositive clinical results. Bouloc et al. [ 90] com-pared the efﬁcacy of a commercial cosmeticproduct with 0.2% retinol and 2% tetrahydro-jasmonic acid to a 0.025% tretinoin formula-
tion. Results indicated that formulationsprovided comparable effects but the retinolformulation was better tolerated and perceivedby participants (Table 2).Recently, Chien et al. [ 91] published a studyin which a topical formulation containing acombination of three retinoids (1.1%: retinol(1%), retinyl acetate (0.05%), and retinylpalmitate (0.05%)) was compared in terms ofantiaging efﬁcacy and tolerability with a topicaltretinoin formulation (0.02%), involvingpatients with moderate to severe facial photo-damage. The study suggests that cosmeceuticalscontaining a combination of retinol and retinylesters may have a comparable antiaging effectto tretinoin (Table 2).Performed clinical studies for the antiagingefﬁcacy of retinol have limitations includingsmall sample size and lack of a vehicle controlgroup which limits the robustness of the resultsand the validity of the conclusions. Studies fortopical treatments need to be vehicle controlled
topical treatments need to be vehicle controlledas vehicle alone can also produce signiﬁcantimprovements on the skin [ 81]. However, inpractice vehicle-controlled clinical studies arerare.The need for stabilization of retinol formu-
as vehicle alone can also produce signiﬁcantimprovements on the skin [ 81]. However, inpractice vehicle-controlled clinical studies arerare.The need for stabilization of retinol formu-lations is well known because of its sensitivity tolight, oxygen, heat, and heavy metals [ 80,92]. Arecent study that evaluated the stability of 12commercially available products with declaredretinoids conﬁrmed the instability of retinoidsin almost all cosmetic products by long-termand accelerated stability testing [ 92]. It is rec-ommended that retinol in cosmetics is stabi-lized through appropriate formulation, sinceretinol in cosmetic formulations is generallystable for less than 6 months if manufacturedAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5357
Table 2 Comparison clinical studies: tretinoin vs other topical retinoids in retinoid formulations used in facial antiage treatmentsRetinoid Clinical study Duration Subjects Comparison Evaluated parameters Results ReferencesRetinol Randomized,double-blind,split-facecomparisonclinical study12 weeks 65 Retinol 0.25%, 0.5%, and1.0%, vs tretinoin0.025%, 0.05% and0.1%Overall photodamage, ﬁnelines/wrinkles, coarselines/wrinkles, skin tonebrightness, mottledpigmentation, tactileroughnessStatistically signiﬁcantimprovements frombaseline in all efﬁcacyparameters. Nostatistically signiﬁcantdifferences in efﬁcacybetween the formulationswas observed[87]Retinol Randomized,parallel, double-blind, whole-face,controlled clinicalstudy3 months 120 Retinol 0.2%/tetrahydrojasmonicacid 2% cream vstretinoin 0.025% creamClinical efﬁcacy evaluationsof wrinkles (frontal andglabellar area, eyes area,nasolabial fold), pores,mottled pigmentation andglobal photodamageThree-dimensional
Three-dimensionalmeasurements of theperiorbital skin relief(wrinkles, ﬁne lines, andskin texture) wasperformedBoth products improvedconsiderably wrinkles,mottled pigmentation,pores, and globalphotodamage. Nostatistically signiﬁcantdifferences between bothproducts were observed[90]Retinol Double-blinded,single-center,parallel-arm,whole-face,comparison study24 weeks 24 Formulation with retinol(1%), retinyl acetate(0.05%), and retinylpalmitate (0.05%) vstretinoin 0.02%Wrinkles, pigmentation,yellowing, and overallclinical severity of thephotodamage as scored onthe Grifﬁths scale forassessment of the globalphotodamageNo signiﬁcant differences inefﬁcacy between theretinoid formulation andtretinoin 0.02% inGrifﬁths photoagingscores[91]5358 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
Table 2 continuedRetinoid Clinical study Duration Subjects Comparison Evaluated parameters Results ReferencesRetinaldehyde Randomized,double-blind,vehicle-controlled,whole-face clinicaltrial44 weeks 125 Retinaldehyde 0.05% vstretinoin 0.05% vsvehicleOptical proﬁlometry of skinsilicone replica, assessingfor deepness androughness of the wrinklesSigniﬁcant reduction of thewrinkle and roughnessfeaturesNo statistically signiﬁcantdifferences between thetreatment groups at anyassessment time point wasobserved[107]Retinaldehyde Randomized,double-blind,split-facecomparison study12 weeks 30 Retinaldehyde proretinalhydrogel containing0.025% retinoid vs0.025% tretinoinhydrogelEvaluation of skin aging(ﬁne lines and wrinkles)and seven skin parameters,namely surface, volume,energy, entropy,homogeneity, contrast,and variance valuesRetinaldehydenanoformulation showedbetter antiaging efﬁcacy inthe evaluated parameterscompared to tretinoin[110]Adapalene Multicenter,randomized,
Adapalene Multicenter,randomized,investigator-blinded, whole-face, parallel-group comparisonstudy24 weeks 128 0.3% adapalene gel vs0.05% tretinoin creamEvaluation of the globalcutaneous photoaging,periorbital and foreheadwrinkles, ephelides/melanosis and actinickeratosisSigniﬁcant improvement ofthe evaluated parameters:global cutaneousphotoaging, periorbitaland forehead wrinkles,ephelides/melanosis, andactinic keratosisNo statistically signiﬁcantdifference between thetreatments was observed[158]Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5359
Table 2 continuedRetinoid Clinical study Duration Subjects Comparison Evaluated parameters Results ReferencesTazarotene Prospective weeklymulticenter,investigator-masked, whole-face, randomized,vehicle-controlled,parallel groupstudy24 weeks 349 0.01%, 0.025%, 0.05%,and 0.1% tazarotenecream vs 0.05%tretinoin emollient vsvehicleFine wrinkling, mottledhyperpigmentation,lengthiness, irregulardepigmentation, tactileroughness, coarsewrinkling, telangiectasia,pore size, elastosis, actinickeratoses, and overallintegrated assessment ofthe individual signs ofphotodamageSigniﬁcant improvementwas observed for themottledhyperpigmentation, ﬁnewrinkling, and the overallintegrated assessment ofthe individual signs ofphotodamage comparedto vehicle. Tazarotene0.05% and tretinoin0.05% producedcomparable results.Tazarotene 0.1% was themost effective among thetested formulations[150]Tazarotene Multicenter, double-blind,randomized,whole-face,parallel-groupstudy24 weeks 173 0.1% tazarotene vs 0.05%
tretinoin emollientcreamFine wrinkling, mottledhyperpigmentation, coarsewrinkling, irregulardepigmentation,lentigines, elastosis, tactileroughness, telangiectasia,and actinic keratosesTazarotene 0.1% creamoffers signiﬁcantly fasterimprovement comparedto tretinoin 0.05%emollient cream in thetreatment ofphotodamaged skinTazarotene efﬁcacy wassigniﬁcantly better for ﬁnewrinkling and the overallintegrated assessment ofphotodamage, mottledhyperpigmentation, andcoarse wrinkling[151]5360 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
under an inert atmosphere and stored, forexample, in aluminum tubes at 20 /C176C or below[80]. Considering that such products are notmanufactured and stored in this way in prac-tice, the validity of the results from the per-formed studies is questionable and cannot beattributed solely to the retinol effect [ 81].However, the stability of retinoids in cosmeticsis formulation-dependent and must be evalu-ated on a case-by-case basis [ 92]. In addition,Temova Rakus ˇa et al. [ 93] evaluated the con-tent-related quality of 35 commercially avail-able cosmetic products containing retinol andother retinoids (mainly retinyl palmitate) andfound signiﬁcant inconsistencies in labelingand deviations from the declared content, e.g.,a very low content or a much higher concen-tration than the maximum concentration rec-ommended by the Scientiﬁc Committee onConsumer Safety at the European Commission.Considering the study ﬁndings and the fact thatmost cosmetic products do not indicate the
most cosmetic products do not indicate theactive ingredient content on the packaging,which is important for assessment of the pro-duct safety and efﬁcacy, stricter regulations andquality controls are recommended [ 93].Different methods are being investigated toimprove the stability of retinol cosmetic for-mulations, including nanotechnology. Conse-quently, various nanoformulations with retinolhave been developed [ 94–98]. Boskabadi et al.[94] developed SLNs with retinol (0.5%) byultrasonication procedure and incorporatedthem into gel formulations. The results of thein vitro cytotoxicity, in vitro permeation, andin vivo skin irritation testing in rats werefavorable, suggesting that SLNs could be suit-able carriers for topical delivery of retinol. Junet al. [ 96] developed a cream containing vac-uum-assisted lipid nanoparticles with retinol(0.1% or 0.3%) and evaluated the permeationproperties of the formulation in an in vitro
properties of the formulation in an in vitrostudy on porcine skin and its effects on areconstructed 3D human skin model. Thedeveloped formulation with retinol-loaded lipidnanocarriers exhibited beneﬁcial propertiessuch as improved penetration, low irritationproﬁle, and increased epidermis thicknesscompared to the other tested formulations inthe study [ 96].Clinical studies evaluating the antiagingeffects of nanoformulations containing retinolare lacking.RetinaldehydeAs a natural precursor of retinoic acid with afavorable activity/tolerance ratio after topicalapplication, retinaldehyde is considered themost effective retinoid in cosmeceuticals[11,99,100]. Oxidation of retinaldehyde totretinoin is differentiation-dependent and moreefﬁciently performed by differentiated ker-atinocytes [ 101,102]. The low irritation proﬁleof retinaldehyde is due to the limited capacityof keratinocytes, since topically applied reti-
of keratinocytes, since topically applied reti-naldehyde does not bind to retinoid receptors,but is predominantly converted to retinyl estersand only a small fraction is metabolized to tre-tinoin, which is responsible for the biologicalactivity [ 101,103]. It is considered that skinirritation is partly a result of the receptors’‘‘overload’’ with non-physiological amounts ofexogenous tretinoin [ 102] and with retinalde-hyde as a precursor this process is prevented[100,101].Compared to retinol esters, the efﬁcacy ofretinaldehyde in antiaging treatments is sup-ported by stronger evidence. Several studiesevaluated the efﬁcacy of retinaldehyde on agedand photoaged skin [ 104–106]. Only Creidiet al. [ 107] performed a comparison clinicalstudy and evaluated the efﬁcacy and tolerabilityof 0.05% retinaldehyde cream compared to0.05% tretinoin cream and vehicle in patientswith photodamaged skin (Table 2). Both for-mulations were effective on the basis of the
mulations were effective on the basis of theassessed changes of the wrinkle and roughnessfeatures, but tretinoin caused more local irrita-tion and lower compliance in patients. How-ever, no statistically signiﬁcant differences inassessed parameters were observed between
tion and lower compliance in patients. How-ever, no statistically signiﬁcant differences inassessed parameters were observed betweenretinaldehyde and tretinoin or between reti-naldehyde and vehicle group (Table 2).Recently, Kwon et al. [ 108] conducted a3-month randomized, double-blind, controlledclinical trial comparing the efﬁcacy of 0.1% and0.05% retinaldehyde creams in 40 women. Thedata showed improvement in photoaged skin interms of hydration, wrinkles, skin roughness,and reduction in TEWL, although no vehicleAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5361
control group was included. The only statisti-cally signiﬁcant difference between the twogroups was observed in the melanin index,which was higher in 0.1% retinaldehyde group[108].Formulations containing retinaldehyde at aconcentration of 0.05% are considered effectiveand well tolerated [ 100]. Topical application ofretinaldehyde, even when applied at higherconcentrations or during a longer period, is alsonot associated with detectable change in theconstitutive levels of plasma retinoids due toskin metabolism [ 109]. Retinaldehyde is also ahighly unstable molecule prone to autooxida-tion and photooxidation [ 110]. Various formu-lations based on nanotechnology are beingdeveloped for retinaldehyde as a compoundwith high antiaging potential and physico-chemical instability.Pisetpackdeekul et al. [ 110] developedproretinal nanoparticles for controlled releaseof retinaldehyde by grafting retinaldehyde on
of retinaldehyde by grafting retinaldehyde onchitosan. The formulation was stability testedand evaluated for its irritation potential andhistological changes in the skin by performingtests on rats and human volunteers. In addition,the antiaging efﬁcacy of the hydrogel formula-tion with proretinal nanoparticles was evalu-ated in comparison with a 0.025% tretinoinhydrogel (Table 2). The controlled release of theactive ingredient resulted in improved stimula-tion of the epidermal proliferation with mini-mized side effects [ 110]. Similarly, byperforming an in vitro cytotoxicity study onkeratinocytes, an in vivo skin irritation, and abiological activity study on rats’ skin, Lim-charoen et al. [ 111] suggested that proretinalnanoparticles can be used as an effective systemfor sustained delivery of retinaldehyde.Nayak et al. [ 112] developed NLCs loadedwith coenzyme Q10and retinaldehyde (0.05%)and evaluated the efﬁcacy and safety of differ-
and evaluated the efﬁcacy and safety of differ-ent formulations with in vitro release andcytotoxicity, ex vivo skin permeation, andin vivo skin irritation and therapeutic efﬁcacytesting on wrinkles in mice. The NLCs gel for-mulation with both active ingredients showed asigniﬁcant reduction in wrinkles and bettersafety proﬁle than other tested formulations.Further studies are needed to evaluate theclinical efﬁcacy of retinaldehyde in variouscosmetic formulations.Retinyl PalmitateRetinyl palmitate (RP) is the most abundantform of retinol esters found endogenously inthe skin [ 113]. As a thermally stable alternativeto retinol, it is widely used in antiaging cos-metics. However, compared to retinol, RP ismore prone to photodegradation [ 114]. It hasbeen shown that RP can be a prooxidant undercertain conditions, such as photo-irradiation,through its toxic photodegradation products,generation of reactive oxygen species, induc-
generation of reactive oxygen species, induc-tion of lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage[113,115]. In addition, there is evidence thattopical application of cosmetics containing RPmay enhance UVR-induced photococarcino-genesis [ 116]. The long-term consequences ofthe use of RP-containing cosmetics have notbeen thoroughly investigated [ 117]. However,on the basis of current knowledge and availabledata, RP is considered a safe cosmetic ingredientwhen used in current practice and at the rec-ommended concentrations of 0.05% in bodylotions and 0.3% (retinol equivalents) in creamsand leave-on or rinse-off products [ 80]. RP at aconcentration of 0.6% is half as active com-pared to 0.25% retinol [ 79].No published clinical study has exclusivelyinvestigated the use of RP as an antiaging agentunder normal conditions of use. There is alsoonly one published study that compared theantiaging effects of two different commercialcosmetic products containing RP [ 118]. How-
cosmetic products containing RP [ 118]. How-ever, the RP content in the formulations wasnot disclosed. In general, most of the studiesthat evaluated the efﬁcacy of retinol esters asantiaging agents in cosmetics have method-ological issues and limitations [ 119,120].Therefore, there is a clear lack of evidence from
that evaluated the efﬁcacy of retinol esters asantiaging agents in cosmetics have method-ological issues and limitations [ 119,120].Therefore, there is a clear lack of evidence fromadequately designed and controlled clinical tri-als to support the use of RP for antiagingpurposes.Nevertheless, RP is a very popular cosmeticingredient and there is ongoing research toimprove its stability and efﬁcacy through variousformulation approaches, including nanoformu-lations [ 54,121–128], microencapsulation5362 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
[124,129], or combination with other ingredi-ents such as pectin [ 124,130]. Most of thedeveloped formulation s have been evaluatedby various in vitro or ex vivo tests, includingrelease and skin permeation studies [ 54,121,124,125,127,128,131], skin irritation test[123], in vitro safety proﬁle and in vitro antioxi-dant activity [ 126]. Some authors went a stepfurther and evaluated the developed formulationswith in vivo studies. Jeon et al. [ 128] developedSLNs with RP and incorporated them in hydrogel(1000 IU/g and 2500 IU/g as active vitamin A, RPcontent). The formulations were evaluated within vivo anti-wrinkle study in mice. On the basis ofthe results, it was suggested that SLNs with RP canbe used for the development of effective anti-wrinkle formulations. Moreover, Pena-Rodrı ´guezet al. [ 122] developed transfersomes with RP(1.1%) integrated into liposome membrane with apredicted shelf life of 36 months. The in vitrostudy showed increased penetrationof RP into the
skin compared to the formulation with free RP. Inaddition,aninvivostudyincludingsixvolunteersevaluated the compatibility with the skin of theemulsion prepared with RP transfersomes (0.55%)[122]. Measurements of TEWL and penetration ofRP into the stratum corneum showed that theemulsion with RP transfersomes did not affect theskin integrity. All studies performed showedbeneﬁcial properties of the developed topicalnanoformulations such as improved formulationstability, higher penetration, and low skin irrita-tion. Similar to other retinoids contained innanoformulations, comprehensive in vivo andclinical studies of RP formulations are needed, asmost published studies include only in vitroevaluations.Interestingly, there is no published, well-de-signed clinical study that conﬁrms the antiag-ing effects of RP on the skin, but compared toother retinoids, it is a very popular compoundfor developing new formulations. Overall, there
for developing new formulations. Overall, thereis a lack of clinical evidence supporting the useof RP as an antiaging agent in both conven-tional and nanoformulations.Retinyl PropionateRetinyl propionate is a retinyl ester that isconsidered to have a stronger retinoid activitycompared to retinol and RP, as shown by Bjerkeet al. [ 132] in in vitro and ex vivo skin models. Itis also the ﬁrst retinyl ester that has been clini-cally evaluated by Green et al. [ 133], who per-formed a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 48-week study with retinyl propi-onate cream (0.15%). Although minimalimprovement trends were noted in photoagedskin, no statistically signiﬁcant effects wereobserved compared to vehicle. Some studiesshowed that combining retinyl propionate withother agents may increase its efﬁcacy in anti-aging treatments [ 134,135]. To our knowledge,no published studies are addressing the incor-poration of retinyl propionate into nanotech-
nology delivery systems. In light of recentﬁndings identifying retinyl propionate as acompound with pronounced antiaging poten-tial, further research is needed.Retinyl AcetateRetinyl acetate is a popular retinoid derivativeused as a commercial cosmetic ingredient inantiaging products [ 136]. To date, no publishedclinical study has evaluated the antiaging efﬁ-cacy of retinyl acetate as a single active ingre-dient in a topical formulation. Retinyl acetatehas been studied as a cocarcinogen, but thecurrent evidence on its effects on photocar-cinogenesis does not provide a consistentmechanistic explanation for the results of dif-ferent studies [ 115]. Arayachukeat et al. [ 136]developed polymeric nanoparticles containingretinyl acetate to improve the photostability ofthe compound. The results showed that thedelivery of retinyl acetate to the dermis could beachieved by a suitable polymeric carrier.Retinyl RetinoateRetinyl retinoate was synthesized by a conden-
Retinyl retinoate was synthesized by a conden-sation reaction between retinol and retinoicacid to achieve improved photostability [ 137].The compound is considered more stable and
Retinyl retinoate was synthesized by a conden-sation reaction between retinol and retinoicacid to achieve improved photostability [ 137].The compound is considered more stable andless irritating compared to other ﬁrst-generationretinoid derivatives with comparable ability toinduce hyaluronan production [ 138]. The efﬁ-cacy of retinyl retinoate in the treatment of ﬁnewrinkles in photoaged skin is also supported byclinical data [ 139–141]. Considering that theAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5363
performed studies have limitations, including asmall sample size, further studies are needed toprove the potential of retinyl retinoate as anantiaging agent.Lee et al. [ 142] developed different nanofor-mulations with retinyl retinoate and investi-gated in vitro the active ingredient release. Thestudy suggests that NLCs may be a suitable de-livery system for topical application of retinylretinoate.Retinyl N-Formyl AspartamateRetinyl N-formyl aspartamate is a retinoidderivative with higher photostability and lowerirritation potential compared to retinol [ 143].Its efﬁcacy on photoaged skin was investigatedin a 24-week, prospective, single-blind, ran-domized, controlled split-face study with 24participants [ 144]. The retinyl N-formyl aspar-tamate cream was well tolerated when appliedtwice daily and signiﬁcantly improved theassessed parameters compared to vehicle. How-ever, the study has limitations, including smallsample size.
sample size.Overall, there is a lack of evidence support-ing the use of the commonly used retinyl estersin antiaging cosmetics (RP, retinyl propionate,retinyl retinoate, retinyl acetate).2nd GenerationCurrently, second-generation retinoids are notused as active ingredients in formulations fortopical application [ 145].3rd GenerationTazaroteneTazarotene is a prodrug of tazarotenic acid withselectivity toward RAR- band RAR- cbut nottoward RXRs [ 22]. It is currently regulated asmedicine and approved in topical formulations(0.045%, 0.05%, or 0.1%) for the treatment ofpsoriasis and acne. Also, the 0.1% formulationof tazarotene is approved as an adjunctive agentfor the treatment of facial ﬁne wrinkling, pig-mentation, and benign lentigines.The use of 0.1% tazarotene for treatment ofphotodamage is considered safe and effectivewith mild to moderate adverse effects [ 146].Kang et al. [ 147] conducted a 24-week, multi-center, double-blind, randomized, vehicle-con-
center, double-blind, randomized, vehicle-con-trolled, parallel-group study involving 568patients with photodamaged skin. The once-daily 0.1% tazarotene cream was signiﬁcantlymore effective than the vehicle in reducing ﬁnewrinkles, mottled hyperpigmentation, lentigi-nes, irregular depigmentation, apparent poresize, elastosis, tactile roughness, and the overallassessment of photodamage [ 147]. The resultswere consistent with the previously publishedstudies [ 148,149].Some authors also performed clinical com-parison studies with tretinoin. Kang et al. [ 150]conducted a clinical study and compared theefﬁcacy of different concentrations of tazar-otene creams with 0.05% tretinoin cream. The0.1% tazarotene cream was as effective as stan-dard tretinoin cream and produced only mild tomoderate side effects (Table 2). Similar resultswere obtained in a study conducted by Loweet al. [ 151], suggesting that 0.1% tazarotenecream may provide comparable efﬁcacy with a
cream may provide comparable efﬁcacy with afaster improvement compared to 0.05% treti-noin cream (Table 2). Compared to tretinoin,tazarotene has been associated with a morefrequent occurrence of a burning sensation onthe skin, but only during the ﬁrst week oftreatment [ 151].To our knowledge, there are no recent clini-cal trials on tazarotene in antiaging treatments,and most published studies examine its efﬁcacyin the treatment of acne.Generally, the conducted studies suggestthat topical treatments with tazarotene andtretinoin have similar tolerability and frequencyof adverse effects, although tazarotene, as arepresentative of the selective retinoids, isexpected to be better tolerated. In practice, tre-tinoin is well established and commonly usedfor the treatment of aged skin. Considering thesimilar performance of the two agents in anti-aging treatments, perhaps the higher price isone of the reasons why tazarotene formulations
one of the reasons why tazarotene formulationsare not as widely used in clinical practice astretinoin.Although tazarotene has conﬁrmed potential
one of the reasons why tazarotene formulationsare not as widely used in clinical practice astretinoin.Although tazarotene has conﬁrmed potentialfor antiaging treatments, new nanotechnology-based formulations are being evaluated for5364 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
other indications such as wound healing [ 152]and psoriasis [ 153].AdapaleneThe activity of adapalene is selectively mediatedvia RAR- band RAR- creceptors [ 154]. In topicalformulations at a concentration of 0.1% or0.3%, adapalene is used to treat acne withclinically conﬁrmed efﬁcacy and tolerability butis also used off-label for treatment of photoag-ing [ 155]. Kang et al. [ 156] conducted aprospective, randomized, controlled, masked,two-center, parallel-group study and evaluatedthe efﬁcacy of adapalene gel at two concentra-tions (0.1% and 0.3%) compared with vehicle inpatients with actinic keratoses and solar lentig-ines. The 9-month study showed that adapalenesigniﬁcantly improved the assessed parametersof the photoaged skin with acceptable tolerabil-ity compared to the vehicle-treated group.Herane et al. [ 157] also recommended 0.3%adapalene gel as an effective and safe treatmentfor facial photodamage, as demonstrated by the6-month open-label study in Chilean women
6-month open-label study in Chilean womenwith cutaneous photoaging, although no vehi-cle control group was included in the study.In addition, a comparison study conductedby Bagatin et al. [ 158] showed that the clinicalefﬁcacy of 0.3% adapalene gel was comparableto 0.05% tretinoin cream (Table 2). Therefore,0.3% adapalene gel is recommended as aneffective treatment in patients with mild ormoderate photoaging [ 158]. Pinto et al. [ 54]developed NLCs formulation with 0.1% ada-palene by miniemulsion method and performedan in vitro release experiment using the equi-librium dialysis method. The new formulationshowed favorable properties from a technolog-ical perspective, but further studies are neededto reveal the potential of the formulation forantiaging treatments. Other nanoformulationscontaining adapalene are being developed andevaluated speciﬁcally for the treatment of acne[159,160].BexaroteneBexarotene is a selective agonist of all RXRs
Bexarotene is a selective agonist of all RXRssubtypes with a complex and not yet fullyevaluated mechanism of action [ 161]. As a 1%gel, bexarotene is used for topical treatment ofIA and IB persistent or refractory cutaneousT cell lymphoma. To our knowledge, there is nopublished study that has investigated the use ofbexarotene in antiaging treatments.4th GenerationTrifaroteneTrifarotene is currently approved in topicalformulations as a 0.005% cream for the treat-ment of acne [ 162]. Its efﬁcacy and safety proﬁlefor acne treatment is also being clinically eval-uated [ 163,164]. Trifarotene, as a selective RAR-cagonist with greater than 20-fold higherselectivity over RAR- aand RAR- breceptors, hasconﬁrmed depigmenting and antipigmentingactivity in animal models [ 165]. It is suggestedthat trifarotene, as a selective agonist of RAR- c(the predominant isoform in the dermis), haspotential for the treatment of photoaging, as it
potential for the treatment of photoaging, as itmay activate the same pathways induced bytretinoin [ 166]. On the basis of the results frompreclinical studies, trifarotene is expected tohave a better proﬁle compared to earlier gener-ation retinoids. However, to date, there is nopublished comparison clinical study thatdirectly evaluates the superiority of trifarotenein terms of efﬁcacy and tolerability. Therefore,the use of trifarotene as an antiaging agentrequires further research and clinical evalua-tion. Since it is a new generation of retinoids,new formulations are also likely to be developedin near future.Seletinoid GSeletinoid G is a synthetic retinoid with selec-tivity toward RAR- c[22]. Kim et al. [ 23] con-ducted an in vivo study in which formulationscontaining 1% seletinoid G, 0.1% tretinoin, orvehicle were applied occlusively to the buttockskin of 17 participants for 4 days. The resultsshowed that seletinoid G affected the expres-
sion of the assessed extracellular matrix pro-teins and connective tissue-degrading enzymessimilarly to tretinoin, and it was suggested thatit could repair altered connective tissue in old
sion of the assessed extracellular matrix pro-teins and connective tissue-degrading enzymessimilarly to tretinoin, and it was suggested thatit could repair altered connective tissue in oldskin and inhibit UV-induced collagen deﬁ-ciency in young skin [ 23]. Similarly, a skinAdv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5365
irritation test with three different concentra-tions of seletinoid G (0.25%, 0.5%, and 0.1%)and tretinoin (0.025%, 0.05%, and 0.1%) wasalso performed on six volunteers [ 23].Seletinoid G showed no irritation on the treatedarea compared to tretinoin. However, theresults cannot be generalized because the studyhas some limitations. A recent in vitro study hasalso shown that seletinoid G is a potent com-pound for antiaging treatments without signif-icant side effects, as it improves skin barrierfunction by promoting keratinocyte migrationand restoring abnormal collagen deposition inthe dermis [ 167]. To date, there is no publishedclinical study investigating the antiaging effectof seletinoid G under normal conditions of use.Although seletinoid G shows promising resultsas an antiaging agent, its potential has yet to beevaluated.DISCUSSIONClinical Evidence for ConventionalFormulationsCosmeceuticals containing retinoids are freelyavailable on the market compared to the pre-
available on the market compared to the pre-scribed formulations regulated as medicines.Customers expect cosmeceuticals to offer pen-etration of the active ingredient into the skinand clinical effects after topical application [ 13].However, cosmeceuticals are not regulated asmedicines in terms of safety, quality, and efﬁ-cacy and often contain ingredients for whichthere is no clinical evidence to support their use[14]. The results of published studies suggestthat tretinoin, included in formulations regu-lated as medicines, is the most well-establishedretinoid with solid evidence of antiaging efﬁ-cacy and approved indications for treatment ofwrinkles and photoaging.Overall, there is limited evidence from clin-ical research evaluating the antiaging efﬁcacy ofother retinoids compared to tretinoin as thegold standard. Comparisons with tretinoin bywhole or split-face clinical studies are per-formed for retinol, retinaldehyde, adapalene,
and tazarotene. Only retinol and retinaldehydeare found in cosmeceuticals, while adapaleneand tazarotene are regulated as medicines thatare also used for antiaging indications. Ada-palene and tazarotene are recommended asalternatives to tretinoin in patients with sensi-tive skin [ 47]. Retinol is the most clinicallystudied retinoid in cosmetics, while retinalde-hyde is considered the most promising. On theother hand, retinyl palmitate is the most pop-ular model compound for the development ofnew formulations, although its use as an anti-aging agent is not supported by clinical evi-dence. Also, there is a lack of clinical evidencefor the antiaging efﬁcacy of the other retinylesters since most of the performed studies havelimitations, such as a small number of partici-pants and/or a lack of a vehicle control group.In general, placebo-controlled double-blindstudies as a standard in clinical research arelacking for cosmetics [ 168]. Considering the
lacking for cosmetics [ 168]. Considering thelimitations of the clinical studies performed, theuse of retinoid cosmetics as a tretinoin equiva-lent is not justiﬁed and evidence-based. Ourﬁndings are consistent with previous studiesthat also suggested that in the case of cosme-ceuticals, the positive study outcome cannot beconsidered relevant information for clinicaldecision-making because most of the performedstudies have signiﬁcant methodological issuesand deﬁciencies in study design that limit therelevance of the results [ 81,168].Although the cosmetic market is constantlygrowing and many products are marketed withunrealistic claims, there is a lack of validatedmethods for evaluation of the product efﬁcacyand safety through comprehensive and stan-dardized testing. As a result of the competi-tiveness of the cosmetic industry and shortproduct development cycles, cosmeceuticals arebeing marketed with little or no clinical evalu-
being marketed with little or no clinical evalu-ation. Therefore, there is a need for trustworthyevidence from high-quality designed clinicalstudies that can guide clinicians in their deci-
being marketed with little or no clinical evalu-ation. Therefore, there is a need for trustworthyevidence from high-quality designed clinicalstudies that can guide clinicians in their deci-sion-making about treatment options and notjust serve as promotional material for the cos-metics industry.5366 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
Clinical Evidence for NanoformulationsOverall there is a lack of clinical studies evalu-ating the safety and efﬁcacy of nanoformula-tions compared to conventional formulations.From the literature review, most of the per-formed studies evaluated the nanoformulationscontaining retinoids by in vitro/in vivo perme-ation tests and in vivo irritation tests. To ourknowledge, only one study including humanvolunteers clinically evaluated the antiagingeffect of the developed nanoformulation withretinaldehyde and compared it with tretinoin[110].One of the reasons for the small number ofnanoformulations on the market is the lack ofrobust in vitro studies with conﬁrmed in vitro/in vivo correlations that can be used instead ofclinical studies [ 169]. Currently, the risk/beneﬁtratio of the topical nanoformulations is evalu-ated on a case-by-case basis because of the lackof harmonized quality standards and regulatoryframeworks [ 169]. Since clinical trials are not
frameworks [ 169]. Since clinical trials are notrequired for cosmetics, there is also a lack ofevidence to support the claimed efﬁcacy ofcosmetic nanoformulations.The use of nanomaterials in cosmeticsrequires a comprehensive safety assessment, asexposure via topical application may pose a riskfor adverse effects from insoluble and persistentnanoparticles that can reach unintended sites inthe body and interact with biological entities atthe molecular level [ 170]. One way to bridge thecurrent gap between research and commercial-ization of innovations and realize the fullpotential of new delivery systems is to imple-ment analytical and in vitro/in vivo evaluationstrategies for their characterization [ 171].As a result of restrictive regulations in somecountries, researchers are also looking for alter-natives to animal testing. For example, theCosmetics Regulation (EC) No. 1223/2009 inEurope prohibits animal testing for cosmetics
and marketing of cosmetic ingredients/productstested on animals since March 2013 [ 170].Therefore, toxicological data must be obtainedfrom scientiﬁcally validated alternatives such asin vitro and ex vivo studies, in silico models,and the use of physiologically based pharma-cokinetic and toxicokinetic modeling [ 170].Overall, the development of targeted deliverysystems with efﬁciently incorporated activeingredients, low irritability when applied to theskin, and control over the potential toxicity ofthe used nanomaterials is complex.In general, nanoformulations containingretinoids are advantageous compared to con-ventional formulations because they are morestable, penetrate the skin better, produce amodiﬁed release of the active ingredient at thesite of action, and cause fewer side effects andirritation. The results of the performed studieshighlight the promising potential of nanofor-
highlight the promising potential of nanofor-mulations for topical delivery, but the prelimi-nary results need to be supported by additionalin vivo testing and clinical studies. However,translating the results into clinical practice andscaling up the production are challengingbecause most studies use small batch formula-tions. Since most published results are frompreclinical studies, there is a need for compre-hensive clinical evidence for evaluation of thebeneﬁts and risks of nanoformulations fortopical use. The use of retinoids containingnanoformulations for topical antiaging treat-ments requires further research.CONCLUSIONMost of the performed studies emphasized theimportance of an appropriate combination ofactive ingredients, excipients, and technologi-cal processes to obtain a stable cosmetic productthat is effective and well tolerated. When asuitable formulation is used, signiﬁcant clinicaleffects on the skin are obtained as with treti-
noin, but with fewer side effects. Consequently,such a formulation leads to better user compli-ance and satisfaction. However, considering thelimitations of the performed studies, there is a
noin, but with fewer side effects. Consequently,such a formulation leads to better user compli-ance and satisfaction. However, considering thelimitations of the performed studies, there is aneed for additional studies that will providenew information and insights to support theuse of different retinoids in antiagingtreatments.Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5367
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSFunding. No funding was received for thisstudy or publication of this article.Authorship. All named authors meet theInternational Committee of Medical JournalEditors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship for thisarticle, take responsibility for the integrity ofthe work as a whole, and have given theirapproval for this version to be published.Author Contributions. All authors con-tributed to the study conception and design.The literature search and data analysis wereperformed by Daniela Milosheska. All authorsdrafted and/or critically revised the work. Allauthors read and approved the ﬁnalmanuscript.Disclosures. Daniela Milosheska and RobertRosˇkar have nothing to disclose.Compliance with Ethics Guidelines. Thisarticle is based on previously conducted studiesand does not contain any new studies withhuman participants or animals performed byany of the authors.Data Availability. Data sharing is not
Data Availability. Data sharing is notapplicable to this article because no datasetswere generated or analyzed during the currentstudy.Open Access. This article is licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution-NonCommer-cial 4.0 International License, which permitsany non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation,distribution and reproduction in any mediumor format, as long as you give appropriate creditto the original author(s) and the source, providea link to the Creative Commons licence, andindicate if changes were made. The images orother third party material in this article areincluded in the article’s Creative Commonslicence, unless indicated otherwise in a creditline to the material. If material is not includedin the article’s Creative Commons licence andyour intended use is not permitted by statutoryregulation or exceeds the permitted use, youwill need to obtain permission directly from thecopyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ .REFERENCES1. Shin JW, Kwon SH, Choi JY, et al. Molecularmechanisms of dermal aging and antiagingapproaches. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20(9):E2126.2. Zhang S, Duan E. Fighting against skin aging: theway from bench to bedside. Cell Transplant.2018;27(5):729–38.3. Ganguly B, Hota M, Pradhan J. Skin aging: impli-cations of UV radiation, reactive oxygen species andnatural antioxidants. In: Ahmad R, editor. Bio-chemistry. IntechOpen. 2022. https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/78654 . Accessed 1 Aug2022.4. Krutmann J, Schalka S, Watson REB, Wei L, MoritaA. Daily photoprotection to prevent photoaging.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed.2021;37(6):482–9.5. Lephart ED. Skin aging and oxidative stress: equol’santi-aging effects via biochemical and molecularmechanisms. Ageing Res Rev. 2016;31:36–54.6. Baumann L. Skin ageing and its treatment. J Pathol.2007;211(2):241–51.7. McCullough JL, Kelly KM. Prevention and treat-
7. McCullough JL, Kelly KM. Prevention and treat-ment of skin aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1067:323–31.8. Kim BH. Safety evaluation and anti-wrinkle effectsof retinoids on skin. Toxicol Res. 2010;26(1):61–6.9. Zasada M, Budzisz E. Retinoids: active moleculesinﬂuencing skin structure formation in cosmeticand dermatological treatments. Postepy DermatolAlergol. 2019;36(4):392–7.10. Riahi RR, Bush AE, Cohen PR. Topical retinoids:therapeutic mechanisms in the treatment of pho-todamaged skin. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2016;17(3):265–76.11. Sorg O, Antille C, Kaya G, Saurat JH. Retinoids incosmeceuticals. Dermatol Ther. 2006;19(5):289–96.5368 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
12. Hubbard BA, Unger JG, Rohrich RJ. Reversal of skinaging with topical retinoids. Plast Reconstr Surg.2014;133(4):481e-e490.13. Levin J, Momin SB. How much do we really knowabout our favorite cosmeceutical ingredients? J ClinAesthet Dermatol. 2010;3(2):22–41.14. Tetali B, Fahs FM, Mehregan D. Popular over-the-counter cosmeceutical ingredients and their clinicalefﬁcacy. Int J Dermatol. 2020;59(4):393–405.15. Resende DISP, Ferreira MS, Lobo JMS, Sousa E,Almeida IF. Skin depigmenting agents in anti-agingcosmetics: a medicinal perspective on emergingingredients. Appl Sci. 2022;12(2):775.16. Szyman ´ski Ł, Skopek R, Palusin ´ska M, et al. Retinoicacid and its derivatives in skin. Cells. 2020;9(12):E2660.17. Ng A, Evans K, North RV, Jones L, Purslow C.Impact of eye cosmetics on the eye, adnexa, andocular surface. Eye Contact Lens. 2016;42(4):211–20.18. Panchaud A, Csajka C, Merlob P, et al. Pregnancy
outcome following exposure to topical retinoids: amulticenter prospective study. J Clin Pharmacol.2012;52(12):1844–51.19. Kaplan YC, Ozsarfati J, Etwel F, Nickel C, Nulman I,Koren G. Pregnancy outcomes following ﬁrst-tri-mester exposure to topical retinoids: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol.2015;173(5):1132–41.20. Williams AL, Pace ND, DeSesso JM. Teratogenupdate: topical use and third-generation retinoids.Birth Defects Res. 2020;112(15):1105–14.21. Yin S, Luo J, Qian A, et al. Retinoids activate theirritant receptor TRPV1 and produce sensoryhypersensitivity. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(9):3941–51.22. Mukherjee S, Date A, Patravale V, Korting HC,Roeder A, Weindl G. Retinoids in the treatment ofskin aging: an overview of clinical efﬁcacy andsafety. Clin Interv Aging. 2006;1(4):327–48.23. Kim MS, Lee S, Rho HS, Kim DH, Chang IS, ChungJH. The effects of a novel synthetic retinoid,
JH. The effects of a novel synthetic retinoid,seletinoid G, on the expression of extracellularmatrix proteins in aged human skin in vivo. ClinChim Acta. 2005;362(1–2):161–9.24. Limcharoen B, Toprangkobsin P, Banlunara W,et al. Increasing the percutaneous absorption andfollicular penetration of retinal by topical applica-tion of proretinal nanoparticles. Eur J Pharm Bio-pharm. 2019;139:93–100.25. Souto EB, Fangueiro JF, Fernandes AR, et al.Physicochemical and biopharmaceutical aspectsinﬂuencing skin permeation and role of SLN andNLC for skin drug delivery. Heliyon. 2022;8(2):e08938.26. Salvioni L, Morelli L, Ochoa E, et al. The emergingrole of nanotechnology in skincare. Adv CollInterface Sci. 2021;293: 102437.27. Abu Hajleh MN, Abu-Huwaij R, Al-Samydai A, Al-Halaseh LK, Al-Dujaili EA. The revolution of cos-meceuticals delivery by using nanotechnology: anarrative review of advantages and side effects.J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021;20(12):3818–28.
J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021;20(12):3818–28.28. Alsabeelah N, Arshad MF, Hashmi S, Khan RA, KhanS. Nanocosmeceuticals for the management ofageing: rigors and vigors. J Drug Deliv Sci Technol.2021;63: 102448.29. Khater D, Nsairat H, Odeh F, et al. Design, prepa-ration, and characterization of effective dermal andtransdermal lipid nanoparticles: a review. Cosmet-ics. 2021;8(2):39.30. Romes NB, Abdul Wahab R, Abdul HM. The role ofbioactive phytoconstituents-loaded nanoemulsionsfor skin improvement: a review. BiotechnolBiotechnol Equip. 2021;35(1):711–30.31. Ahmad J. Lipid nanoparticles based cosmetics withpotential application in alleviating skin disorders.Cosmetics. 2021;8(3):84.32. Morales JO, Valde ´s K, Morales J, Oyarzun-AmpueroF. Lipid nanoparticles for the topical delivery ofretinoids and derivatives. Nanomed (Lond).2015;10(2):253–69.33. Garce ˆs A, Amaral MH, Sousa Lobo JM, Silva AC.Formulations based on solid lipid nanoparticles
Formulations based on solid lipid nanoparticles(SLN) and nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC) forcutaneous use: a review. Eur J Pharm Sci.2018;15(112):159–67.34. Doktorovova ´S, Kovac ˇevic´AB, Garcia ML, Souto EB.Preclinical safety of solid lipid nanoparticles and
cutaneous use: a review. Eur J Pharm Sci.2018;15(112):159–67.34. Doktorovova ´S, Kovac ˇevic´AB, Garcia ML, Souto EB.Preclinical safety of solid lipid nanoparticles andnanostructured lipid carriers: current evidence fromin vitro and in vivo evaluation. Eur J Pharm Bio-pharm. 2016;108:235–52.35. Gordillo-Galeano A, Mora-Huertas CE. Solid lipidnanoparticles and nanostructured lipid carriers: areview emphasizing on particle structure and drugrelease. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2018;133:285–308.36. Kaul S, Gulati N, Verma D, Mukherjee S, Nagaich U.Role of nanotechnology in cosmeceuticals: a reviewof recent advances. J Pharm (Cairo). 2018;2018:3420204.Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5369
37. Souto EB, Ja ¨ger E, Ja ¨ger A, et al. Lipid nanomaterialsfor targeted delivery of dermocosmetic ingredients:advances in photoprotection and skin anti-aging.Nanomater (Basel). 2022;12(3):377.38. Ascenso A, Ribeiro H, Marques HC, Oliveira H,Santos C, Simo ˜es S. Is tretinoin still a key agent forphotoaging management? Mini Rev Med Chem.2014;14(8):629–41.39. Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, Leyden JJ. Topicaltretinoin for photoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol.1986;15(4 Pt 2):836–59.40. Leyden JJ, Grove GL, Grove MJ, Thorne EG, LufranoL. Treatment of photodamaged facial skin withtopical tretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989;21(3 Pt2):638–44.41. Ellis CN, Weiss JS, Hamilton TA, Headington JT,Zelickson AS, Voorhees JJ. Sustained improvementwith prolonged topical tretinoin (retinoic acid) forphotoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1990;23(4 Pt1):629–37.42. Weinstein GD, Nigra TP, Pochi PE, et al. Topical
tretinoin for treatment of photodamaged skin. Amulticenter study. Arch Dermatol. 1991;127(5):659–65.43. Olsen EA, Katz HI, Levine N, et al. Tretinoin emol-lient cream for photodamaged skin: results of48-week, multicenter, double-blind studies. J AmAcad Dermatol. 1997;37(2 Pt 1):217–26.44. Grifﬁths CE, Kang S, Ellis CN, et al. Two concen-trations of topical tretinoin (retinoic acid) causesimilar improvement of photoaging but differentdegrees of irritation. A double-blind, vehicle-con-trolled comparison of 0.1% and 0.025% tretinoincreams. Arch Dermatol. 1995;131(9):1037–44.45. Kang S, Bergfeld W, Gottlieb AB, et al. Long-termefﬁcacy and safety of tretinoin emollient cream 0.05% in the treatment of photodamaged facial skin:a two-year, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.Am J Clin Dermatol. 2005;6(4):245–53.46. Darlenski R, Surber C, Fluhr JW. Topical retinoids inthe management of photodamaged skin: from the-ory to evidence-based practical approach. Br J Der-
matol. 2010;163(6):1157–65.47. Buchanan PJ, Gilman RH. Retinoids: literaturereview and suggested algorithm for use prior tofacial resurfacing procedures. J Cutan Aesthet Surg.2016;9(3):139–44.48. Prow TW, Grice JE, Lin LL, et al. Nanoparticles andmicroparticles for skin drug delivery. Adv DrugDeliv Rev. 2011;63(6):470–91.49. Tashtoush BM, Jacobson EL, Jacobson MK. UVA isthe major contributor to the photodegradation oftretinoin and isotretinoin: Implications for devel-opment of improved pharmaceutical formulations.Int J Pharm. 2008;352(1–2):123–8.50. Ghate VM, Lewis SA, Prabhu P, Dubey A, Patel N.Nanostructured lipid carriers for the topical deliveryof tretinoin. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2016;108:253–61.51. Raza K, Singh B, Lohan S, et al. Nano-lipoidal car-riers of tretinoin with enhanced percutaneousabsorption, photostability, biocompatibility andanti-psoriatic activity. Int J Pharm. 2013;456(1):65–72.52. Ebrahimi S, Mahjub R, Haddadi R, Vafaei SY. Design
and optimization of cationic nanocapsules fortopical delivery of tretinoin: application of the box-behnken design, in vitro evaluation, and ex vivoskin deposition study. Biomed Res Int. 2021;2021:4603545.53. Liu J, Zheng A, Peng B, Xu Y, Zhang N. Size-de-pendent absorption through stratum corneum bydrug-loaded liposomes. Pharm Res. 2021;38(8):1429–37.54. Pinto F, de Barros DPC, Reis C, Fonseca LP. Opti-mization of nanostructured lipid carriers loadedwith retinoids by central composite design. J MolLiq. 2019;293: 111468.55. Lima FA, Vilela RV, Ore ´ﬁce RL, et al. Nanostruc-tured lipid carriers enhances the safety proﬁle oftretinoin: in vitro and healthy human volunteers’studies. Nanomed (Lond). 2021;16(16):1391–409.56. Yamaguchi Y, Nagasawa T, Nakamura N, et al.Successful treatment of photo-damaged skin ofnano-scale atRA particles using a novel transdermaldelivery. J Control Release. 2005;104(1):29–40.57. Mandawgade SD, Patravale VB. Development of
57. Mandawgade SD, Patravale VB. Development ofSLNs from natural lipids: application to topicaldelivery of tretinoin. Int J Pharm. 2008;363(1–2):132–8.
57. Mandawgade SD, Patravale VB. Development ofSLNs from natural lipids: application to topicaldelivery of tretinoin. Int J Pharm. 2008;363(1–2):132–8.58. Shah KA, Date AA, Joshi MD, Patravale VB. Solidlipid nanoparticles (SLN) of tretinoin: potential intopical delivery. Int J Pharm. 2007;345(1–2):163–71.59. Ourique AF, Melero A, de Bona da Silva C, et al.Improved photostability and reduced skin perme-ation of tretinoin: development of a semisolidnanomedicine. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2011;79(1):95–101.60. Nasrollahi SA, Hassanzade H, Moradi A, et al. Safetyassessment of tretinoin loaded nano emulsion andnanostructured lipid carriers: a non-invasive trial on5370 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
human volunteers. Curr Drug Deliv. 2017;14(4):575–80.61. Raminelli ACP, Romero V, Semreen MH, LeonardiGR. Nanotechnological advances for cutaneousrelease of tretinoin: an approach to minimize sideeffects and improve therapeutic efﬁcacy. Curr MedChem. 2018;25(31):3703–18.62. Abdelmaksoud A, Lotti T, Anadolu R, et al. Low doseof isotretinoin: a comprehensive review. DermatolTher. 2020;33(2):e13251.63. Maddin S, Lauharanta J, Agache P, Burrows L, Zul-tak M, Bulger L. Isotretinoin improves the appear-ance of photodamaged skin: results of a 36-week,multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000;42(1 Pt 1):56–63.64. Armstrong RB, Lesiewicz J, Harvey G, Lee LF, SpoehrKT, Zultak M. Clinical panel assessment of photo-damaged skin treated with isotretinoin using pho-tographs. Arch Dermatol. 1992;128(3):352–6.65. Sendagorta E, Lesiewicz J, Armstrong RB. Topicalisotretinoin for photodamaged skin. J Am AcadDermatol. 1992;27(6 Pt 2):S15-18.
66. Grifﬁths CEM, Maddin S, Wiedow O, Marks R,Donald AE, Kahlon G. Treatment of photoaged skinwith a cream containing 0.05% isotretinoin andsunscreens. J Dermatolog Treat. 2005;16(2):79–86.67. Shiva G, Somaye M, Reza JM. Improved photosta-bility, reduced skin permeation and irritation ofisotretinoin by solid lipid nanoparticles. ActaPharm. 2012;62(4):547–62.68. Liu J, Hu W, Chen H, Ni Q, Xu H, Yang X. Iso-tretinoin-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles with skintargeting for topical delivery. Int J Pharm.2007;328(2):191–5.69. Raza K, Singh B, Singla N, Negi P, Singal P, KatareOP. Nano-lipoidal carriers of isotretinoin with anti-aging potential: formulation, characterization andbiochemical evaluation. J Drug Target. 2013;21(5):435–42.70. Bettoni CC, Felippi CC, de Andrade C, et al. Iso-tretinoin-loaded nanocapsules: stability and cuta-neous penetration by tape stripping in human andpig skin. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2012;8(2):258–71.
pig skin. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2012;8(2):258–71.71. Miastkowska MG, Sikora EB, Ogonowski J, ZielinaM, Łudzik A. The kinetic study of isotretinoinrelease from nanoemulsion. Coll Surfa A Physic-ochem Eng Aspects. 2016;510(1):63–8.72. Patwekar SL, Pedewad SR, Gattani S. Developmentand evaluation of nanostructured lipid carriers-based gel of isotretinoin. Part Sci Technol.2018;36(7):832–43.73. Gupta S, Wairkar S, Bhatt LK. Isotretinoin and a-tocopherol acetate-loaded solid lipid nanoparticletopical gel for the treatment of acne. J Microencap-sul. 2020;37(8):557–65.74. Cheng C, Michaels J, Scheinfeld N. Alitretinoin: acomprehensive review. Expert Opin Investig Drugs.2008;17(3):437–43.75. Baumann L, Vujevich J, Halem M, et al. Open-labelpilot study of alitretinoin gel 0.1% in the treatmentof photoaging. Cutis. 2005;76(1):69–73.76. Li WH, Wong HK, Serrano J, et al. Topical stabilized
retinol treatment induces the expression of HASgenes and HA production in human skin in vitroand in vivo. Arch Dermatol Res. 2017;309(4):275–83.77. Romana-Souza B, Silva-Xavier W, Monte-Alto-CostaA. Topical retinol attenuates stress-induced ageingsigns in human skin ex vivo, through EGFR activa-tion via EGF, but not ERK and AP-1 activation. ExpDermatol. 2019;28(8):906–13.78. Shao Y, He T, Fisher GJ, Voorhees JJ, Quan T.Molecular basis of retinol anti-ageing properties innaturally aged human skin in vivo. Int J Cosmet Sci.2017;39(1):56–65.79. Duell EA, Kang S, Voorhees JJ. Unoccluded retinolpenetrates human skin in vivo more effectivelythan unoccluded retinyl palmitate or retinoic acid.J Invest Dermatol. 1997;109(3):301–5.80. European Commission. Directorate general forhealth and food safety. Opinion on vitamin A(retinol, retinyl acetate, retinyl palmitate). 2016.https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2875/642264 . Acces-sed 13 Aug 2022.
sed 13 Aug 2022.81. Spierings NMK. Evidence for the efﬁcacy of over-the-counter vitamin A cosmetic products in theimprovement of facial skin aging: a systematicreview. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2021;14(9):33–40.
81. Spierings NMK. Evidence for the efﬁcacy of over-the-counter vitamin A cosmetic products in theimprovement of facial skin aging: a systematicreview. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2021;14(9):33–40.82. Tucker-Samaras S, Zedayko T, Cole C, Miller D,Wallo W, Leyden JJ. A stabilized 0.1% retinol facialmoisturizer improves the appearance of photo-damaged skin in an eight-week, double-blind,vehicle-controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol.2009;8(10):932–6.83. Randhawa M, Rossetti D, Leyden JJ, et al. One-yeartopical stabilized retinol treatment improves pho-todamaged skin in a double-blind, vehicle-con-trolled trial. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015r;14(3):271–80.Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5371
84. Kikuchi K, Suetake T, Kumasaka N, Tagami H.Improvement of photoaged facial skin in middle-aged Japanese females by topical retinol (vitamin Aalcohol): a vehicle-controlled, double-blind study.J Dermatol Treat. 2009;20(5):276–81.85. Belleme `re G, Stamatas GN, Brue `re V, Bertin C,Issachar N, Oddos T. Antiaging action of retinol:from molecular to clinical. Skin Pharmacol Physiol.2009;22(4):200–9.86. Gold MH, Kircik LH, Bucay VW, Kiripolsky MG,Biron JA. Treatment of facial photodamage using anovel retinol formulation. J Drugs Dermatol.2013;12(5):533–40.87. Babcock M, Mehta RC, Makino ET. A randomized,double-blind, split-face study comparing the efﬁ-cacy and tolerability of three retinol-based productsvs. three tretinoin-based products in subjects withmoderate to severe facial photodamage. J DrugsDermatol. 2015;14(1):24–30.88. Draelos ZD, Peterson RS. A double-blind, compara-
tive clinical study of newly formulated retinol ser-ums vs tretinoin cream in escalating doses: amethod for rapid retinization with minimized irri-tation. J Drugs Dermatol. 2020;19(6):625–31.89. Kong R, Cui Y, Fisher GJ, et al. A comparative studyof the effects of retinol and retinoic acid on histo-logical, molecular, and clinical properties of humanskin. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;15(1):49–57.90. Bouloc A, Vergnanini AL, Issa MC. A double-blindrandomized study comparing the association ofretinol and LR2412 with tretinoin 0.025% in pho-toaged skin. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2015;14(1):40–6.91. Chien AL, Kim DJ, Cheng N, et al. Biomarkers oftretinoin precursors and tretinoin efﬁcacy inpatients with moderate to severe facial photodam-age: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Dermatol.2022;158(8):879–86.92. Temova Rakus ˇaZˇ,Sˇkufca P, Kristl A, Ros ˇkar R.Retinoid stability and degradation kinetics in com-mercial cosmetic products. J Cosmet Dermatol.2021;20(7):2350–8.
93. Temova Rakus ˇaZˇ,Sˇkufca P, Kristl A, Ros ˇkar R.Quality control of retinoids in commercial cosmeticproducts. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2021;20(4):1166–75.94. Boskabadi M, Saeedi M, Akbari J, Morteza-SemnaniK, Hashemi SMH, Babaei A. Topical gel of vitamin asolid lipid nanoparticles: a hopeful promise as adermal delivery system. Adv Pharm Bull.2021;11(4):663–74.95. Goudon F, Cle ´ment Y, Ripoll L. Controlled releaseof retinol in cationic co-polymeric nanoparticles fortopical application. Cosmetics. 2020;7(2):29.96. Jun SH, Kim H, Lee H, Song JE, Park SG, Kang NG.Synthesis of retinol-loaded lipid nanocarrier viavacuum emulsiﬁcation to improve topical skindelivery. Polymers (Basel). 2021;13(5):826.97. Kim DG, Jeong YI, Choi C, et al. Retinol-encapsu-lated low molecular water-soluble chitosannanoparticles. Int J Pharm. 2006;319(1–2):130–8.98. Eskandar NG, Simovic S, Prestidge CA. Chemicalstability and phase distribution of all-trans-retinol
in nanoparticle-coated emulsions. Int J Pharm.2009;376(1–2):186–94.99. Fluhr JW, Vienne MP, Lauze C, Dupuy P, GehringW, Gloor M. Tolerance proﬁle of retinol, retinalde-hyde and retinoic acid under maximized and long-term clinical conditions. Dermatology.1999;199(Suppl 1):57–60.100. Saurat JH, Didierjean L, Masgrau E, et al. Topicalretinaldehyde on human skin: biologic effects andtolerance. J Invest Dermatol. 1994;103(6):770–4.101. Sorg O, Didierjean L, Saurat JH. Metabolism oftopical retinaldehyde. Dermatology.1999;199(Suppl 1):13–7.102. Didierjean L, Carraux P, Grand D, Sass JO, Nau H,Saurat JH. Topical retinaldehyde increases skincontent of retinoic acid and exerts biologic activityin mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol. 1996;107(5):714–9.103. Sass JO, Didierjean L, Carraux P, Plum C, Nau H,Saurat JH. Metabolism of topical retinaldehyde andretinol by mouse skin in vivo: predominant for-mation of retinyl esters and identiﬁcation of
14-hydroxy-4, 14-retro-retinol. Exp Dermatol.1996;5(5):267–71.104. Boisnic S, Branchet-Gumila MC, Le Charpentier Y,Segard C. Repair of UVA-induced elastic ﬁber and
14-hydroxy-4, 14-retro-retinol. Exp Dermatol.1996;5(5):267–71.104. Boisnic S, Branchet-Gumila MC, Le Charpentier Y,Segard C. Repair of UVA-induced elastic ﬁber andcollagen damage by 0.05% retinaldehyde cream inan ex vivo human skin model. Dermatology.1999;199 Suppl 1:43–8.105. Diridollou S, Vienne MP, Alibert M, et al. Efﬁcacy oftopical 0.05% retinaldehyde in skin aging by ultra-sound and rheological techniques. Dermatology.1999;199 Suppl 1:37–41.106. Creidi P, Humbert P. Clinical use of topical reti-naldehyde on photoaged skin. Dermatology.1999;199(Suppl 1):49–52.107. Creidi P, Vienne MP, Ochonisky S, et al. Proﬁlo-metric evaluation of photodamage after topical5372 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
retinaldehyde and retinoic acid treatment. J AmAcad Dermatol. 1998;39(6):960–5.108. Kwon HS, Lee JH, Kim GM, Bae JM. Efﬁcacy andsafety of retinaldehyde 0.1% and 0.05% creamsused to treat photoaged skin: a randomized double-blind controlled trial. J Cosmet Dermatol.2018;17(3):471–6.109. Sass JO, Masgrau E, Piletta PA, Nau H, Saurat JH.Plasma retinoids after topical use of retinaldehydeon human skin. Skin Pharmacol. 1996;9(5):322–6.110. Pisetpackdeekul P, Supmuang P, Pan-In P, et al.Proretinal nanoparticles: stability, release, efﬁcacy,and irritation. Int J Nanomed. 2016;11:3277–86.111. Limcharoen B, Pisetpackdeekul P, Toprangkobsin P,Thunyakitpisal P, Wanichwecharungruang S, Ban-lunara W. Topical proretinal nanoparticles: biolog-ical activities, epidermal proliferation anddifferentiation, follicular penetration, and skin tol-erability. ACS Biomater Sci Eng. 2020;6(3):1510–21.112. Nayak K, Katiyar SS, Kushwah V, Jain S. Coenzyme
Q10 and retinaldehyde co-loaded nanostructuredlipid carriers for efﬁcacy evaluation in wrinkles.J Drug Target. 2018;26(4):333–44.113. Yan J, Xia Q, Cherng SH, et al. Photo-induced DNAdamage and photocytotoxicity of retinyl palmitateand its photodecomposition products. Toxicol IndHealth. 2005;21(7–8):167–75.114. Ihara H, Hashizume N, Hirase N, Suzue R. Esteriﬁ-cation makes retinol more labile to photolysis.J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 1999;45(3):353–8.115. Tolleson WH, Cherng SH, Xia Q, et al. Photode-composition and phototoxicity of natural retinoids.Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2005;2(1):147–55.116. Boudreau MD, Beland FA, Felton RP, et al. Photo-co-carcinogenesis of topically applied retinyl palmitatein SKH-1 hairless mice. Photochem Photobiol.2017;93(4):1096–114.117. Fu PP, Cheng SH, Coop L, et al. Photoreaction,phototoxicity, and photocarcinogenicity of reti-noids. J Environ Sci Health C Environ CarcinogEcotoxicol Rev. 2003;21(2):165–97.
118. Farooq U, Mahmood T, Shahzad Y, Yousaf AM,Akhtar N. Comparative efﬁcacy of two anti-agingproducts containing retinyl palmitate in healthyhuman volunteers. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2018;17(3):454–60.119. Bradley EJ, Grifﬁths CEM, Sherratt MJ, Bell M,Watson REB. Over-the-counter anti-ageing topicalagents and their ability to protect and repair pho-toaged skin. Maturitas. 2015;80(3):265–72.120. Babamiri K, Nassab R. Cosmeceuticals: the evidencebehind the retinoids. Aesthet Surg J. 2010;30(1):74–7.121. Clares B, Calpena AC, Parra A, et al. Nanoemulsions(NEs), liposomes (LPs) and solid lipid nanoparticles(SLNs) for retinyl palmitate: effect on skin perme-ation. Int J Pharm. 2014;473(1–2):591–8.122. Pena-Rodrı ´guez E, Moreno MC, Blanco-FernandezB, Gonza ´lez J, Ferna ´ndez-Campos F. Epidermaldelivery of retinyl palmitate loaded transfersomes:penetration and biodistribution studies. Pharma-ceutics. 2020;12(2):E112.123. Pinto F, Fonseca LP, Souza S, Oliva A, de Barros
DPC. Topical distribution and efﬁciency of nanos-tructured lipid carriers on a 3D reconstructedhuman epidermis model. J Drug Deliv Sci Technol.2020;57: 101616.124. Ro J, Kim Y, Kim H, et al. Pectin micro- and nano-capsules of retinyl palmitate as cosmeceutical car-riers for stabilized skin transport. Korean J PhysiolPharmacol. 2015;19(1):59–64.125. Teixeira Z, Zanchetta B, Melo BAG, et al. Retinylpalmitate ﬂexible polymeric nanocapsules: charac-terization and permeation studies. Coll Surf BBiointerfaces. 2010;81(1):374–80.126. Oliveira MB, do Prado AH, Bernegossi J, et al.Topical application of retinyl palmitate-loadednanotechnology-based drug delivery systems forthe treatment of skin aging. Biomed Res Int.2014;2014:632570.127. AlZahabi S, Sakr OS, Ramadan AA. Nanostructuredlipid carriers incorporating prickly pear seed oil forthe encapsulation of vitamin A. J Cosmet Dermatol.2019;18(6):1875–84.128. Jeon HS, Seo JE, Kim MS, et al. A retinyl palmitate-
lipid carriers incorporating prickly pear seed oil forthe encapsulation of vitamin A. J Cosmet Dermatol.2019;18(6):1875–84.128. Jeon HS, Seo JE, Kim MS, et al. A retinyl palmitate-loaded solid lipid nanoparticle system: effect ofsurface modiﬁcation with dicetyl phosphate on skinpermeation in vitro and anti-wrinkle effect in vivo.Int J Pharm. 2013;452(1–2):311–20.129. Nandy A, Lee E, Mandal A, Saremi R, Sharma S.Microencapsulation of retinyl palmitate by meltdispersion for cosmetic application. J Microencap-sul. 2020;37(3):205–19.130. Suh DC, Kim Y, Kim H, et al. Enhanced in vitro skindeposition properties of retinyl palmitate throughits stabilization by pectin. Biomol Ther (Seoul).2014;22(1):73–7.131. Algahtani MS, Ahmad MZ, Ahmad J. Nanoemulgelfor improved topical delivery of retinyl palmitate:formulation design and stability evaluation. Nano-materials (Basel). 2020;10(5):E848.Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5373
132. Bjerke DL, Li R, Price JM, et al. The vitamin A esterretinyl propionate has a unique metabolic proﬁleand higher retinoid-related bioactivity over retinoland retinyl palmitate in human skin models. ExpDermatol. 2021;30(2):226–36.133. Green C, Orchard G, Cerio R, Hawk JL. A clinico-pathological study of the effects of topical retinylpropionate cream in skin photoageing. Clin ExpDermatol. 1998;23(4):162–7.134. Fu JJJ, Hillebrand GG, Raleigh P, et al. A random-ized, controlled comparative study of the wrinklereduction beneﬁts of a cosmetic niacinamide/pep-tide/retinyl propionate product regimen vs. a pre-scription 0.02% tretinoin product regimen. Br JDermatol. 2010;162(3):647–54.135. Lam ECS, Li R, Rodrigues MR, et al. Enhanced reti-noid response by a combination of the vitamin Aester retinyl propionate with niacinamide and aﬂavonoid containing Ceratonia siliqua extract inretinoid responsive in vitro models. Int J CosmetSci. 2021;43(1):102–6.
Sci. 2021;43(1):102–6.136. Arayachukeat S, Wanichwecharungruang SP, Tree-Udom T. Retinyl acetate-loaded nanoparticles: der-mal penetration and release of the retinyl acetate.Int J Pharm. 2011;404(1–2):281–8.137. Kim H, Kim B, Kim H, et al. Synthesis and in vitrobiological activity of retinyl retinoate, a novelhybrid retinoid derivative. Bioorg Med Chem.2008;16(12):6387–93.138. Kim JE, Kim B, Kim H, et al. Retinyl retinoateinduces hyaluronan production and less irritationthan other retinoids. J Dermatol. 2010;37(5):448–54.139. Kim H, Koh J, Baek J, et al. Retinyl retinoate, a novelhybrid vitamin derivative, improves photoagedskin: a double-blind, randomized-controlled trial.Skin Res Technol. 2011;17(3):380–5.140. Kim H, Kim N, Jung S, et al. Improvement in skinwrinkles from the use of photostable retinylretinoate: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Der-matol. 2010;162(3):497–502.141. Kim M, Yang H, Kim H, Jung H, Jung H. Novel
141. Kim M, Yang H, Kim H, Jung H, Jung H. Novelcosmetic patches for wrinkle improvement: retinylretinoate- and ascorbic acid-loaded dissolvingmicroneedles. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2014;36(3):207–12.142. Lee SG, Jeong JH, Kim SR, et al. Topical formulationof retinyl retinoate employing nanostructured lipidcarriers. J Pharm Investig. 2012;42(5):243–50.143. Han HS, Kwon YJ, Park MS, et al. Efﬁcacy validationof synthesized retinol derivatives In vitro: stability,toxicity, and activity. Bioorg Med Chem.2003;11(17):3839–45.144. Lee MS, Lee KH, Sin HS, Um SJ, Kim JW, Koh BK. Anewly synthesized photostable retinol derivative(retinyl N-formyl aspartamate) for photodamagedskin: proﬁlometric evaluation of 24-week study.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;55(2):220–4.145. Motamedi M, Chehade A, Sanghera R, Grewal P. Aclinician’s guide to topical retinoids. J Cutan MedSurg. 2022;26(1):71–8.146. Ogden S, Samuel M, Grifﬁths CEM. A review oftazarotene in the treatment of photodamaged skin.
tazarotene in the treatment of photodamaged skin.Clin Interv Aging. 2008;3(1):71–6.147. Kang S, Krueger GG, Tanghetti EA, et al. A multi-center, randomized, double-blind trial of tazarotene0.1% cream in the treatment of photodamage. J AmAcad Dermatol. 2005;52(2):268–74.148. Phillips TJ, Gottlieb AB, Leyden JJ, et al. Efﬁcacy of0.1% tazarotene cream for the treatment of photo-damage: a 12-month multicenter, randomized trial.Arch Dermatol. 2002;138(11):1486–93.149. Machtinger LA, Kaidbey K, Lim J, et al. Histologicaleffects of tazarotene 0.1% cream vs. vehicle onphotodamaged skin: a 6-month, multicentre, dou-ble-blind, randomized, vehicle-controlled study inpatients with photodamaged facial skin. Br J Der-matol. 2004;151(6):1245–52.150. Kang S, Leyden JJ, Lowe NJ, et al. Tazarotene creamfor the treatment of facial photodamage: a multi-center, investigator-masked, randomized, vehicle-controlled, parallel comparison of 0.01%, 0.025%,
controlled, parallel comparison of 0.01%, 0.025%,0.05%, and 0.1% tazarotene creams with 0.05%tretinoin emollient cream applied once daily for 24weeks. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137(12):1597–604.151. Lowe N, Gifford M, Tanghetti E, et al. Tazarotene 0.
0.05%, and 0.1% tazarotene creams with 0.05%tretinoin emollient cream applied once daily for 24weeks. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137(12):1597–604.151. Lowe N, Gifford M, Tanghetti E, et al. Tazarotene 0.1% cream versus tretinoin 0.05% emollient creamin the treatment of photodamaged facial skin: amulticenter, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2004;6(2):79–85.152. Liu P, Yang X, Han J, et al. Tazarotene-loaded PLGAnanoparticles potentiate deep tissue pressure injuryhealing via VEGF-Notch signaling. Mater Sci Eng CMater Biol Appl. 2020;114: 111027.153. Nasr M, Abdel-Hamid S, Moftah NH, Fadel M, Aly-oussef AA. Jojoba oil soft colloidal nanocarrier of asynthetic retinoid: preparation, characterizationand clinical efﬁcacy in psoriatic patients. Curr DrugDeliv. 2017;14(3):426–32.154. Shroot B, Michel S. Pharmacology and chemistry ofadapalene. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36(6 Pt 2):S96-103.5374 Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375
155. Rusu A, Tanase C, Pascu GA, Todoran N. Recentadvances regarding the therapeutic potential ofadapalene. Pharmaceuticals. 2020;13(9):217.156. Kang S, Goldfarb MT, Weiss JS, et al. Assessment ofadapalene gel for the treatment of actinic keratosesand lentigines: a randomized trial. J Am Acad Der-matol. 2003;49(1):83–90.157. Herane MI, Orlandi C, Zegpi E, Valde ´s P, Ancic ´X.Clinical efﬁcacy of adapalene (Differin/C210) 0.3% gel inChilean women with cutaneous photoaging. J Der-matolog Treat. 2012;23(1):57–64.158. Bagatin E, de Sa ´Gonc¸alves H , Sato M, AlmeidaLMC, Miot HA. Comparable efﬁcacy of adapalene 0.3% gel and tretinoin 0.05% cream as treatment forcutaneous photoaging. Eur J Dermatol. 2018;28(3):343–50.159. Najaﬁ-Taher R, Jafarzadeh Kohneloo A, Eslami Far-sani V, et al. A topical gel of tea tree oilnanoemulsion containing adapalene versus ada-palene marketed gel in patients with acne vulgaris:a randomized clinical trial. Arch Dermatol Res.2022;314(7):673–9.
160. Prasad S, Mukhopadhyay A, Kubavat A, et al. Efﬁ-cacy and safety of a nano-emulsion gel formulationof adapalene 0.1% and clindamycin 1% combina-tion in acne vulgaris: a randomized, open label,active-controlled, multicentric, phase IV clinicaltrial. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol.2012;78(4):459–67.161. Schadt CR. Topical and oral bexarotene. DermatolTher. 2013;26(5):400–3.162. Scott LJ. Trifarotene: ﬁrst approval. Drugs.2019;79(17):1905–9.163. Tan J, Thiboutot D, Popp G, et al. Randomizedphase 3 evaluation of trifarotene 50 lg/g creamtreatment of moderate facial and truncal acne. J AmAcad Dermatol. 2019;80(6):1691–9.164. Blume-Peytavi U, Fowler J, Keme ´ny L, et al. Long-term safety and efﬁcacy of trifarotene 50 lg/gcream, a ﬁrst-in-class RAR- cselective topical reti-noid, in patients with moderate facial and truncalacne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2020;34(1):166–73.165. Aubert J, Piwnica D, Bertino B, et al. Nonclinical
and human pharmacology of the potent and selec-tive topical retinoic acid receptor- cagonist tri-farotene. Br J Dermatol. 2018;179(2):442–56.166. Cosio T, Di Prete M, Gaziano R, et al. Trifarotene: acurrent review and perspectives in dermatology.Biomedicines. 2021;9(3):237.167. Lee ES, Ahn Y, Bae IH, et al. Synthetic retinoidseletinoid G improves skin barrier function throughwound healing and collagen realignment in humanskin equivalents. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21(9):E3198.168. Imhof L, Leuthard D. Topical over-the-counterantiaging agents: an update and systematic review.Dermatology. 2021;237(2):217–29.169. Schlich M, Musazzi UM, Campani V, et al. Designand development of topical liposomal formulationsin a regulatory perspective. Drug Deliv Transl Res.2022;12(8):1811–28.170. European Commission. Directorate General forHealth and Food Safety. Guidance on the safetyassessment of nanomaterials in cosmetics. 2019.https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2875/40446 . Acces-
sed 13 Aug 2022.171. Mahant S, Rao R, Souto EB, Nanda S. Analyticaltools and evaluation strategies for nanostructuredlipid carrier-based topical delivery systems. ExpertOpin Drug Deliv. 2020;17(7):963–92.Adv Ther (2022) 39:5351–5375 5375
