REVIEWChronic Wound Healing: A Review of CurrentManagement and TreatmentsGeorge Han .Roger CeilleyReceived: October 20, 2016 / Published online: January 21, 2017/C211The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.comABSTRACTWound healing is a complex, highly regulatedprocess that is critical in maintaining the barrierfunction of skin. With numerous diseaseprocesses, the cascade of events involved inwound healing can be affected, resulting inchronic, non-healing wounds that subject thepatient to signiﬁcant discomfort and distresswhile draining the medical system of anenormous amount of resources. The healing ofa superﬁcial wound requires many factors towork in concert, and wound dressings andtreatments have evolved considerably toaddress possible barriers to wound healing,ranging from infection to hypoxia. Evenoptimally, wound tissue never reaches itspre-injured strength and multiple aberranthealing states can result in chronic
healing states can result in chronicnon-healing wounds. This article will reviewwound healing physiology and discuss currentapproaches for treating a wound.Keywords: Bioﬁlms; Chronic wounds; Growthfactors; Hyperbaric oxygen; Negative pressurewound therapy; Skin infection; Skin substitutes;Wound dressings; Wound healingINTRODUCTIONThe process of cutaneous wound healing isincredibly complex, dependent on an intricateinterplay between a number of highly regulatedfactors working in concert to restore injuredskin towards repaired barrier function. Thissequence of events plays out normally in thevast majority of superﬁcial wounds; however, itcan go awry at numerous steps along thepathway, especially with underlying diseasestates such as diabetes. When wound healingdoes not progress normally, a chronic woundmay result and this is at signiﬁcant burden toboth the patient and the medical system. It hasbeen estimated that a single diabetic ulcer
been estimated that a single diabetic ulcercarries a cost of nearly US$50,000 [ 1] andchronic wounds as a whole cost the medicalsystem over US$25 billion per year, with thenumber of patients affected growing yearlyfrom 6.5 million, given the increasingprevalence of diabetes and other chronicdiseases that may affect wound healing [ 2].Aside from the burden of a chronic wound,even simple wounds created after minorprocedures such as outpatient surgeries requireEnhanced content To view enhanced content for thisarticle go to http://www.medengine.com/Redeem/A287F06016A19FA2 .G. Han (&)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,NY, USAe-mail: george.han@mountsinai.orgR. CeilleyUniversity of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USAAdv Ther (2017) 34:599–610DOI 10.1007/s12325-017-0478-y
proper attention and care, and understandably,patients may be concerned about possibleresultant scarring. It is no surprise, then, thatwound healing has received a great deal ofattention, both from a basic science standpointand a business perspective. The basic science ofhow a wound heals is fascinating, with newdiscoveries elucidating mechanisms ofphysiologic wound repair constantly beingreported. Meanwhile, wound healing is also ahuge commercial enterprise, with the marketfor wound care products exceeding US$15billion and treating wound scarring anotherUS$12 billion [ 3]. In this review, basic conceptsof wound healing will be discussed, with a focuson current practice in treatment of wounds andfuture directions in wound care. This article isbased on previously conducted studies and doesnot involve any new studies of human oranimal subjects performed by any of theauthors.PHYSIOLOGIC WOUND HEALING
PHYSIOLOGIC WOUND HEALINGAfter a superﬁcial wound, a myriad of systemsare activated at the site in order to clear foreignmaterial, as the primary barrier function of theskin is lost, and to eventually restore the normalstructure of the skin. While this may only besuccessful to a limited degree—a wound willnever reach the maximum tensile strength ofunwounded skin, and at best reaches about 70%[4]—most of the essential functions of the skinwill be returned to a wound. This does,however, require the delivery of variousinﬂammatory cells, chemokines, cytokines,matrix molecules, and nutrients to the woundsite with a concordant increase in metabolicdemand. These processes occur simultaneouslyand are generally divided into three mainphases of wound healing: inﬂammatory,proliferative, and remodeling.The inﬂammatory phase of wound healingstarts shortly after hemostasis is achieved, andthe primary goal of this phase is to clearpathogens as well as foreign material from the
pathogens as well as foreign material from thewound and to contain the damage to a localizedarea. Vascular permeability increases withvasodilation, allowing neutrophils andmonocytes to localize to the wound site. Acomplex interplay of cytokines also helps toregulate this phase, culminating in monocyteconversion to macrophages, often thought of asthe master regulator of this inﬂammatory phaseof wound healing [ 5]. The macrophages notonly phagocytose and digest tissue debris andremaining neutrophils but also secrete growthfactors and cytokines that promote tissueproliferation and cell migration. After about3 days from the initial wound, the proliferativephase centers around ﬁbroblasts andproduction of both collagen and groundsubstance that will form the basis for thetissue scaffold of the previous wound area.Meanwhile, endothelial cells enter a rapidgrowth phase and angiogenesis occurs withinthe granulation tissue, creating a rich vascular
network supplying this very active area ofhealing. After about 2–3 weeks, the woundtransitions to a remodeling, or maturation,phase where the collagen type is restored tousual (type I, rather than type III seen in a newwound) [ 6] and the wound tissue matures,resulting in full cross-linking and restorationof a somewhat normal structure. The vascularnetwork rapidly regresses as well [ 7]. Aspreviously discussed, the wound strengthnever reaches its normal, pre-injury state.An important consideration in physiologicwound healing is oxygen supply and oxygentension in the wound bed. Wound healingrequires oxygen to interact with numerouscytokines, supply the actively proliferatingcells, as well as provide an effector for theneutrophil respiratory burst. It has beenestimated that a wound requires at least atissue oxygen tension of 20 mmHg to heal [ 8]and non-healing wounds have been measuredto have oxygen tensions as low as 5 mmHg [ 9].
to have oxygen tensions as low as 5 mmHg [ 9].These effects seem to compound one another—in situations of low oxygen tension, not onlywill there be more necrotic debris to facilitatebacterial growth but the primary mechanism ofthe immune system in combating these
in situations of low oxygen tension, not onlywill there be more necrotic debris to facilitatebacterial growth but the primary mechanism ofthe immune system in combating thesemicrobes is compromised. Thus, special caremust be taken with wounds resulting fromperipheral vascular disease and also in caseswhere vascular compromise may play a role,such as a diabetic ulcer. Additionally, the600 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
systemic optimization of nutritional statusshould be evaluated in wound healing.Numerous nutrients have proven to beimportant in wound healing, especiallyprotein intake [ 10]. This was illustrated in astudy of elderly patients with pressure ulcerswhere change in ulcer area was signiﬁcantlycorrelated with protein intake [ 11]; however,other factors are also important, such asvitamins A and C, and zinc [ 12]. The ﬁnebalance of these nutrients has to be taken intoaccount, though. For example, with vitamin E,an important lipophilic antioxidant, conﬂictingstudies have both shown reduced tensilestrength and collagen content of experimentalwounds [ 13,14] and, conversely, increasedwound strength and collagen [ 15]. As with allaspects of wound repair, a ﬁne balance isnecessary to ultimately achieve proper healing.Given the tight regulation of a multitude offactors required for proper wound healing, it isnot surprising that chronic wounds are rather
not surprising that chronic wounds are rathercommon. After an acute wound such as trauma,surgery, or even a bug bite, the abovewell-coordinated series of events come intoplay. The ultimate time course and outcomewill depend on the nature of the acute wound—its location, size, depth, and type. However,when other pathologic factors come into play,such as an underlying disease state, a chronicwound can form (see Fig. 1). This refers to awound that has somehow deviated from thepreviously described natural physiologic courseof events and has stalled at some point. Theunderlying mechanism varies greatly, butincludes factors inﬂuencing blood supply(peripheral vascular disease), immune function(such as immunosuppression or acquiredimmunodeﬁciency), metabolic diseases (suchas diabetes), medications, or previous localtissue injury (such as radiation therapy).External factors, such as sustained pressure,
External factors, such as sustained pressure,temperature, and moisture, also play animportant role in allowing a wound to heal.As the pathophysiology of normal acute woundhealing has been well described, this review willmainly focus on chronic wounds and theirtreatment.Aberrant wound healing can be seen rarely innormal healthy subjects, but is usuallyassociated with an underlying process, rangingfrom diabetes to cancer to malnutrition. Of themajor concerns for chronic wounds, perhapsnone is as menacing or as important as diabetes.In the USA, the number of people with diabetesalready reaches 20 million and is expected todouble by the year 2030 [ 16]. Diabetic footulcers affect 15% of these patients and precedethe vast majority of amputations in this patientpopulation [ 17]. A wide variety of factors isthought to contribute to this problem, affectingall phases of wound healing and seeminglynearly every molecule involved in this process
[18], and evidence is emerging that properglycemic control can have a signiﬁcant impacton the rate of wound healing in a diabeticpatient [ 19]. This effect was mainly seen inpatients with markedly elevatedhemoglobin A1c levels, but it underscoresemerging evidence that diabetes plays aFig. 1 Chronic ulcers of peripheral vascular diseaseAdv Ther (2017) 34:599–610 601
multifactorial role in wound healing. It hasbeen well described that the neuropathyexperienced by diabetics can lead to a loss ofprotective sensation, producing wounds thateventuate into ulcers; however, there is anemerging role of advanced glycation endproducts in contributing to not only thisneuropathy but also the wound healingcascade and small vessel disease [ 20]. Whileachieving good glycemic control can certainlybe challenging, it also serves to reinforce theneed to address lifestyle choices and integrationof the primary care provider into treating achronic wound.WOUND INFECTIONSThe most common preventable challenge towound healing is possible infection, and topicalantimicrobials have long been used empiricallyto attempt to prevent wound infection. Whilebacteria are a normal part of the skin ﬂora andthus wounds, a critical threshold of 105bacteriahas been proposed as the delineation betweencolonization and a clinically relevant infection
colonization and a clinically relevant infectionthat may impede wound healing [ 21]. It is alsonecessary to distinguish between an incidentalpositive culture and a true pathogen affecting awound. Repeat surface cultures in a wound areof limited use, neither conﬁrming nor rulingout a continued infection; rather, clinicaldiagnosis of an infected wound remains ofprimary importance [ 22]. Deep tissue culturesare somewhat more controversial. While theyhave better sensitivity and speciﬁcity inisolating a causative organism in an infectedwound, it is still not perfect; isolates fromdifferent parts of the same wound have evenbeen shown to have different organisms [ 23].Additionally, the practitioner is, in essence,exacerbating the initial wound with an evendeeper wound, but this may still be aworthwhile trade-off if it guaranteesappropriate antimicrobial coverage.There are many approaches towards bothtreatment and prevention of wound infections.
treatment and prevention of wound infections.Silver has been used as adjunct in wound carefor over 2000 years [ 24] and remains a popularwound care ingredient today. It has a broadspectrum of activity and is available innumerous forms. Newer advances in usingsilver for wound healing have focused onallowing for sustained release of silver in highenough concentrations to allow for retainedefﬁcacy. Nanocrystalline silver dressings weredeveloped with this in mind and help to addressthe shortcoming that silver nitrate has—to workproperly, it would have to be administered 12times a day [ 25]. Furthermore, a recent reviewfound no convincing evidence that silversulfadiazine has any effect on wound healingoverall, despite its common use amongpractitioners [ 26]. Similarly, iodine-containingcompounds have long been used in woundhealing but there have been some concernswith toxicity of iodine-containing compounds,especially over large wound areas. For limited
wounds, though, cadexomer iodine (iodinewithin a starch lattice formed intomicrobeads) has a good deal of datasupporting its use as a cost-effective adjuvantfor wound healing [ 27,28].Numerous topical formulations ofantibiotics have also been developed to applyto wound sites. They remain popular, eventhough emerging evidence has shown that thebeneﬁt of this wholesale application ofantibiotic ointments may not be necessary andthe only real indication for topical antibiotics isa clinically infected wound, such as purulentdrainage, erythema, warmth, pain, tenderness,or induration [ 29]. Numerous recent studieshave echoed this sentiment, with routineadministration of antibiotic ointment leadingto no better outcomes but often resulting inpatient discomfort, along with the possibility ofantibiotic resistance and contact dermatitis[30,31]. This is in conﬂict with a few earlierstudies where children with minor scratchesand insect bites had reduced rates of infection
with topical antibiotic ointment [ 32,33],although this cannot be clearly generalized toall patients. Even after Mohs micrographicsurgery, a prospective study found the rate of
with topical antibiotic ointment [ 32,33],although this cannot be clearly generalized toall patients. Even after Mohs micrographicsurgery, a prospective study found the rate ofinfection after clean surgical technique to beless than 1%, with the highest rate of infectionsin ﬂap closures [ 34]. Overall, the consensusseems to be that in dermatology, use of topicalantibiotics should be reserved for conditions602 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
such as impetigo or a clearly infected woundand not for general prophylaxis [ 35].WOUND CARE AND DRESSINGSWound care has become increasingly importantgiven the rise of chronic wounds and themorbidity associated with them. An importantconcept in wound care is the role ofdebridement, or the removal of non-viabletissue material. This can be achieved throughsurgical or autolytic/enzymatic mechanisms—ineither case, the goal is to expose healthy,well-perfused tissue that is able to proliferateand populate the wound bed via epithelial cellmigration, rather than keeping necrotic debriswhich only serves as fuel for infection andimpedes wound healing. The optimal timingand frequency of surgical debridement are stillunclear, as they are likely to vary greatlydepending on the type of wound being treated,but there is general agreement that surgicaldebridement is an important component ofwound care. Autolytic debridement refers tothe self-activation of endogenous enzymes
the self-activation of endogenous enzymesinvolved in ﬁbrin degradation generated in amoist wound environment and seen with sometypes of wound dressings [ 36]. While this canhave some utility in wound healing, it iscertainly not capable of removing devitalizedtissue as well as surgical debridement and, assuch, cannot serve as adequate replacement forsurgical debridement. Recently, there has beensome renewed interest in the use of so-calledbiosurgical debridement, or the application oflarvae/maggots to a wound. This is intriguing inthat it achieves both a mechanical/surgicaldebridement and an enzymatic debridement atthe same time, whilst having the capability toeliminate pathogenic organisms and stimulateﬁbroblast proliferation [ 37,38]. Further studiesare needed, but it is certainly an intriguingconcept.Many wound dressings have been developed totry to both protect the healing wound frominfection and also to help promote the wound
infection and also to help promote the woundhealing process itself (Table 1). A moist occlusivedressing helps support the inﬂammatory phase bycreating an environment with low oxygentension (thereby activating such factors ashypoxia-inducible factor-1) [ 39]a n da l s oincreases the rate of re-epithelialization [ 40].Additionally, a limited amount of exudateretained on the wound allows for autolyticdebridement, which serves to further promotesuccessful wound healing. However, traditionaldry gauze wound dressings may degrade thisprocess while also causing further injury whenremoved. Low adherent dressings andsemipermeable ﬁlms (i.e., Tegaderm) representthe basic types of wound dressings commonly inuse, with the goal of restricting liquid andmicrobial penetration but allowing air and watervapor through. Hydrocolloids and hydrogels takeadvantage of a hydrophilic material that absorbs acertain amount of exudate but keep a moistenvironment; hydrocolloids are furthermore
impermeable to air and are somewhat morelong-lasting, but should not be used onexudative wounds because of its impermeablenature. Hydrogels may additionally be used tohelp promote moisture in an otherwise drywound. Another option is alginate dressings,seaweed-derived non-woven ﬁbers that aregenerally reserved for highly exudative woundsbecause of their ability to absorb large amounts ofﬂuid. As such, adverse effects can be seen in drywounds dressed with alginate [ 41]. Similarly,foams have some absorptive capacity and can beused on moderately exudative wounds, especiallyhelpful because they minimize trauma duringdressing changes. Lastly, collagen products havebeen used on recalcitrant wounds and chroniculcers. While this collagen is not intended to be adirect replacement for new production of collagenin wounded tissue (as it can be derived frommultiple sources, including bovine and porcinecollagen), it is thought to help facilitate an
collagen), it is thought to help facilitate anenvironment attracting cell types critical towound healing while depleting negativeeffectors such as free radicals and proteases [ 42].Several more recent developments in wound
environment attracting cell types critical towound healing while depleting negativeeffectors such as free radicals and proteases [ 42].Several more recent developments in wounddressings have focused on integratingantimicrobial compounds into the wounddressing itself. These materials combinetraditional wound dressings such as foams orhydrogels with antimicrobial compounds suchas silver, betaine, chitin, or polyhexamethylenebiguanide (Kendall AMD). These materials, asAdv Ther (2017) 34:599–610 603
discussed previously, may not be appropriatefor broad-spectrum application to healingwounds, but may be appropriate in chroniclower leg ulcers where infection can be aproblem, especially with formation of bioﬁlms.Many pathogens are able to adhere togetherinto bioﬁlms, which represent tightly packedmasses surrounding a polymeric matrix, thushelping to evade destruction by antibiotics. Thiscreates not only a physical barrier to woundhealing but one in which the normal resolutionof the inﬂammatory phase may be prolonged,and addressing bioﬁlms has become a majorchallenge in wound healing. Both in vitro testsand patient data show that these antimicrobialwound dressings can be helpful in chronicpressure/venous ulcers that may be affected bythese bioﬁlms [ 43,44].SKIN SUBSTITUTESWhile skin substitutes have long been used ingrafts (mostly from autologous sources) eitherfor signiﬁcant surgical defects or burns
necessitating replacement of a large surfacearea of tissue, advances in this ﬁeld haveallowed for the development of novelbioprosthetic skin substitutes. These materialsgenerally consist of a biologically derivedsubstance combined with a material to allowfor its placement on a wound. Overall, thesedressings are quite costly, representing asigniﬁcant barrier to widespread adoption.However, several studies have been conductedto look at cost-effectiveness and many of thesehave shown an advantage with using theseexpensive substitutes, considering that reducingeven a single day of a hospital admissionrepresents an enormous cost saving, not tomention being much better for the patient.While multiple options have focused on a meshmaterial coated with porcine collagen orpolypeptides (Biobrane and Transcyte, thelatter of which also contains newbornﬁbroblast cells) or a porcine xenograft (EZDerm), it is not clear whether they represent a
cost-effective option for general application,Table 1 Currently available wound dressingsType ofdressingCommercially available products NotesGauze Curity, Vaseline Gauze, Xeroform Inexpensive, drying, may cause furtherinjury on changingFilms Bioclusive, Blisterﬁlm, Cutiﬁlm, Flexigrid, OpSite, Tegaderm Occlusive, retains moisture, only fornon-exudative woundsHydrocolloids Aquacel, Comfeel, DuoDERM, Granuﬂex, Tegasorb Long times between changes,ﬂuid-trapping, occlusive, not forinfected woundsHydrogels Carrasyn, Curagel, Nu-Gel, Purilon, Restore, SAF-gel, XCell Rehydrates dry wounds, easy removal/changes, may cause over-hydrationFoams 3M Adhesive Foam, Allevyn, Lyofoam, Tielle Moderately absorbent, insulatingAlginates Algisite, Kaltostat, Sorbsan, Tegagen Highly absorbent, hemostaticHydroﬁbers Aquacel Hydroﬁber Highly absorbentTissueengineeredskinsubstitutesAlloderm, Apligraf, Biobrane, Bioseed, Dermagraft, Epicel,
EZ Derm, Hyalograft, Integra Omnigraft, Laserskin,Myskin, TransCyteAddresses deﬁcient growth factors andcytokines, expensive, risk of infection,antigenicity604 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
although one study suggested that it wasassociated with decreased cost of care andimproved outcome in a relatively limitedscope of facial burns [ 45]. Perhaps moreinteresting, however, is a material developedusing ﬁbroblasts derived from newborn foreskintissue, extracellular matrix, and a bioabsorbablepolyglactin mesh (Dermagraft). The ﬁbroblastsin this material are able to generate growthfactors, collagen, cytokines, andglycosaminoglycans to help support thewound healing environment. Numerousstudies have borne out its efﬁcacy [ 46,47],especially for burn wounds and venous/pressureulcers, but a few downsides are a theoretical riskof rejection (although unreported thus far) andhypersensitivity (as bovine serum may becontained in trace amounts in thepreparation). This concept was taken one stepfurther with Apligraf, an allogenic bilayeredcultured skin equivalent, where a dermal layerof cultured ﬁbroblasts and bovine type I
of cultured ﬁbroblasts and bovine type Icollagen is combined with an epidermal layerof cultured keratinocytes, generating a materialthat can be absorbed much like a graft andgenerates a similar environment to a normallyhealing wound. While no dermal appendages orblood vessels are contained, it was shown thatthis material actually signiﬁcantly increasedblood ﬂow by over 70% to the base of diabeticfoot ulcers [ 48]. This comes at a signiﬁcant cost,however, as a single application of Apligraf cancost over US$1000 for a 7.5-cm-diametercircular disk. Again, as previously noted, thiscost has been analyzed, taking into accountshortened time to wound closure, and actuallyresulted in a cost savings over 1 year in woundsthat fail to respond to traditional wound care[49]. However, this must be taken with thecaveat that the study population consisted ofrecalcitrant, chronic, non-healing wounds,somewhat limiting the applicability in generalof these products.
of these products.Another option which received a new FDAindication in 2016 for diabetic foot ulcers is theIntegra Dermal Regeneration Template(Omnigraft). This material is an acellularbilayer matrix consisting of collagen,glycosaminoglycan, and chondroitin-6-sulfate,with a layer of silicone for barrier function [ 50].It had been used since 1996 for burn woundswith a later approval for scars from burns, butmore recently gained the approval for diabeticfoot ulcers on the basis of a pivotal study from32 sites and over 300 patients. The data showedthat treatment with Omnigraft increasedwound closure rate by 50% compared tostandard of care, with time to wound closurereduced by 5 weeks. A major beneﬁt ofOmnigraft is that in the vast majority of cases(72%), only one application of the substrate isneeded for complete wound healing, with over90% of wounds requiring two or lessapplications [ 50].NEGATIVE PRESSURE WOUNDTHERAPYNegative pressure wound therapy, or
THERAPYNegative pressure wound therapy, orvacuum-assisted closure, has received a gooddeal of attention since ﬁrst being used in theUSA in 1997. By maintaining a moistenvironment, optimizing blood ﬂow,removing exudates, and applying pressure topromote wound closure, these devices are ableto mitigate numerous factors that may bedeﬁcient in a chronic wound. Additionally,numerous studies have shown that thesedevices are associated with reduced rates ofinfection in these wounds [ 51]. Meanwhile,dressing changes may be simpliﬁed andsigniﬁcant cost savings can be associated witha reduced need for surgical debridement overthe long term. As a rule, these devices consist ofa foam dressing (that requires changes, up toevery other day) and an evacuation tube. Detailsof the exact material and irrigation ﬂuids thatcan be run through the system concurrentlyhave been developed, but in general, thesedevices range from simple portable home units
devices range from simple portable home unitsto more complex machines designed for acutecare settings such as burn units. One interestingemerging indication for negative pressurewound therapy is its use on a complicatedsurgical wound. As a temporizing measure,
care settings such as burn units. One interestingemerging indication for negative pressurewound therapy is its use on a complicatedsurgical wound. As a temporizing measure,negative pressure wound therapy may reducethe volume of the wound, thereby simplifyingthe subsequent surgical repair of the wound[52].Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610 605
GROWTH FACTORSGrowth factors in wound healing have receivedsigniﬁcant attention in the ﬁeld of woundhealing in the past few decades. However, theonly one of these therapies proven to improvehealing in a double-blinded randomizedcontrolled trial is platelet-derived growth factor(PDGF) and those results were rather modest[53]. Nonetheless, it stands to reason that since achronic wound contains so many perturbationsin growth factors and cytokines, addressing someof these issues may be helpful. For example, achronic wound tends to show decreased levels ofepidermal growth factor (EGF), ﬁbroblast growthfactor (FGF), transforming growth factor- b(TGF-b), PDGF, and vascular endothelial growth factor(VEGF) while expressing lower levels ofinterleukins (IL) 1 and 6, and tumor necrosisfactor- a(TNF- a)[54]. Perhaps most of this is dueto the fact that in an environment where somany factors are deﬁcient and dysregulated,simply replacing one is unable to rescue the
chronic wound phenotype; alternatively, it isalso likely that the ‘‘master regulator’’ of woundhealing has yet to be addressed. In any case, thescientiﬁc literature is rife with reports ofapplying a certain growth factor, cytokine,protein, or hormone and achieving remarkableresults in various models for wound healing,including all of the aforementioned growthfactors and additional targets of interest[55,56]. Nonetheless, broad acceptance ofthese factors has remained lukewarm at best,perhaps limited in large by the cost of thesefactors. The data is also often difﬁcult tointerpret, as different models of wound healingare used and practical issues often limit theability to control the study. It is worth notingthat several insurance companies have begun toaccept at least some forms of therapy, such asRegranex (becaplermin gel—a PDGF). A reviewof United Healthcare and Blue Cross Blue Shieldpolicies reveals that at least some of these
policies reveals that at least some of theseproviders will reimburse for these growthfactors given certain conditions (usuallydiabetic neuropathic ulcers being treated withadjunctive wound care). Work in this ﬁeld iscertainly still progressing, regardless ofseemingly promising therapies such as TGF- bsupplementation notably failing to produceresults such as shown with PDGF [ 57].HYPERBARIC OXYGENHyperbaric oxygen has been used in woundhealing on the basis of the principle that it canpromote ﬁbroblast proliferation, enhanceimmune function, and stimulate angiogenesis,among other functions. However, these idealshave not necessarily borne out in practice,leading to some degree of controversy in itsuse. Importantly, this therapy is applied to thepatient in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber aslocalized delivery of oxygen has not beenshown to be effective (Fig. 2), which could leadto signiﬁcant side effects including myopia,oxygen toxicity in the brain leading to seizures,
oxygen toxicity in the brain leading to seizures,and pneumothorax [ 58]. A Cochrane review wasonly able to show a modest increase in thelikelihood of diabetic foot ulcers healing at1 year, and even this was based on mostlysmaller studies with questionable study design[59]. At this point in time, it seems thathyperbaric oxygen can only be considered inwounds where an ischemic diabetic ulcer hasdemonstrated hypoxia [ 60] and, even then, someof the newer approaches described previouslymay be of more beneﬁt. This was in some waysunderlined in a recent randomized controlledtrial where hyperbaric oxygen as an adjunct didhelp wound healing but even the authorsqualiﬁed their ﬁndings to be applicable only to‘‘selected patients with diabetes’’ [ 61]. As thatstudy was not powered to look at outcomes suchas amputation, a clinical trial is currentlyunderway to answer some of these questions bycomparing standard wound care with or withouthyperbaric oxygen therapy to prevent
hyperbaric oxygen therapy to preventamputations in non-healing ulcers in diabeticpatients [ 62].FUTURE DIRECTIONSWith the economic and patient care impacts of
hyperbaric oxygen therapy to preventamputations in non-healing ulcers in diabeticpatients [ 62].FUTURE DIRECTIONSWith the economic and patient care impacts ofwound healing, it comes as no surprise that theﬁeld of wound healing research is incredibly606 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
active. New research in wound healing comesfrom seemingly disparate ﬁelds ranging frommaterials science to molecular biology. Some ofthese have focused on novel molecules ofinterest in wound healing, such as nitric oxide,with numerous approaches to this end involvinginnovative material design [ 63,64]. While theseapproaches may be seen as helpful in woundhealing and furthermore may, in essence, bypasssome of the limitations of single growth factorsor cytokines (especially as more broadly acting,gregarious molecules involved in the woundhealing cascade are identiﬁed), it still will notapproach the ‘‘holy grail’’ of wound healing.It has long been appreciated that fetalwounds do not scar but understanding howthis occurs has been much more difﬁcult [ 65].While this is something of a separate issue interms of wound healing with much of theprevious discussion focusing on chronic,non-healing wounds, the idea that a simplewound can heal without scarring or minimal
scarring has been enticing nonetheless. In thefetus, a wound heals by regeneration ratherthan orderly repair [ 66]. Perhaps this correlateswith the relatively pathogen-free environmentseen in utero, and explains why the woundhealing ‘‘switch’’ turns on sometime during latepregnancy, in the last trimester [ 67]. This has acorollary in the animal kingdom with reptilianlimb regeneration and the more recentlyreported African spiny mouse (Acomys) [ 68].Some researchers have sought to isolateindividual factors that are up- ordownregulated in the fetal wound, such asTGF, matrix metalloproteinases [ 69], and thesuch, but perhaps the greatest promise lies instem cell therapy. Parallel to numeroussuccessful research efforts in chronic woundsfocusing on injecting stem cells from bonemarrow into non-healing wounds [ 70,71],more recent studies have also focused on usingstem cells as scar-attenuating adjuncts to
stem cells as scar-attenuating adjuncts towound healing, leading to tissue regenerationrather than repair with subsequent formation ofﬁbrotic scar tissue [ 72]. Until these therapiesbear fruit, however, it may be best to practicethe old adage, ‘‘protect your skin,’’ and avoidthe burden of a wound in the ﬁrst place.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSNo funding or sponsorship was received for thisstudy or publication of this article. All namedauthors meet the International Committee ofMedical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria forauthorship for this manuscript, takeresponsibility for the integrity of the work as awhole, and have given ﬁnal approval for theversion to be published.Disclosures.. George Han and Roger Ceilleyhave nothing to disclose.Compliance with Ethics Guidelines.. Thisarticle is based on previously conducted studiesand does not involve any new studies of humanor animal subjects performed by any of theauthors.Fig. 2 Hyperbaric oxygen wound therapy chamber (Sigma
34 Hyperbaric Chamber, Perry Biomedical, Riviera Beach,FL, USA)Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610 607
Data Availability.. Data sharing is notapplicable to this article as no datasets weregenerated or analyzed during the current study.Open Access. This article is distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution-NonCommercial 4.0 InternationalLicense ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), which permits any noncommercialuse, distribution, and reproduction in anymedium, provided you give appropriate creditto the original author(s) and the source, providea link to the Creative Commons license, andindicate if changes were made.REFERENCES1. Paquette D, Falanga V. Leg ulcers. Clin Geriatr Med.2002;18(1):77–88 (vi).2. Brem H, Stojadinovic O, Diegelmann RF, et al.Molecular markers in patients with chronic woundsto guide surgical debridement. Mol Med.2007;13(1–2):30–9.3. Sen CK, Gordillo GM, Roy S, et al. Human skinwounds: a major and snowballing threat to publichealth and the economy. Wound Repair Regen.2009;17(6):763–71.
4. Stadelmann WK, Digenis AG, Tobin GR. Physiologyand healing dynamics of chronic cutaneouswounds. Am J Surg. 1998;176(2A Suppl):26S–38S.5. Wynn TA, Barron L. Macrophages: masterregulators of inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis. SeminLiver Dis. 2010;30(3):245–57.6. Haukipuro K, Melkko J, Risteli L, Kairaluoma M,Risteli J. Synthesis of type I collagen in healingwounds in humans. Ann Surg. 1991;213(1):75–80.7. Gurtner GC, Werner S, Barrandon Y, Longaker MT.Wound repair and regeneration. Nature.2008;453(7193):314–21.8. Hunt TK, Hopf HW. Wound healing and woundinfection. What surgeons and anesthesiologists cando. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77(3):587–606.9. Shefﬁeld PJ. Tissue oxygen measurements. In: HuntTK, Davis JC, editors. Problem wounds: the role ofoxygen. New York: Elsevier; 1988. p. 17–52.10. Ruberg RL. Role of nutrition in wound healing. SurgClin North Am. 1984;64(4):705–14.11. Breslow RA, Hallfrisch J, Guy DG, Crawley B,
Goldberg AP. The importance of dietary protein inhealing pressure ulcers. J Am Geriatr Soc.1993;41(4):357–62.12. MacKay D, Miller AL. Nutritional support forwound healing. Altern Med Rev. 2003;8(4):359–77.13. Ehrlich HP, Tarver H, Hunt TK. Inhibitory effects ofvitamin E on collagen synthesis and wound repair.Ann Surg. 1972;175(2):235–40.14. Greenwald DP, Sharzer LA, Padawer J, Levenson SM,Seifter E. Zone II ﬂexor tendon repair: effects ofvitamins A, E, beta-carotene. J Surg Res.1990;49(1):98–102.15. Galeano M, Torre V, Deodato B, et al. Raxofelast, ahydrophilic vitamin E-like antioxidant, stimulateswound healing in genetically diabetic mice.Surgery. 2001;129(4):467–77.16. Wild S, Roglic G, Green A, Sicree R, King H. Globalprevalence of diabetes: estimates for the year 2000and projections for 2030. Diabetes Care.2004;27(5):1047–53.17. Reiber GE, Vileikyte L, Boyko EJ, et al. Causal
pathways for incident lower-extremity ulcers inpatients with diabetes from two settings. DiabetesCare. 1999;22(1):157–62.18. Brem H, Tomic-Canic M. Cellular and molecularbasis of wound healing in diabetes. J Clin Invest.2007;117(5):1219–22.19. Christman AL, Selvin E, MargolisDJ,LazarusGS,GarzaLA. Hemoglobin A1c predicts healing rate in diabeticwounds. J Invest Dermatol. 2011;131(10):2121–7.20. Peppa M, Stavroulakis P, Raptis SA. Advancedglycoxidation products and impaired diabeticwound healing. Wound Repair Regen.2009;17(4):461–72.21. Trengove NJ, Stacey MC, McGechie DF, Mata S.Qualitative bacteriology and leg ulcer healing.J Wound Care. 1996;5(6):277–80.22. Armstrong DG, Liswood PJ, Todd WF. William J.Stickel Bronze Award. Prevalence of mixedinfections in the diabetic pedal wound. Aretrospective review of 112 infections. J AmPodiatr Med Assoc. 1995;85(10):533–7.23. Schneider M, Vildozola CW, Brooks S. Quantitative
assessment of bacterial invasion of chronic ulcers.Statistical analysis. Am J Surg. 1983;145(2):260–2.24. Murphy PS, Evans GR. Advances in wound healing:a review of current wound healing products. Plast
24. Murphy PS, Evans GR. Advances in wound healing:a review of current wound healing products. PlastSurg Int. 2012;2012:190436.608 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
25. Warriner R, Burrell R. Infection and the chronicwound: a focus on silver. Adv Skin Wound Care.2005;18(Suppl 1):2–12.26. Miller AC, Rashid RM, Falzon L, Elamin EM,Zehtabchi S. Silver sulfadiazine for the treatmentof partial-thickness burns and venous stasis ulcers.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(5):e159–65.27. Skog E, Arnesjo B, Troeng T, Gjores JE, Bergljung L,Gundersen J, et al. A randomized trial comparingcadexomer iodine and standard treatment in theout-patient management of chronic venous ulcers.Br J Dermatol. 1983;109(1):77–83.28. Moberg S, Hoffman L, Grennert ML, Holst A. Arandomized trial of cadexomer iodine in decubitusulcers. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1983;31(8):462–5.29. Lipsky BA, Hoey C. Topical antimicrobial therapyfor treating chronic wounds. Clin Infect Dis.2009;49(10):1541–9.30. Draelos ZD, Rizer RL, Trookman NS. A comparisonof postprocedural wound care treatments: doantibiotic-based ointments improve outcomes?J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(3 Suppl):S23–9.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(3 Suppl):S23–9.31. Taylor SC, Averyhart AN, Heath CR.Postprocedural wound-healing efﬁcacy followingremoval of dermatosis papulosa nigra lesions inan African American population: a comparison ofa skin protectant ointment and a topicalantibiotic. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(3Suppl):S30–5.32. Langford JH, Artemi P, Benrimoj SI. Topicalantimicrobial prophylaxis in minor wounds. AnnPharmacother. 1997;31(5):559–63.33. Maddox JS, Ware JC, Dillon HC Jr. The naturalhistory of streptococcal skin infection: preventionwith topical antibiotics. J Am Acad Dermatol.1985;13(2 Pt 1):207–12.34. Rogers HD, Desciak EB, Marcus RP, Wang S,MacKay-Wiggan J, Eliezri YD. Prospective study ofwound infections in Mohs micrographic surgeryusing clean surgical technique in the absence ofprophylactic antibiotics. J Am Acad Dermatol.2010;63(5):842–51.35. Levender MM, Davis SA, Kwatra SG, Williford PM,Feldman SR. Use of topical antibiotics as
Feldman SR. Use of topical antibiotics asprophylaxis in clean dermatologic procedures.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(3):445–51.36. Mulder G, Jones R, Cederholm-Williams S, CherryG, Ryan T. Fibrin cuff lysis in chronic venous ulcerstreated with a hydrocolloid dressing. Int JDermatol. 1993;32(4):304–6.37. Prete PE. Growth effects of Phaenicia sericata larvalextracts on ﬁbroblasts: mechanism for woundhealing by maggot therapy. Life Sci.1997;60(8):505–10.38. Thomas S, Andrews A, Jones M, Church J. Maggotsare useful in treating infected or necrotic wounds.BMJ. 1999;318(7186):807–8.39. Ke Q, Costa M. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).Mol Pharmacol. 2006;70(5):1469–80.40. Jones V, Grey JE, Harding KG. Wound dressings.BMJ. 2006;332(7544):777–80.41. Barnett SE, Varley SJ. The effects of calcium alginateon wound healing. Ann R Coll Surg Engl.1987;69(4):153–5.42. Cullen B, Smith R, McCulloch E, Silcock D,
42. Cullen B, Smith R, McCulloch E, Silcock D,Morrison L. Mechanism of action ofPROMOGRAN, a protease modulating matrix, forthe treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Wound RepairRegen. 2002;10(1):16–25.43. Beele H, Meuleneire F, Nahuys M, Percival SL. Aprospective randomised open label study toevaluate the potential of a new silveralginate/carboxymethylcellulose antimicrobialwound dressing to promote wound healing. IntWound J. 2010;7(4):262–70.44. Percival SL, Bowler P, Woods EJ. Assessing the effectof an antimicrobial wound dressing on bioﬁlms.Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(1):52–7.45. Dziewulski P, et al. Acute management of facialburns. In: Jeschke MG, Kamolz L-P, Sjo ¨berg F, WolfSE, editors. Handbook of burns vol. 1: acute burncare, 1st edn. New York: Springer; 2011.pp. 291–302.46. Marston WA, Hanft J, Norwood P, Pollak R. Theefﬁcacy and safety of Dermagraft in improving thehealing of chronic diabetic foot ulcers: results of aprospective randomized trial. Diabetes Care.
prospective randomized trial. Diabetes Care.2003;26(6):1701–5.47. Hanft JR, Surprenant MS. Healing of chronic footulcers in diabetic patients treated with a humanﬁbroblast-derived dermis. J Foot Ankle Surg.2002;41(5):291–9.48. Newton DJ, Khan F, Belch JJ, Mitchell MR, Leese
ulcers in diabetic patients treated with a humanﬁbroblast-derived dermis. J Foot Ankle Surg.2002;41(5):291–9.48. Newton DJ, Khan F, Belch JJ, Mitchell MR, LeeseGP. Blood ﬂow changes in diabetic foot ulcerstreated with dermal replacement therapy. J FootAnkle Surg. 2002;41(4):233–7.49. Langer A, Rogowski W. Systematic review ofeconomic evaluations of human cell-derivedwound care products for the treatment of venousAdv Ther (2017) 34:599–610 609
leg and diabetic foot ulcers. BMC Health Serv Res.2009;9:115.50. Driver VR, Lavery LA, Reyzelman AM, et al. Aclinical trial of Integra Template for diabetic footulcer treatment. Wound Repair Regen.2015;23(6):891–900.51. Streubel PN, Stinner DJ, Obremskey WT. Use ofnegative-pressure wound therapy in orthopaedictrauma. J Am Acad Orthop Surg.2012;20(9):564–74.52. Venturi ML, Attinger CE, Mesbahi AN, Hess CL,Graw KS. Mechanisms and clinical applications ofthe vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) device: a review.Am J Clin Dermatol. 2005;6(3):185–94.53. Smiell JM, Wieman TJ, Steed DL, Perry BH,Sampson AR, Schwab BH. Efﬁcacy and safety ofbecaplermin (recombinant human platelet-derivedgrowth factor-BB) in patients with nonhealing,lower extremity diabetic ulcers: a combinedanalysis of four randomized studies. WoundRepair Regen. 1999;7(5):335–46.54. Barrientos S, Stojadinovic O, Golinko MS, Brem H,Tomic-Canic M. Growth factors and cytokines inwound healing. Wound Repair Regen.
wound healing. Wound Repair Regen.2008;16(5):585–601.55. Emmerson E, Campbell L, Davies FC, et al.Insulin-like growth factor-1 promotes woundhealing in estrogen-deprived mice: new insightsinto cutaneous IGF-1R/ERalpha cross talk. J InvestDermatol. 2012;132(12):2838–48.56. Lima MH, Caricilli AM, de Abreu LL, et al. Topicalinsulin accelerates wound healing in diabetes byenhancing the AKT and ERK pathways: adouble-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. PLoSOne. 2012;7(5):e36974.57. Wu L, Xia YP, Roth SI, Gruskin E, Mustoe TA.Transforming growth factor-beta1 fails to stimulatewound healing and impairs its signal transductionin an aged ischemic ulcer model: importance ofoxygen and age. Am J Pathol. 1999;154(1):301–9.58. Wu SC, Marston W, Armstrong DG. Wound care:the role of advanced wound-healing technologies.J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 2010;100(5):385–94.59. Kranke P, Bennett M, Roeckl-Wiedmann I, Debus S.Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for chronic wounds.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for chronic wounds.Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(2):CD004123.60. Fonder MA, Lazarus GS, Cowan DA, Aronson-CookB, Kohli AR, Mamelak AJ. Treating the chronicwound: a practical approach to the care ofnonhealing wounds and wound care dressings.J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;58(2):185–206.61. Londahl M, Katzman P, Nilsson A, Hammarlund C.Hyperbaric oxygen therapy facilitates healing ofchronic foot ulcers in patients with diabetes.Diabetes Care. 2010;33(5):998–1003.62. O’Reilly D, Linden R, Fedorko L, et al. Aprospective, double-blind, randomized, controlledclinical trial comparing standard wound care withadjunctive hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) tostandard wound care only for the treatment ofchronic, non-healing ulcers of the lower limb inpatients with diabetes mellitus: a study protocol.Trials. 2011;12:69.63. Han G, Nguyen LN, Macherla C, et al. Nitricoxide-releasing nanoparticles accelerate woundhealing by promoting ﬁbroblast migration and
healing by promoting ﬁbroblast migration andcollagen deposition. Am J Pathol.2012;180(4):1465–73.64. Mowbray M, Tan X, Wheatley PS, Rossi AG, MorrisRE, Weller RB. Topically applied nitric oxideinduces T-lymphocyte inﬁltration in human skin,but minimal inﬂammation. J Invest Dermatol.2008;128(2):352–60.65. Lo DD, Zimmermann AS, Nauta A, Longaker MT,Lorenz HP. Scarless fetal skin wound healingupdate. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today.2012;96(3):237–47.66. Larson BJ, Longaker MT, Lorenz HP. Scarless fetalwound healing: a basic science review. PlastReconstr Surg. 2010;126(4):1172–80.67. Wilgus TA. Regenerative healing in fetal skin: areview of the literature. Ostomy Wound Manage.2007;53(6):16–31 (quiz 2–3).68. Seifert AW, Kiama SG, Seifert MG, Goheen JR,Palmer TM, Maden M. Skin shedding and tissueregeneration in African spiny mice (Acomys).Nature. 2012;489(7417):561–5.69. Degen KE, Gourdie RG. Embryonic wound healing:
a primer for engineering novel therapies for tissuerepair. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today.2012;96(3):258–70.70. Badiavas EV, Falanga V. Treatment of chronic
a primer for engineering novel therapies for tissuerepair. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today.2012;96(3):258–70.70. Badiavas EV, Falanga V. Treatment of chronicwounds with bone marrow-derived cells. ArchDermatol. 2003;139(4):510–6.71. McFarlin K, Gao X, Liu YB, et al. Bonemarrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cellsaccelerate wound healing in the rat. WoundRepair Regen. 2006;14(4):471–8.72. Jackson WM, Nesti LJ, Tuan RS. Mesenchymal stemcell therapy for attenuation of scar formationduring wound healing. Stem Cell Res Ther.2012;3(3):20.610 Adv Ther (2017) 34:599–610
