REVIEW ARTICLEOral nicotinamide for non-melanoma skin cancers: A reviewSamantha Vicki Hunt1✉, Aaron Jamison1and Raman Malhotra1© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of Ophthalmologists 2022There has been much interest in the role of oral nicotinamide supplementation in reducing the incidence of non-melanoma skincancers. This article reviews the hypothesised mechanisms of action of nicotinamide, and the available literature outlining its rolefor this purpose. There have been ﬁve randomised controlled trials (RCT), one histopathological study and two case series exploringthe effect of oral nicotinamide supplementation on UV-induced immunosuppression of the skin, and incidence of actinic keratosesand non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSC). The largest RCT received criticism of the statistical analyses used, but the critics stillacknowledged a likely bene ﬁt of treatment with oral nicotinamide in reducing the incidence of NMSC. Nicotinamide has a
favourable safety pro ﬁle. Current evidence is not de ﬁnitive that oral nicotinamide supplementation reduces the incidence of NMSC,but it constitutes a low-risk management option that may be particularly relevant for high-risk individuals, and should be discussedas an option for these patients.Eye (2023) 37:823–829; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-022-02036-zINTRODUCTIONNicotinamide (also known as niacinamide), hereafter NAM, is anamide derivative of vitamin B3. Humans are unable to produce itendogenously, and must derive it from exogenous sources [ 1]. It isfound in meat, ﬁsh, legumes, mushrooms, nuts and grains, and hasan active role in protecting cells from ultraviolet (UV) radiation-induced damage [ 2–4]. UV exposure is a recognised risk factor inthe development of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) [ 2], which
has sparked interest in the role of oral NAM supplementation forreducing the incidence of these malignancies. NMSC is the mostcommon malignancy in the white population [ 5], and a frequentpresentation to oculoplastic services [ 6]. In this article, we reviewthe current literature on oral supplementation of NAM and NMSCincidence, and consider how the use of NAM may be applied toophthalmology.METHODSA literature search using PubMed and Medline was carried outwith search terms ‘nicotinamide ’,‘vitamin B3 ’,‘niacinamide ’,‘basalcell carcinoma ’,‘BCC’,‘squamous cell carcinoma ’,‘SCC’,‘skincancer ’and ‘chemoprevention ’. Articles not written in English orfocusing on topical administration of NAM were excluded.Relevant articles and their bibliographies were reviewed toidentify further pertinent sources.RESULTSThe literature search resulted in 291 unique articles. Article reviewidenti ﬁedﬁve randomised controlled trials (RCT) (two exploring
localised UV-induced immunosuppression, one, incidence rates ofactinic keratosis, and two, rates of NMSC), one histopathologicalstudy and two case series. Figure 1gives an overview of the articlereview process.Nicotinamide and cellular pathwaysUV-irradiation to skin causes DNA damage that instigates acascade of cellular responses to repair [ 2,7]. DNA repair is anenergy-intensive process, and inadequate levels of adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) may limit these efforts and ultimately result incell death. UV-irradiation depletes nicotinamide adenine dinucleo-tide (NAD +), which is required for the generation of ATP. This isexacerbated by UV exposure related overactivation of poly-adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase (PARP), which blocksglycolysis and further reduces available NAD +.NAM is theorised to support DNA repair following UV exposurevia dual mechanisms as it is a precursor of NAD +, and a directinhibitor of PARP. NAM, therefore, increases available NAD +, and
supports maintenance of adequate ATP levels to drive the highlyenergy-dependent DNA repair process. Other theories on NAM ’s
inhibitor of PARP. NAM, therefore, increases available NAD +, andsupports maintenance of adequate ATP levels to drive the highlyenergy-dependent DNA repair process. Other theories on NAM ’sprotective mechanism of action include the inhibition of sirtuinenzymatic pathways, which regulate cellular metabolism and arepro-in ﬂammatory [ 8]. Sirtuin 1, which inhibits apoptosis, has beenfound to be over-expressed in biopsy samples of NMSC [ 9,10].NAM may offer further photoprotection due to its impact on theimmune system, since it is recognised to modulate a variety ofcytokines including IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-8, TNF and IFN-g, and may havedownstream effects on calcium-based leukocyte signalling andCD38-related NAD +regulation [ 7,11,12]. However, PARP-deﬁcient cells have been shown to have higher rates of celldeath, meaning there may be a balance with the effect of NAM-
inhibition, and an in-vitro study on irradiated mouse cells byRiklis et al. [ 11] showed a concentration-dependent effect on DNArepair.Clinical applications –effect on cell senescenceSenescent cells are thought to be induced by oxidative stress,and increase in number with age. Senescent ﬁbroblasts in skinare thought to contribute to the development of NMSC [ 1].Received: 25 January 2022 Revised: 8 March 2022 Accepted: 15 March 2022Published online: 28 March 20221Corneoplastic unit, Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, England.✉email: samanthahunt2@nhs.netwww.nature.com/eye1234567890();,:
Mahajan et al. [ 1] undertook a series of experiments to evaluatethe effect of both creatine and NAM on the number of senescentcells produced by treating dermal human neonatal ﬁbroblastswith hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) for 2 h. Some cells were pre-treated for 24 h with creatinine, NAM, or both. Some were treated2 h following the exposure to H 2O2,some were treated with waterand some not treated at all, to act as controls. Cells wereincubated for 72 h post-H2O2treatment with some cells removedat 24, 48 and 72 h for analysis. Pre-treatment for 2 days with eithercreatine or NAM resulted in reduced markers associated withsenescent cells, with no additional improvements noted whenthey were combined. Similarly, pre-treatment with either creatineor NAM attenuated the impact of H2O2on senescent-cell-inducedchanges in cytokine expression. As before, effects were similar forseparate and combined use of creatine and NAM. However,treatment after exposure to H
treatment after exposure to H2O2failed to achieve this effect.Furthermore, pre-treatment with creatine, NAM or both wasshown to reduce the H2O2-induced increases in intracellularreactive oxygen species. This study lends support to the use ofNAM as prophylaxis to reduce the incidence of NMSC, but not as atreatment option for NMSC. However, this is an in-vitro studyrelying on topical treatment, and further studies would berequired in-vivo to elucidate the effect of oral supplementationonﬁbroblast senescence.Clinical applications –effect on UV-inducedimmunosuppresionIn 2009, Yiasemides et al. [ 2] undertook a double blinded,randomised, controlled, crossover trial to evaluate the impact oforal NAM on UV-induced immunosuppression. It is recognisedthat UV radiation equivalent to daily ambient sun exposure is
adequate to suppress delayed hypersensitivity responses to recallantigens. The authors applied this knowledge and evaluated theimpact of oral NAM in healthy, Mantoux-positive volunteers.Volunteers took either NAM tablets or visually-matched placebofor 1 week. From day 3, three areas of the lower back receivedirradiation from a solar simulator with UV designed to replicatenatural sunlight. Each area was irradiated with a different dose ofradiation (1, 2 and 4 J/cm2) once daily for 3 consecutive days, afterwhich they underwent Mantoux testing, alongside an adjacent,untreated area. The results of the Mantoux testing were evaluated72 h later. Following a 4-week washout period, the process wasrepeated on the other side of the lower back, with volunteersswitching from treatment to placebo, or vice versa. Of note, twodifferent doses of NAM were used –one group took 500 mg NAMonce daily (low dose group, n=31), and the other took 500 mg 3
times a day (high dose group, n=30). All volunteers had theirminimal erythema dose –the minimum UV exposure required togenerate a barely perceptible erythema 24 h later –established bytesting on the upper back at the beginning of each arm of thestudy. The researchers also measured erythrocyte NAD +levels inﬁve fasted volunteers - 30, 60 and 90 min after consumption of a500 mg NAM tablet. Oral NAM did not affect minimal erythemathresholds in either the low or high dose groups; neither did oralNAM affect hypersensitivity reactions on unirradiated sites.Immunosuppression was noted in a dose-dependent manner inboth placebo and treatment groups; in those receiving NAMsupplements, there was signi ﬁcantly less immunosuppressionnoted ( p< 0.001), with similar responses in the high and low dosegroups. Sub-analysis to identify risk factors for immunosuppres-sion did not identify links with age or gender but did ﬁnd aninverse relationship with minimal erythema dose, suggesting
volunteers with paler complexion experienced greater immuno-suppression than those with darker complexions. Blood levels ofNAD+peaked at 30% of baseline 1 h after NAM tablet ingestion,
volunteers with paler complexion experienced greater immuno-suppression than those with darker complexions. Blood levels ofNAD+peaked at 30% of baseline 1 h after NAM tablet ingestion,returning to baseline by 90 min, which the authors hypothesisemeant the NAM was rapidly absorbed by tissues, though theyhighlight that it is not yet known how that correlates with NAD +Records screened(n = 291)Records excluded(n = 230)Not relevantFocus on topical treatmentFocus on nicotinic acidFocus on other malignancyReports assessed for eligibility(n = 61)Reports excluded:(n = 53)Not clinical trialsRecords identified from Pubmed (n=569) and Medline (n=355):(n = 924)Records removed before screening :Duplicate records removed (n = 633)ScreeningStudies included in review(n = 8)noitacifitnedI IncludedFig. 1 PRISMA diagram outlining the article review and selection process.S.V. Hunt et al.824Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
levels in skin. There were no reported adverse effects. The authorsconcluded that low dose oral NAM supplementation confersprotection against photoimmunosuppression without any effecton tendency to sunburn and may offer inexpensive and well-tolerated protection against skin cancer.Thanos et al. [ 13] used very similar methodology to explore theeffect of both oral (and topical) NAM prior to photodynamictherapy (PDT) on local immunosuppression. Drawing on healthy,Mantoux-positive volunteers, they undertook a double-blind,placebo-controlled crossover study using high and low irradiancerates of PDT. PDT was found to induce local immunosuppressionwith high irradiance PDT having a larger effect (up to 50%suppression) than low irradiance PDT (up to 22%). Oral NAMreduced the observed immunosuppression by up to 69%.Clinical applications –actinic keratoses and non-melanomaskin cancerSurjana et al. [ 14] undertook a randomised, placebo-controlled,
double blinded study into the number of actinic keratoses (AK)present in patients receiving oral NAM 500 mg either once ortwice daily for a 4-month period. Participants were examined atbaseline, 2 months and 4 months, with relative reductions innumbers of AK of up to 48% noted (35% in the twice daily groupat both 2 and 4 months, 15 and 29% in the once daily group, allreaching statistical signi ﬁcance). Given the recognised linkbetween number of AK and development of NMSC [ 15], theauthors also noted the incidence of new biopsy-proven diagnosesof cutaneous malignancies. Prior histopathological diagnoses ofcutaneous malignancies prior to enrolment occurred in 81% and79% of participants in placebo and treatment groups. Duringthe 4-month trial, 20 new NMSCs developed in 11 patients in theplacebo group, and four developed in two patients in thetreatment group with an odds ratio of developing a new NMSCin the NAM group of 0.14 ( p=0.019).
in the NAM group of 0.14 ( p=0.019).Chen et al. [ 16]. undertook a phase III controlled trial of 386‘high-risk ’participants randomised to 12 months of oral NAM (500mg twice daily) or placebo, known as the ONTRAC study, andoutlined a 23% reduction in the development of NMSCs at12 months ( p=0.02). ‘High risk ’was de ﬁned as having had at leasttwo NMSCs (basal cell carcinoma - BCC, squamous cell carcinoma–SCC, and Bowen ’s disease) in the previous 5 years. The reductionappeared to be similar in the development of BCC (20%, p=0.12)compared with SCC (30%, p=0.05), with greatest effect seenamong super ﬁcial BCC (although, as these are more commonamongst immunosuppressed patients, their pathogenesis is likelyto differ from the other subtypes). The effect was also greateramongst patients who had a higher number of NMSCs in the 5years prior to the study. The incidence of AKs was also studied as a
secondary endpoint and found to be 13% lower at 12 months.There were no differences found between the groups 6 monthsafter NAM treatment was stopped, suggesting that the effect oftreatment only persists whilst the patient is actively taking NAM.Theﬁndings of this RCT were discussed widely in the literature,which, in part, included criticism of its statistical analysis [ 17–20].Gilmore et al. [ 17] performed a retrospective Bayesian analysisbased on Chen et al. ’s reported ﬁndings, and demonstrated thatthere was insuf ﬁcient evidence to make any positive statementsregarding NAM ’se fﬁcacy. They suggested that the true reductionin NMSC incidence rate is likely to be in the region of 5%, whichthe authors did not believe to be suf ﬁcient to recommend its use,although improved study design and increased sample sizeswould be required to prove this with a meaningful statisticalsigni ﬁcance.A speci ﬁc criticism of the ONTRAC study lies in the fact that their
primary endpoint was a composite one - the occurrence of BCC,SCC and Bowen ’s disease, all counted as one –with the powercalculation based on the same [ 17]. Given that the effect of NAM
primary endpoint was a composite one - the occurrence of BCC,SCC and Bowen ’s disease, all counted as one –with the powercalculation based on the same [ 17]. Given that the effect of NAMon the pathogenesis of tumour development is likely to differbetween these three clinical entities, it would be clinically usefulto investigate its effect on their incidence rates separately, whichwould necessitate different power calculations and, subsequently,larger sample sizes.Gilmore et al. [ 17], however, also acknowledge that there wasno evidence to conclude that NAM does not provide any bene ﬁt.Furthermore, they agree that given the underlying pathophysiol-ogy, NAM is likely to have a preventative effect on NMSC, but warnthat higher standards of evidence will be required to prove it.Minocha et al. [ 21] analysed pathological specimens of tumoursarising as part of the ONTRAC study, examining 70 tumours (BCC
or SCC) from the placebo group, and 60 from the NAM group.They found statistically lower levels of CD68 +positive cells in theNAM group, without statistically lower levels of CD163, suggestinga speci ﬁc reduction in M1 macrophages. CD68 +cells havepreviously been found in higher levels in SCC than normal skinand M1 macrophages produce pro-carcinogenic reactive oxygenspecies and in ﬂammation [ 21,22]. The authors suggest that NAMreduces M1 macrophage-associated tumorigenesis. Tumours thatarose in sun-exposed areas were also assessed for markers of DNAdamage. Although these tended to lower levels in the NAM group,these did not reach statistical signi ﬁcance. The authors postulatethis may relate to diverse sampling with respect to time betweensun exposure and tumour excision. They also highlight that theseanalyses were performed on lesions that arose despite treatmentwith NAM, and the effect on areas of skin that did not develop
tumours was outside the scope of this research [ 21].Chen et al. [ 23] also reported a double blinded, placebo-controlled study with stable, immunosuppressed post-renaltransplant patients randomised to receive oral NAM 500 mg twicedaily or placebo for 6 months. Such patients are at high risk ofdeveloping NMSC, especially SCCs, which have been reported asoccurring with a frequency up to 250 fold that of immunocompe-tent individuals [ 9,24]. Patients were examined at baseline, thenevery 2 months for 6 months. They also undertook blood andurine testing at regular intervals to establish safety of NAMsupplementation in this patient group. The primary endpoint wasrate of new NMSC, with secondary endpoints separating theseinto BCC, SCC and AK. Although trends towards lower rates of newlesions were noted in the treated group, and they report an outlierin the placebo group that may have affected analyses, none of theendpoints reached statistical signi ﬁcance. The authors note similar
rates of reduction compared with their ONTRAC study inimmunocompetent individuals and speculate that larger numberswould reach statistical signi ﬁcance. Unfortunately, the studystruggled to recruit the intended numbers required by theirpower calculations and was stopped early with only 25% of theintended participants. Yélamos et al. [ 25] echo Gilmore et al. [ 17]concerns about evaluating all NMSC subtypes together andhighlight the underpowering of both of Chen et al. ’s studies.They also raise particular concerns regarding the increasednumber of more aggressive lesions such as morpheiform BCCsand poorly differentiated SCCs in the ONTRAC treated group. Theyadvocated larger studies to explore this.In response to Chen et al. [ 23] reported ﬁndings, Drago et al.[26] reported positive responses in post-renal transplant patients,later publishing a similar study which also included post-hepatictransplant patients [ 27]. Both studies constituted small case
control studies comparing size and number of AKs at baseline
later publishing a similar study which also included post-hepatictransplant patients [ 27]. Both studies constituted small casecontrol studies comparing size and number of AKs at baselineand after 6 months with treatment groups given oral NAM. Therenal-only study used a regime of 250 mg 3 times a day.Unfortunately, the second study reports con ﬂicting regimes, withthe abstract reporting 500 mg once daily and the main body ofthe text stating 250 mg three times daily. Blood monitoringestablished there was no effect on immunosuppressant druglevels throughout the treatment periods. In the treated group, ﬁveof 19 patients underwent biopsy of a lesion clinically consistentwith AK at baseline, which con ﬁrmed the diagnosis. The treatedS.V. Hunt et al.825Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
groups in both studies showed at least partial regression of atleast one lesion in 88% of individuals, with 44% and 42%respectively showing complete regression of at least one lesion.No new lesions developed, and none transformed to SCC, whereasboth untreated groups showed enlargement of lesions, develop-ment of new lesions, or transformation to SCC. In the secondstudy, using area of AK in cm2, they showed statistically signi ﬁcantdifferences between the treated and untreated groups ( p=0.01).Unfortunately, there does not appear to be any evidence ofblinding of the researchers evaluating the lesions. The authorsspeculate that their results differ to those of Chen et al. [ 23] due todifferent levels of immunosuppression, or drug choice, and notethat Chen et al. did not report this information, so they are unableto compare the cohorts in this respect. They advocate largerstudies with longer follow-up periods to con ﬁrm their ﬁndings.
Ferreira et al. [ 28] undertook a two-pronged study exploring theeffects of the both oral NAM, and topical 5-Flurouracil (5FU) onskin ﬁeld cancerisation. They recruited 36 patients with 3-10 AKson a forearm. Patients were ﬁrst randomised to receive 500 mgoral NAM twice daily, or placebo (blinded), then randomised againto use topical 5FU 3 times a day or SPF 30 sunscreen 3 times a dayon their forearm for 120 days. Evaluations explored clearance ofAKs, changes in forearm photoageing scales, and biopsy samplesfrom areas clinically AK-free looking at epithelial dysplasia, usingexpression of both p53 and Ki67 markers. 5FU reduced the overallnumber of AKs compared with use of sunscreen, but did not reachstatistical signi ﬁcance in clearance of AKs or in epithelial dysplasiamarkers. NAM was not shown to have any impact, except inreducing the expression of Ki67, which did reach statisticalsigni ﬁcance. However, patient numbers were small, three patients
failed to complete the courses (not related to the use of NAM) andthe side effect pro ﬁle of NAM was favourable, and much less thanthat of 5FU. The authors speculate that a longer course of NAMmight have demonstrated a clinical bene ﬁt not identi ﬁed in thisresearch.Side effects and tolerabilityOral nicotinamide has been used for a variety of clinicalindications, including: autoimmune blistering disorders such asbullous pemphigoid, acne, depression, and prevention of type 1diabetes mellitus and degenerative neurological disorders[7,29,30].Studies in rodents raised concerns regarding toxicity of NAM,with doses resulting in death of half of the population at 2.5 g/kg[30]. However, studies in humans have reported good tolerabilityat higher doses, with no adverse effects reported in childrentreated for 5 years with doses of 25 –50 mg/kg/day, and reportedpractice of doses up to 3 g per day in adults [ 30].Reported side effects include temporary headache, dizziness
and vomiting in fasted individuals who consumed 6 g orally,resolving upon withdrawal [ 30,31]. Reversible hepatotoxicity hasbeen reported in doses of 9 –10 g/day [ 32,33].Surjana et al. [ 14] reported good compliance (94 –98% asdetermined by rates of returned tablets at the end of their trial) inpatients taking 500 mg either once or twice daily, with one reportof nausea. They also reported that blood tests (full blood count,creatinine and liver function) taken at 2 months did not show anyclinically signi ﬁcant changes compared with baseline, though theydo not elaborate on what changes, if any, were noted.Caution should be taken in patients with hepatic disease, whichdelays clearance of plasma levels [ 33]. Due to differences inmetabolic pathways, side effects reported by non-human studiesmay not be representative of effects in humans. Older studies maybe difﬁcult to interpret due to use of products contaminated
by nicotinic acid, with its different side effect pro ﬁle. Concernsraised regarding NAM-induced insulin resistance in rats appear
be difﬁcult to interpret due to use of products contaminatedby nicotinic acid, with its different side effect pro ﬁle. Concernsraised regarding NAM-induced insulin resistance in rats appearunfounded in humans; a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial found no difference in incidence of diabetes inindividuals with diabetic relatives who had islet-cell antibodiesand received 1.2 g/m2oral NAM for 5 years [ 33,34]. A 7-year studyoffering 1.2 g/m2oral NAM to children found to have islet-cellantibodies compared incidence of diabetes in the treated groupcompared with those who declined treatment and found thatrates of diabetes were 41% of that in the untreated group,suggesting a possible protective effect, though this methodologyis less robust than that of a RCT [ 35].Oral NAM has been associated with an overall lowering ofphosphate levels [ 9,36]. Whilst this could theoretically beproblematic in patients on long-term supplementation, this has
not been reported in the studies where patients have takennicotinamide for years [ 34,35]. Furthermore, it is theorised thismay be of clinical bene ﬁt in patients with end-stage renal disease,or post-renal transplant patients, in whom hyperphosphataemia iscorrelated with cardiovascular morbidity and graft rejection [ 9].Unfortunately, one study found it was equally effective but lesswell-tolerated than sevelamer in haemodialysis patients, with 45%of patients in the NAM arm failing to complete the course: half ofthese due to side effects [ 36]. Doses were titrated between 0.5 and2 g per day, and it may be that these doses were too high for thispopulation.Some interest has been shown regarding the use of NAM inpatients with Parkinson ’s disease. A trial by Green [ 37] comparingexcretion of NAM metabolic products after oral administration of50 mg NAM in individuals with motor neurone disease orParkinson ’s disease against control identi ﬁed abnormal excretion
rates in patients with Parkinson ’s disease. The authors speculatedthat this may be due to an underlying enzymatic dysfunction ofhydroxylation resulting in a build-up of neurotoxic derivatives,though this study is not designed to con ﬁrm a causative effect[37]. Zhao et al. [ 38] summarise the current evidence, which isinconclusive. There is evidence to suggest an optimal therapeuticwindow with respect to neuroprotection from NAM, withexcessive levels being potentially neurotoxic. However, Alisky[39] reports a case of a patient receiving oral nicotinic acid (alsoknown as niacin, a precursor to NAM) whose Parkinsoniansymptoms of bradykinesia and rigidity improved with increasingdoses of nicotinic acid, but relapsed upon nicotinic acid with-drawal due to side effects of nightmares and skin rash. Concurrentresearch during the ONTRAC study failed to identify any
neurocognitive effect of oral NAM supplementation, though theyhighlight that other more vulnerable populations may be morelikely to demonstrate a change [ 40]. It seems prudent to avoid oralsupplementation in patients with Parkinson ’s disease until furtherresearch can elucidate this issue.NAM crosses the placenta, with higher levels in foetuses thanmothers. No formal studies have evaluated the safety of oralnicotinamide supplementation in pregnancy or breastfeeding, butno concerns appear to have been raised in the literature [ 33].Zhao [ 41] analysed the data reported in Chen et al. [ 16] phase IIItrial in immunocompetent individuals, and identi ﬁed statisticallysigni ﬁcantly higher rates of mucocutaneous infections within thegroup receiving oral nicotinamide, though the original authorsbelieve this falls within the realms of chance, highlighting that
non-mucocutaneous infection rates were higher in the placebogroup and that nicotinamide has been found to reduce skininfections in mouse models [ 8].Future areas of researchGollins et al. [ 42] recently undertook a survey of dermatologists
Future areas of researchGollins et al. [ 42] recently undertook a survey of dermatologistsand clinicians working in transplant units across the UK, as well asa survey of solid organ transplant recipients. They aimed to assesscurrent practices regarding systemic chemoprevention drug useand establish feasibility for a UK-based RCT studying the use oforal NAM to reduce the incidence of SCC in these high-riskpatients. Of all clinician respondents, 73% had initiated systemicchemoprevention, 60% using acitretin as their ﬁrst line treatmentS.V. Hunt et al.826Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
option. NAM has been used by 24%. Feasibility for the studyappeared good, with 82% of clinicians expressing a willingness torecruit patients, and 72% of patient respondents indicating awillingness to participate.Perceptions of Nicotinamide in NMSC preventionFania et al. [ 43] recently undertook a survey amongst Italiandermatologists exploring perceptions of the use of systemicphotoprotective agents in reducing the risk of NMSC, whichincluded NAM. 85.2% believe that systemic photoprotection playsa role in reducing the risk of NSMC. Of those who had prescribedjust one of the treatment options enquired about, most reportedprescribing NAM (31.5%). The majority of prescriptions were givenfor short-term use: 56.1% covering the 2 –3 month summer period.A 2021 survey of Mohs surgeons in the United States by Desaiet al. [ 44] examined prescribing habits and perceptions over thesafe use long-term of oral NAM. Of 160 respondents, 76.9%
recommend nicotinamide for the prevention of NMSC –70%consider oral NAM in patients who develop at least two NMSCsover 2 years, and 44.4% frequently or always recommend oralNAM to organ transplant recipients to prevent SCC. Clinicianspractising for more than 10 years, and those expressinguncertainty or concern regarding the long-term use of oral NAMwere less likely to have recommended its use in the previous year.Unfortunately, the number of respondents represented only11.3% of invited clinicians, and those that responded mayrepresent a biased sample of those with particularly strong viewsregarding this use of oral NAM. However, with 20% of respondentsrecommending oral NAM to at least 100 patients in the previousyear, the number of patients affected is considerable, and theauthors recommend further studies into safety pro ﬁling and cost-effectiveness of oral NAM in this context.The National Comprehensive Cancer Network, consisting of 31
cancer centres in the USA, incorporated the use of NAM as apreventative management option for SCC in their 2017 guidelines,particularly referencing its better side effect pro ﬁle than oralretinoids: an alternative systemic chemopreventative treatmentoption [ 45]. A 2021 meta-analysis by Tee et al. [ 46] reported nodifference between oral retinoids and NAM for prevention of AKand NMSC, prompting Hoegler et al. [ 47] to recommend NAM asﬁrst line treatment for prevention of NMSC. They highlight thelogistical barriers of using oral retinoids such as prescriptionrequirement, dose titration, monitoring blood tests, and terato-genicity that are not encountered when prescribing NAM.However, consensus-based guidelines on invasive cutaneousSCC were updated for the European Dermatology Forum andpublished in 2020, which acknowledged the evidence regardingnicotinamide in this role, but did not recommend its routine use[48]. A consensus paper of Italian dermatology opinions on
management of AK, also published in 2020, perceived nicotina-mide favourably for reducing the incidence of SCCs [ 49].Furthermore, Cosio et al. [ 50] propose that nicotinamide beincorporated into a multi-drug approach alongside hedgehoginhibitors, arsenic trioxide, itraconazole, and all-trans retinoic acidfor locally advanced or treatment-resistant BCC. They recommendthe combination due to different, but synergistic, mechanisms ofaction on cellular metabolism, citing the potential for reduceddrug-resistance, and lower required dosages of each drug, therebyminimising side effect pro ﬁles.Nicotinamide versus nicotinic acidNAM contains an amide group, which differentiates it fromnicotinic acid (also known as niacin), which is an acidic variant ofvitamin B3 [ 51]. Nicotinic acid is a precursor to NAM and isconverted into NAM in vivo [ 52,53]. Administered orally, it hasbeen used as a treatment for hyperlipidaemia [ 3]. However, it has
a vasodilatory effect that results in ﬂushing, headache and
converted into NAM in vivo [ 52,53]. Administered orally, it hasbeen used as a treatment for hyperlipidaemia [ 3]. However, it hasa vasodilatory effect that results in ﬂushing, headache andhypotension and limited its clinical application [ 51,52]. Althoughnicotinic acid may have similar effects on cellular pathwaysregarding maintenance of NAD +levels [ 30], its side effect pro ﬁleis signi ﬁcant and the two should not be confused or usedinterchangeably [ 51,54,55]. The difference must be speci ﬁcallyhighlighted to patients if recommending NAM to preventconfusion and unintended side effects.Topical or oral nicotinamideThis review focuses on oral administration of NAM. Topical NAM isalso available, and has evidence supporting its anti-ageing andanti-in ﬂammatory properties [ 54]. It is commercially available infacial serums, and there is some interest in use of topical NAM fortreatment of localised photoimmunosuppression, as there hasbeen for oral NAM [ 13,56].
Nicotinamide and ophthalmologyNMSC is the most frequent periocular malignancy, and the currentevidence supports the theory that oral NAM supplementation mayreduce the number of NMSCs developing in a high-risk individualfor as long as the individual remains on it. It is also relativelycommon for patients to have ﬁeld changes such as diffuse AK thatincrease their risk of developing NMSC, with some evidence tosuggest oral NAM can cause regression, which could theoreticallyreduce the patient ’s longer term risk of developing NMSC, thoughthis has yet to be substantiated. For patients in whom surgicalintervention is deemed unsuitable, perhaps due to medicalcomorbidities, oral NAM may provide a low-risk option to reducethe rate of growth, but should not be used in preference to moreestablished treatment options such as hedgehog inhibitors. Inpatients at high risk of developing future lesions, such as thosewith NMSC, with ﬁeld change, and those who are immunosup-
pressed, NAM may have a preventative role, though immunosup-pressed patients ﬁrst require more investigation into how to safelymanage the dosing to prevent unacceptable side effects. Furtherwork is required to explore these avenues before oral NAM is likelyto become integrated into routine practice. However, oral NAMsupplementation should be discussed with patients considered athigh risk of future lesions so they can make an informed decisionas to whether they wish to take it. The potential for isolated use oftopical NAM for this purpose, or whether it has additive effectswhen combined with oral NAM are not yet clear and fall outsidethe scope of this review. Furthermore, patients deemed to be athigh risk for developing NMSC may have chronic sun exposure onlarge surface areas of their skin and are frequently older patients
or those with multiple comorbidities for whom application oftopical NAM to a large area is likely to be impractical or unreliable,and oral NAM probably represents the logistically easier option. Inpatients pursuing supplementation, we would recommend a doseof 500 mg twice daily on the basis of the ONTRAC study regimeand ease of administration. If this is not tolerated, topical NAMcould be trialled as an alternative.There is also interest in NAM in other contexts withinophthalmology. It has been shown that there are lower serumlevels of NAM in patients with glaucomatous optic neuropathy;some early human RCTs suggest that oral NAM offers neuropro-tection, slowing deterioration and possibly enhancing inner retinalganglion cell function in patients with glaucoma [ 57–59]. Similarly,in-vivo animal models and in-vitro studies using cell lines fromhuman uveal melanomas show anti-angiogenic and anti-inﬂammatory properties of NAM and suggest it is a viable
treatment option [ 60–62]. These areas still require furtherinvestigation to elucidate the potential bene ﬁts before it couldbe introduced to routine clinical practice.Limitations
treatment option [ 60–62]. These areas still require furtherinvestigation to elucidate the potential bene ﬁts before it couldbe introduced to routine clinical practice.LimitationsThis is a retrospective review focusing on oral administration ofNAM for the purpose of reducing incidence of NMSC. Studies thusfar have generally relied on small numbers of patients, or analysisS.V. Hunt et al.827Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
of different subtypes of NMSC as one entity, which has drawncriticism regarding the validity of the studies and questionsregarding clinical applicability of the ﬁndings.CONCLUSIONNAM is an amide form of vitamin B3 available in a variety ofcommon foods, and cheaply available without the need forprescription in the UK. Administered orally, it has a very good sideeffect pro ﬁle with minimal symptoms, usually gastrointestinal orheadaches, that resolve upon cessation of the drug. It is thoughtto be safe for use in pregnancy. Smaller doses may be appropriatein patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction, and NAM should beavoided in patients with neurodegenerative disease until moreinformation is available. Oral NAM supplementation does notaffect risk of sunburn with UV exposure, but has been shown toreduce UV-induced immunosuppression. NAM is hypothesised tosupport DNA repair by repleting NAD +stores required for this
energy-dependent process, inhibiting PARP and its effects onglycolysis, and inhibiting sirtuin enzymes which are pro-inﬂammatory. NAM ’s support of DNA repair is theorised to reducetumorigenesis. Although there has been criticism of one study ’sstatistical analysis, there remains acknowledgement that NAM islikely to have some effect to reduce the incidence of NMSC.Furthermore, NAM may even support regression of AK, which areprecursors to NMSC. However, the effect of NAM appears todisappear upon cessation of the drug. Further high-qualityresearch would be bene ﬁcial to elucidate the degree of bene ﬁtthat can be expected with use of oral NAM. However, until suchdata is available, NAM represents a cheap and well-toleratedtreatment option for patients at high risk of developing futureNMSC and clinicians should incorporate this into their discussionswith such patients.REFERENCES1. Mahajan AS, Arikatla VS, Thyagarajan A, Zhelay T, Sahu RP, Kemp MG, et al.
Creatine and Nicotinamide Prevent Oxidant-Induced Senescence in HumanFibroblasts. Nutrients. 2021 Nov [cited 2022 Jan 10];13. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8622652/ .2. Yiasemides E, Sivapirabu G, Halliday GM, Park J, Damian DL. Oral nicotinamideprotects against ultraviolet radiation-induced immunosuppression in humans.Carcinogenesis. 2009;30:101 –5.3. Chen AC, Damian DL. Nicotinamide and the skin: Nicotinamide and the skin.Australas J Dermatol. 2014;55:169 –75.4. Chen AC, Damian DL, Halliday GM. Oral a nd systemic photoprotection: Oraland systemic photoprotection. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed.2014;30:102 –11.5. Leiter U, Garbe C. Epidemiology of Melanoma and Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer —The Role of Sunlight. In: Reichrath J, editor. Sunlight, Vitamin D and Skin Cancer.New York, NY: Springer New York; 2008 [cited 2021 Oct 28]. 89 –103. (Advances inExperimental Medicine and Biology; vol. 624). Available from: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-0-387-77574-6_8 .6. Rene C. Oculoplastic aspects of ocular oncology. Eye 2013;27:199 –207.7. Damian DL. Photoprotective effects of nicotinamide. Photochem Photobio Sci.2010;9:578.8. Chen AC, Martin A, Damian DL. Nicotinamide for skin-cancer chemoprevention.N. Engl J Med. 2016;374:789 –90.9. Bostom AG, Merhi B, Walker J, Robinson-Bostom L. More than skin deep?Potential nicotinamide treatment applications in chronic kidney transplant reci-pients. World J Transpl. 2016;6:658 –64.10. Minocha R, Damian DL, Halliday GM. Melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancerchemoprevention: A role for nicotinamide? Photodermatol Photoimmunol Pho-tomed. 2018;34:5 –12.11. Riklis E, Kol R, Marko R. Trends and developments in radioprotection: the effect ofnicotinamide on DNA repair. Int J Radiat Biol. 1990;57:699 –708.12. Rissiek B, Guse AH, Adriouch S, Bruzzone S. Editorial: the versatile role of nico-tinamide adenine dinucleotide in immunity. Front Immunol. 2021;12:810280.
13. Thanos SM, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide reduces photodynamic
tinamide adenine dinucleotide in immunity. Front Immunol. 2021;12:810280.13. Thanos SM, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide reduces photodynamictherapy-induced immunosuppression in humans: Nicotinamide reduces PDTimmunosuppression in humans. Br J Dermatol. 2012;167:631 –6.14. Surjana D, Halliday GM, Martin AJ, Moloney FJ, Damian DL. Oral nicotinamidereduces actinic keratoses in phase II double-blinded randomized controlled trials.J Invest Dermatol. 2012;132:1497 –500.15. Green A, Battistutta D. Incidence and determinants of skin cancer in a high-riskaustralian population. Int J Cancer. 1990;46:356 –61.16. Chen AC, Martin AJ, Choy B, Fernández-Peñas P, Dalziell RA, McKenzie CA, et al. Aphase 3 randomized trial of nicotinamide for skin-cancer chemoprevention. N.Engl J Med. 2015;373:1618 –26.17. Gilmore SJ. Nicotinamide and skin cancer chemoprevention: The jury is still out.Australas J Dermatol. 2018;59:6 –9.
Australas J Dermatol. 2018;59:6 –9.18. Gilmore SJ. Response to ‘Considering the chemopreventive potential of nicoti-namide in Gilmore ’s Bayesian analysis ’. Australas J Dermatol. 2018;59:236 –7.19. Phelan PS. Chemopreventive potential of nicotinamide in Gilmore ’s Bayesiananalysis. Australas J Dermatol. 2018;59:236 –236.20. Bagcchi S. Nicotinamide yields impressive results in skin cancer. Lancet Oncol.2015;16:e591.21. Minocha R, Martin AJ, Chen AC, Scolyer RA, Lyons JG, McKenzie CA, et al. Areduction in in ﬂammatory macrophages may contribute to skin cancer chemo-prevention by nicotinamide. J Invest Dermatol. 2019;139:467 –9.22. Pettersen JS, Fuentes-Duculan J, Suárez-Fariñas M, Pierson KC, Pitts-Kiefer A, FanL, et al. Tumor-associated macrophages in the cutaneous SCC microenvironmentare heterogeneously activated. J Invest Dermatol. 2011;131:1322 –30.23. Chen AC, Martin AJ, Dalziell RA, McKenzie CA, Lowe PM, Eris JM, et al. A phase II
randomized controlled trial of nicotinamide for skin cancer chemoprevention inrenal transplant recipients. Br J Dermatol. 2016;175:1073 –5.24. Collins L, Asfour L, Stephany M, Lear JT, Stasko T. Management of non-melanomaskin cancer in transplant recipients. Clin Oncol. 2019;31:779 –88.25. Yélamos O, Halpern AC, Weinstock MA. Reply to ‘A phase II randomized con-trolled trial of nicotinamide for skin cancer chemoprevention in renal transplantrecipients ’. Br J Dermatol. 2017;176:551 –2.26. Drago F, Ciccarese G, Parodi A. Nicotinamide for skin-cancer chemoprevention. N.Engl J Med. 2016;374:789 –90.27. Drago F, Ciccarese G, Cogorno L, Calvi C, Marsano LA, Parodi A. Prevention ofnon-melanoma skin cancers with nicotinamide in transplant recipients: a case-control study. Eur J Dermatol. 2017;27:382 –5.28. Ferreira ER, Miola AC, Lima TRR, Schmitt JV, Abbade LPF, Miot HA. Ef ﬁcacy ofintermittent topical 5- ﬂuorouracil 5% and oral nicotinamide in the skin ﬁeld
cancerization: a randomized clinical trial. Bras Dermatol. 2021;96:784 –7.29. Knip M, Douek IF, Moore WPT, Gillmor HA, McLean AEM, Bingley PJ, et al. Safetyof high-dose nicotinamide: a review. Diabetologia. 2000;43:1337 –45.30. Hwang ES, Song SB. Possible adverse effects of high-dose nicotinamide:mechanisms and safety assessment. Biomolecules. 2020;10:687.31. Horsman MR, Høyer M, Honess DJ, Dennis IF, Overgaard J. Nicotinamide phar-macokinetics in humans and mice: a comparative assessment and the implica-tions for radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol J Eur Soc Ther Radio Oncol.1993;27:131 –9.32. Elliott RB, Pilcher CC, Stewart A, Fergusson D, McGregor MA. The use of nicoti-namide in the prevention of type 1 diabetes. Ann N. Y Acad Sci. 1993;696:333 –41.33. Rolfe HM. A review of nicotinamide: treatment of skin diseases and potential sideeffects. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2014;13:324 –8.34. Gale EA. European Nicotinamide Diabetes Intervention Trial (ENDIT): a rando-
mised controlled trial of intervention before the onset of type 1 diabetes. Lancet.2004;363:925 –31.35. Elliott RB, Pilcher CC, Fergusson DM, Stewart AW. A Population Based Strategy to
mised controlled trial of intervention before the onset of type 1 diabetes. Lancet.2004;363:925 –31.35. Elliott RB, Pilcher CC, Fergusson DM, Stewart AW. A Population Based Strategy toPrevent Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Using Nicotinamide. J Pediatr EndocrinolMetab. 1996 Jan [cited 2021 Nov 13];9. Available from: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/JPEM.1996.9.5.501/html .36. Lenglet A, Liabeuf S, El Esper N, Brisset S, Mansour J, Lemaire-Hurtel A-S, et al.Efﬁcacy and safety of nicotinamide in haemodialysis patients: the NICOREN study.Nephrol Dial Transpl Publ Eur Dial Transpl Assoc - Eur Ren Assoc. 2017;32:870 –9.37. Green S. N-methylation of pyridines in Parkinson ’s disease. Lancet.1991;338:120 –1.38. Zhao X, Zhang M, Li C, Jiang X, Su Y, Zhang Y. Bene ﬁts of vitamins in thetreatment of parkinson ’s disease. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019;2019:9426867.39. Alisky JM. Niacin improved rigidity and bradykinesia in a Parkinson ’s disease
patient but also caused unacceptable nightmares and skin rash —A case report.Nutr Neurosci. 2005;8:327 –9.40. Martin AJ, Dhillon HM, Vardy JL, Dalziell RA, Choy B, Fernández-Peñas P, et al.Neurocognitive function and quality of life outcomes in the ONTRAC study forskin cancer chemoprevention by nicotinamide. Geriatrics. 2019;4:31.41. Zhao Y. Nicotinamide for skin-cancer chemoprevention. N. Engl J Med.2016;374:789.42. Gollins CE, Shah A, Sinha K, Khan S, Paul N, Meeajun B, et al. Feasibility of a trial toevaluate nicotinamide for chemoprevention of skin cancers in organ transplantrecipients in theUK. Br J Dermatol. 2020;183:394 –6.S.V. Hunt et al.828Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
43. Fania L, Sampogna F, Ricci F, Hyeraci M, Paradisi A, Palese E, et al. Systemicphotoprotection in skin cancer prevention: knowledge among dermatologists.Biomolecules. 2021;11:332.44. Desai S, Olbricht S, Ruiz ES, Hartman RI. Nicotinamide for keratinocyte carcinomachemoprevention: a nationwide survey of mohs surgeons. Dermatol Surg. 2021;47:452 –3.45. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines inOncology: Squamous Cell Cancer. National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2017[cited 2021 Dec 14]. Available from: https://oncolife.com.ua/doc/nccn/Squamous_Cell_Skin_Cancer.pdf .46. Tee LY, Sultana R, Tam SYC, Oh CC. Chemoprevention of keratinocyte carcinomaand actinic keratosis in solid-organ transplant recipients: Systematic review andmeta-analyses. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;84:528 –30.47. Hoegler KM, Khachemoune A. Is the ﬁrst-line systemic chemoprevention ofnonmelanoma skin cancer nicotinamide or acitretin? Int J Dermatol.2021;60:749 –50.
48. Stratigos AJ, Garbe C, Dessinioti C, Lebbe C, Bataille V, Bastholt L, et al. Europeaninterdisciplinary guideline on invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the skin: Part1. epidemiology, diagnostics and prevention. Eur J Cancer. 2020;128:60 –82.49. Moscarella E, Di Brizzi EV, Casari A, De Giorgi V, Di Meo N, Fargnoli MC, et al.Italian expert consensus paper on the management of patients with actinickeratoses. Dermatol Ther. 2020 Nov [cited 2021 Oct 24];33. Available from:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dth.13992 .50. Cosio T, Di Prete M, Campione E. Arsenic trioxide, itraconazole, all-trans retinoicacid and nicotinamide: a proof of concept for combined treatments withhedgehog inhibitors in advanced basal cell carcinoma. Biomedicines. 2020;8:156.51. Huber R, Wong A. Nicotinamide: An Update and Review of Safety & Differences
from Niacin. Skin Ther Lett. 2020 Dec [cited 2021 Oct 24];25. Available from:https://www.skintherapyletter.com/dermatology/nicotinamide-update-niacin/ .52. Kademian M, Bechtel M, Zirwas M. Case reports: new onset ﬂushing due tounauthorized substitution of niacin for nicotinamide. J Drugs Dermatol.2007;6:1220 –1.53. Hosseini B. Vitamin B3 –Not all forms are equivalent! J Pharm Pr Res.2017;47:79 –80.54. Snaidr VA, Damian DL, Halliday GM. Nicotinamide for photoprotection and skincancer chemoprevention: A review of ef ﬁcacy and safety. Exp Dermatol.2019;28:15 –22.55. Ratnarajah K, Zargham H, Jafarian F. Confusion among different forms of vitaminB3. J Cutan Med Surg. 2020;24:642 –3.56. Gensler HL. Prevention of photoimmunosuppression and photocarcinogenesis bytopical nicotinamide. Nutr Cancer. 1997;29:157 –62.57. Hui F, Tang J, Williams PA, McGuinness MB, Hadoux X, Casson RJ, et al. Improvementin inner retinal function in glaucoma with nicotinamide (vitaminB3) supplementa-
B3) supplementa-tion: A crossover randomized clinical trial. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2020;48:903 –14.58. Tribble JR, Otmani A, Sun S, Ellis SA, Cimaglia G, Vohra R, et al. Nicotinamideprovides neuroprotection in glaucoma by protecting against mitochondrial andmetabolic dysfunction. Redox Biol. 2021;43:101988.59. De Moraes CG, John SWM, Williams PA, Blumberg DM, Ciof ﬁGA, Liebmann JM.Nicotinamide and pyruvate for neuroenhancement in open-angle glaucoma: aphase 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2022;140:11 –8.60. Malesu R, Martin AJ, Lyons JG, Scolyer RA, Chen AC, McKenzie CA, et al. Nicoti-namide for skin cancer chemoprevention: effects of nicotinamide on melanomain vitro and in vivo. Photochem Photobio Sci. 2020;19:171 –9.61. Scatozza F, Moschella F, D ’Arcangelo D, Rossi S, Tabolacci C, Giampietri C, et al.Nicotinamide inhibits melanoma in vitro and in vivo. J Exp Clin Cancer Res.2020;39:211.
62. Esposito E, Aldrees S, Mastromonaco C, Zoroquiain P, Vila N, Logan PT, et al.Evaluation of nicotinamide as an anti-in ﬂammatory and anti-angiogenic agent inuveal melanoma cell lines. Arq Bras Oftalmol. 2017;80:74 –7.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Evaluation of nicotinamide as an anti-in ﬂammatory and anti-angiogenic agent inuveal melanoma cell lines. Arq Bras Oftalmol. 2017;80:74 –7.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSRM proposed and devised the scope of the article, critically reviewed and made editsto the article. SH undertook the literature search, wrote the article and made edits. AJcontributed to the literature search and writing of the article, critically reviewed thearticle and suggested edits.COMPETING INTERESTSThe authors declare no competing interests.ADDITIONAL INFORMATIONCorrespondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Samantha VickiHunt.Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprintsPublisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claimsin published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.S.V. Hunt et al.829Eye (2023) 37:823 – 829
