The International Workshop on Meibomian GlandDysfunction: Report of the Subcommittee on Anatomy,Physiology, and Pathophysiology of theMeibomian GlandErich Knop,1Nadja Knop,1Thomas Millar,2Hiroto Obata,3and David A. Sullivan4,5The tarsal glands of Meibom (glandulae tarsales) are largesebaceous glands located in the eyelids and, unlike thoseof the skin, are unassociated with hairs. According to Duke-Elder and Wyler,1they were ﬁrst mentioned by Galenus in 200AD and later, in 1666, they were described in more detail bythe German physician and anatomist Heinrich Meibom, afterwhom they are named.Lipids produced by the meibomian glands are the maincomponent of the superﬁcial lipid layer of the tear ﬁlm thatprotects it against evaporation of the aqueous phase and isbelieved also to stabilize the tear ﬁlm by lowering surfacetension.2Hence, meibomian lipids are essential for the main-tenance of ocular surface health and integrity.
tenance of ocular surface health and integrity.Although they share certain principal characteristics withordinary sebaceous glands, they have several distinct differ-ences in anatomy, location, secretory regulation, compositionof their secretory product, and function.Functional disorders of the meibomian glands, referred totoday as meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD),3are increas-ingly recognized as a discrete disease entity.4–8In patientswith dry eye disease, alterations in the lipid phase that point toMGD are reportedly more frequent than isolated alterations inthe aqueous phase. In a study by Heiligenhaus et al.,9a lipiddeﬁciency occurred in 76.7% of dry eye patients comparedwith only 11.1% of those with isolated alterations of the aque-ous phase. This result is in line with the observations byShimazaki et al.10of a prevalence of MGD in the absolute
10of a prevalence of MGD in the absolutemajority of eyes with ocular discomfort deﬁned as dry eyesymptoms. These observations noted that 64.6% of all sucheyes and 74.5% of those excluding a deﬁciency of aqueous tearsecretion were found to have obstructive MGD, or a loss ofglandular tissue, or both.10Horwath-Winter et al.11reportedMGD in 78% of dry eye patients or, if only non-Sjo ¨gren patientsare considered, in 87% compared with 13% with isolated aque-ous tear deﬁciency. It may thus be accepted that MGD isimportant, conceivably underestimated, and possibly the mostfrequent cause of dry eye disease due to increased evaporationof the aqueous tears.5,9–12After some excellent reviews of MGD4,7,8,13,14in the past,many new ﬁndings have been reported in recent years, andother questions remain to be identiﬁed and resolved. A soundunderstanding of meibomian gland structure and function andits role in the functional anatomy of the ocular surface15is
15isneeded, to understand the contribution of the meibomianglands to dysfunction and disease. Herein, we seek to providea comprehensive review of physiological and pathophysiolog-ical aspects of the meibomian glands.HEINRICH MEIBOMHeinrich Meibom the younger (1638–1700; Fig. 1)16camefrom a scholarly family. He was the son of the physician JohannHeinrich Meibom and the grandson of the German historianand poet Heinrich Meibom the elder (1555–1625),17who wasprofessor of history and poetry at the University of Helmstedtin Germany. Heinrich Meibom the younger was born on June29, 1638, in Lu ¨beck, Germany, and later traveled around inEurope and received a cosmopolitan education. In a shortarticle18that commemorated the 300th anniversary of his birth in1938, the British Medical Journal characterized him as follows:
Europe and received a cosmopolitan education. In a shortarticle18that commemorated the 300th anniversary of his birth in1938, the British Medical Journal characterized him as follows:
“Like so many of his contemporaries, he was indeed a child ofApollo, god of culture, poetry, rhetoric, and healing. While still amedical student (he became MD at Angers in 1663) he wasappointed to, and in 1664 took up, the professorship of medicinein the University of Helmstadt. Fourteen years later he acceptedthe additional chairs of history and of poetry. He further showedhis versatility by straying into the pleasant ﬁelds of archaeology,philology, and philosophy, and all his life he was an insatiatetraveller.” Apparently a man of many talents, in 1666, shortly afterreceiving the chair of medicine, Heinrich Meibom published theﬁrst detailed description, including a drawing, of the oil glandsinside the tarsus of the eyelid, that later were named the meibo-mian glands. His description appeared as a book with the title DeVasis Palpebrarum Novis Epistola .19This early drawing showed
19This early drawing showedbasic characteristics of the glands, such as multiple single glandstreaks along the extension of the tarsus with openings onto thelid margin, similar to but not as detailed as another much later andmore well-known drawing (Fig. 2).ANATOMY ,EMBRYOLOGY ,ANDPHYSIOLOGYAnatomy of the Meibomian GlandsArrangement. A single meibomian gland is composed ofclusters of secretory acini that are arranged circularly around aFrom the1Ocular Surface Center Berlin, Department for Cell andNeurobiology, Center for Anatomy, Charité–Universitätsmedizin Ber-lin, Berlin, Germany; the2School of Science, Food, and Horticulture,University of Sydney, Penrith South DC, New South Wales, Australia;the3Department of Ophthalmology, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi,Japan; and the4Schepens Eye Research Institute and5Department ofOphthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.Supported by the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society (TFOS;
http://www.tearﬁlm.org); individual author support is listed in theAppendix of the Introduction.Submitted for publication December 6, 2010; accepted March 23,2011.Disclosure: Each Workshop Participant’s disclosure data can befound in the Appendix of the Introduction.Corresponding author: Kelly K. Nichols, College of Optometry,338 W. 10th Avenue, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1280; knichols@optometry.osu.edu.Special IssueDOI:10.1167/iovs.10-6997cInvestigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 1938Copyright 2011 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
long central duct and connected to it by short ductules. Thisarrangement has been compared with a chain of onions.20Oneend of the central duct is blind, and the other end opens close tothe posterior lid border, just anterior to the mucocutaneous junc-tion, at the lid margin, where the oily secretion is delivered ontothe tear meniscus.21These separate glands are arranged in parallel in a singlerow throughout the length of the tarsal plates in the upper andlower lids,1,22,23and they presumably act in a coordinatedfashion that is inﬂuenced by hormonal and neural regulationand by the mechanical forces of muscle contraction during theeye blink.24The extent of the meibomian glands roughly corresponds to
the dimensions of the tarsal plates in the upper and lowereyelids and hence differs between them (Fig. 2). In the upperlid the tarsal plate has the shape of a half circle that extendsupward centrally for approximately 1 cm and narrows on thetemporal and nasal sides, whereas the tarsal plate in the lowerlids is smaller and forms a strip of rather equal length ( /H110110.5cm) from the nasal to the temporal side.24Dimensions and Number of Glands. The reported di-mensions of the meibomian glands differ to a certain extentin different studies. The number of separate glands in theupper lid is given in one study20as 25 and in another1as 40,with a median number of approximately 31.25The numberof glands in the lower lid is given in the former study20as 20and in the latter1as 30, with a median of approximately 26glands.25The length of the individual glands is reported asapproximately 5.5 mm in the middle of the upper lid and
approximately 2 mm in the lower lid, and hence theircalculated total volume is also higher: approximately doublein the upper lid (26/H9262L) versus the lower lid (13 /H9262L).25Themeibomian glands in the lower lids tend to be wider thanthose in the upper lids. The number of secretory acini alonga single meibomian gland is reported20to be approximately10 to 15 and is also higher in the upper than in the lower lid.The secretory capacity of the meibomian glands in theupper lids should therefore be roughly double of that in thelower lids, but most investigations focus on the lower lidbecause of its greater accessibility. The differential secretorycapacity in the upper versus the lower lid has not been inves-tigated.Embryologic Development of theMeibomian GlandThe embryologic growth of the meibomian glands occurs fromthe third to the seventh month of gestation, during the sealed-lid phase of eyelid development.26–28During this time, the
26–28During this time, theloose connective tissue of the mesoderm in the lid folds differ-entiates into the tarsal plate and muscles (orbicularis and Rio-lan’s muscle), the blood vessels, and the loose connectivetissue underlying the outer lid skin and the conjunctiva. Thedevelopment of the meibomian glands from the anlage (theinitial clustering of embryonic cells that serves as a foundationfrom which the organ develops) of the meibomian glandsshows considerable similarities to that of the hair follicles, thehair anlage. Both of them grow from the ectodermal sheet,which seals the fused lid folds down into the mesoderm,although the meibomian anlage is larger, grows deeper, andtakes longer for complete development as investigated in detailby Ehler’s group.28Similar to the hair anlage of the eyelashes, which develops
associated glands (holocrine sebaceous glands of Zeis and mod-iﬁed sweat glands of Moll), the epithelial cord of the meibo-mian anlage develops lateral outgrowths that later differentiateinto the connecting ductules and secretory holocrine seba-ceous acini. Inside the epithelial cylinder of the meibomiananlage, similar to the hair anlage, the production of lipids leadsto the formation of a central canal that later develops into thecentral duct. The production of lipids is followed by the oc-currence of keratohyalin granules in the luminal epithelial
FIGURE 1.Heinrich Meibom, the younger (1638–1700). In 1666, hepublished the ﬁrst detailed description of the tarsal glands in the eyelid,which later became known as the meibomian glands. Reprinted withpermission of the Herzog August Bibliothek, Wolfenbu ¨ttel, Germany,Signatur B 100.FIGURE 2.Topography of the meibomian glands within the tarsalplates of the upper and lower eyelids. The extension of a singlemeibomian gland follows the shape of the tarsal plate, which is differ-ent in both lids. The drawing depicts a posterior view with the anteriorpart of the lid removed, and the tarsal connective tissue made translu-cent so that the glands are exposed. The proximal ends of the glandsextend toward the proximal margin of the tarsal plates and the secre-tum (meibum) is delivered at the distal end of the tarsus via a shortexcretory duct through the oriﬁce onto the lid margin. Reproducedfrom Sobotta Ð. Atlas der Anatomie des Menschen. Ferner H, Straube-
sand J, eds. Ed. 18, Vol. 1, p. 215, Urban & Schwarzenberg 1982, withthe kind permission of Elsevier.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1939Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
cells, and therefore the lipid synthesis and keratinizationevents were once assumed to be somehow related.28Lipidproduction by the more mature meibomian anlage and by theciliary glands of Zeis has also been found to be related to theformation of a canal between the two sealed lid folds, whichleads to the separation of the then fully differentiated upperand lower lids in the seventh month of gestation.28In themouse, it is thought that an increasing amount of keratiniza-tion, rather than lipid secretion, contributes to the separationof the upper and lower eyelids.29Hence, the central meibomian duct can be compared to thehair follicles of the eyelashes in embryology and also showsdistinct similarities in structure and epithelial differentiation,including the keratinization status, in the adult. The meibomiangland can hence be regarded as a “hair follicle without a hairshaft.”30This observation may offer the conclusion that hyper -
keratinization is a typical disease of the meibomian gland.Histologic Appearance of the Meibomian GlandThe meibomian glands are composed of secretory acini that areconnected via smaller ductules to the larger, long, straightcentral duct (Fig. 3) that extends throughout the length of thetarsal plate and opens onto the free lid margin close to theposterior lid border. The whole internal ductal system is linedby a stratiﬁed squamous epithelium with signs of incipientkeratinization. Full keratinization (corniﬁcation), as indicatedby the presence of luminal keratin lamellae, is physiologicallyonly present in the terminal part of the central duct that is linedby an ingrowth of the corniﬁed epidermis from the surface ofthe free lid margin.1,23,24,31,32Acinus. As a special type of sebaceous gland, the secretory
acini of the meibomian glands follow a holocrine secretionmode that is reﬂected by their structure (Fig. 4A). The numer-ous secretory acini have an elongated or spherical shape ofapproximately 150 to 200/H9262m diameter. They are completelyﬁlled with secretory cells, termed meibocytes.33The basal cellsare smaller and darker. The meibocytes, located more towardthe center of the acinus, show a progressive accumulation oflipids in the cytoplasm and hence appear increasingly foamyand pale in conventional histology of parafﬁn-embedded sec-tions because of the extraction of the lipids during processing.During their maturation, the most central cells undergo shrink-age, compaction, and disintegration of the nucleus (pyknosis).Eventually, disintegration of the cell membrane occurs at thetransition from the acinus to the ductule. Hence, the whole cellcontents form the oily secretory product termed meibum.33Agradient in maturation with more undifferentiated, immature
cells in the basal layer is also supported by transmission elec-tron microscopy in mouse34and human35meibomian glands.The basal acinar cells contain a medium dense nucleus that isrich in heterochromatin and has a prominent nucleolus. Thebasal acinar cells have sparse cytoplasm that contains a largenumber of keratin ﬁlament bundles together with numerousmitochondria and many free ribosomes, as is characteristic forsynthesis of internal cell proteins, whereas the rough endoplas-mic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, for export of secretoryproducts, are scarce. The basal layer of meibocytes in theperiphery of the acinus serves as a proliferating progenitor cellpopulation that constantly gives rise to new meibocytes. In therat, it has been shown that it takes approximately 4 days togenerate new meibocytes.36Connecting Ductule. Typically one, or sometimes more,acini are connected to a ductule that is approximately 150 /H9262m
long and has a luminal diameter of approximately 30 to 50 /H9262m.
36Connecting Ductule. Typically one, or sometimes more,acini are connected to a ductule that is approximately 150 /H9262mlong and has a luminal diameter of approximately 30 to 50 /H9262m.The ductules are lined by a stratiﬁed (four layers) squamousepithelium. At the junction from the acinus to the ductule, asharp transition from the peripheral layer of basal meibocytesto the ductal epithelium has been reported in electron micros-copy of the monkey and rabbit.32This conclusion was reachedfrom the observation that the epithelial cells of the ductule did
not contain lipid droplets, as found in neighboring meibocytes,but instead contained keratohyalin granules. Histology in thehuman meibomian gland does not necessarily conﬁrm a sharptransition based on the shape and arrangement of the epithelialcells in this region, because the spherical brighter epithelialcells of the basal meibocytes are seen to transform graduallyinto the cells of the multilayered ductal epithelium that have aslightly denser cytoplasm and a more elongated shape (Fig.4B). Keratohyalin granules are also observed in ductal epithe-lial cells of the normal human meibomian gland (Knop E, et al.IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 4833).Central Duct. The connecting ductules enter the longcentral duct, typically in an oblique direction that leads to theformation of a sharp tissue spur that is mainly composed ofepithelial cells and contains a narrow internal core of connec-tive tissue at the entrance into the central duct (Fig. 4C).
The central duct is also lined by a four-layered, stratiﬁedsquamous epithelium but has a wider lumen approximately100 to 150/H9262m in diameter. The central duct extends through-FIGURE 3.Morphology of a single meibomian gland. A single meibo-mian gland (located within the tarsal plate near the conjunctiva) iscomposed of multiple holocrine secretory acini that are arrangedcircularly around a long central duct to which they are connected viashort, lateral, connecting ductules. The terminal part of the centralduct is lined by an ingrowth of the epidermis (ep) that covers the freelid margin and hence forms a short excretory duct that opens as anoriﬁce at the posterior part of the lid margin just anterior to themucocutaneous junction (mcj) near the inner lid border. The oilysecretum (meibum) is synthesized within the secretory acini and trans-ported ( yellow arrows ) in a distal direction toward the oriﬁce. Knop
N, Knop E. [Meibomian glands. Part I: anatomy, embryology andhistology of the Meibomian glands] Meibom-Dru ¨sen Teil I: Anatomie,Embryologie und Histologie der Meibom-Dru ¨sen. Ophthalmologe .2009;106:872–883, with the kind permission of Springer Science andBusiness Media.1940 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
out the total length of the gland, which corresponds roughly tothe extension of the tarsus.1,20,25,37Around the terminal part of the central duct and among theterminal acini close to the free lid margin, there are variousamounts of striated ﬁbers of Riolan’s muscle (Fig. 5, also notedin Fig. 18A) that are split from the orbicularis muscle by thedown-growth of the hair anlage of the cilia, deep into the tarsalfold during embryologic development. These muscle ﬁbersappear to encircle the terminal part of the meibomiangland.20,38The terminal part of the central duct preceding theexcretory duct is often slightly dilated, thus forming a kind ofampulla, conceivably due to its physiological content of se-creted meibum.Excretory Duct. The corniﬁed epithelium of the free lidmargin (epidermis) extends into the terminal part of the mei-FIGURE 5.Driving forces for the delivery of meibomian oil onto the
lid margin and tear ﬁlm. A schematic drawing of a single meibomiangland inside the connective tissue of the tarsus at the posterior lidmargin. The driving forces that result in the eventual delivery ofmeibomian oil (meibum) onto the lid margin and tear ﬁlm are (1) thecontinuous secretion of meibum by the secretory acini, which gener-ates a secretory pressure that pushes the meibum ( yellow arrows ) intothe ductal system and further toward the oriﬁce and (2) the mechanicalmuscular action by muscle ﬁbers ( red dots ) of the pretarsal orbicularismuscle (M. orbicularis), located on the outside of the tarsus, and of themarginal muscle of Riolan (M. Riolan), which encircles the terminalpart of the meibomian gland. During a blink, these muscles may exerta compression ( red arrows ) of the meibomian gland that drives the oil
out of the oriﬁce into the marginal lipid reservoir, where it eventuallyconstitutes the tear ﬁlm lipid layer (TFLL), as observed clinically [com-pare with Figs. 3, 7, and 18]. Reprinted from Knop E, Knop N, SchirraF. [Meibomian glands. Part II: physiology, characteristics, distributionand function of meibomian oil] Meibom-Dru ¨sen Teil II: Physiologie,Eigenschaften, Verteilung und Funktion des Meibom-O ¨ls.Ophthalmo-loge. 2009;106:884–892, with the kind permission of Springer Scienceand Business Media.FIGURE 4.Structure of the acini and ductal system of a normal mei-bomian gland. ( A) The holocrine acini of the meibomian gland are
ﬁlled with the secretory cells (meibocytes) and surrounded by a base-ment membrane (bm). In the periphery of the acinus, a capillary (c)and a small nerve ﬁber (n) are seen. From the basal cells (b) at theperipheral margin, differentiating meibocytes (d) start with the pro-duction and accumulation of lipids within lipid droplets that occur asvacuoles in routine histology, because the lipids are dissolved in thehistologic preparation. Toward the center of the acinus, there is anincrease in the number and size of their internal lipid droplets as thecells differentiate into mature meibocytes (m). These remain vital, asindicated by their intact nucleus ( arrowhead ). In the very large hy-permature meibocytes (h), the nucleus becomes pyknotic ( doublearrowheads ) [compare with Fig. 7]. The cytoplasmic membrane of
these cells disintegrates, and the components of the whole cell formthe secretory product, termed meibum, in the disintegration zone(des) close to the connecting ductule (de). Remnants ( arrow )o ft h emeibocytes are still found inside the ductule and sometimes in thecentral duct. ( B) In the area of the disintegration zone, located atthe transition of the acinus to the ductule, the basal cell layer isreplaced ( open arrows ) by the multilayered squamous epithelium ofthe ductule, which is about four cell layers thick. If the ductal epithe-lium is observed in an oblique plane of section, it is seen to containkeratohyalin granules ( arrowheads ) in the luminal cell layer that rep-resent an incipient stage of keratinization. ( C) Numerous acini of
resent an incipient stage of keratinization. ( C) Numerous acini ofspherical to elongated shape are radially arranged around the centralduct (cd) of a gland, seen here in a longitudinal section. Ductules enter(B,C,arrows ) the central duct, typically in an oblique direction,which results in the formation of a sharp tissue spur ( C,arrowheads )toward the central duct. The direction of ﬂow of the meibum insidethe gland is indicated by a large arrow in (B) and ( C). Light micro-scopic images of parafﬁn-embedded sections stained with hematoxylinand eosin (H&E); size markers are shown in the images. Reprinted fromKnop N, Knop E. [Meibomian glands. Part I: anatomy, embryology andhistology of the Meibomian glands] Meibom-Dru ¨sen Teil I: Anatomie,Embryologie und Histologie der Meibom-Dru ¨sen. Ophthalmologe .2009;106:872–883 with the kind permission of Springer Science andBusiness Media.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1941
Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
bomian gland1,22,23,32for about 0.5 mm. It has a keratinizinglayer that contains numerous dense keratohyalin granules(granular layer) and a superﬁcial layer of fully keratinized (cor-niﬁed) keratin lamellae. At about 0.5 mm internal to the oriﬁce,the epithelium gradually transforms into the ordinary ductalepithelium of the meibomian gland by losing the keratin lamel-lae and the granular layer and by reducing the stratiﬁcationfrom about six to eight layers to four layers. Since the epithe-lium in this terminal part has a different structure comparedwith the rest of the central duct, it appears justiﬁed to term itas an excretory duct (Knop E, et al. IOVS 2009;50:ARVOE-Abstract 4833).Physiology of the Meibomian GlandsSecretion Mode. Basal meibocytes move during their mat-uration, which includes the production and accumulation oflipids, from the basal compartment of the acinus toward itscenter36and eventually toward the entrance of the ductule
(Fig. 4, also indicated in Fig. 3). The biochemical characteris-tics of the secretion process and its products are considered inthe section on lipid synthesis.During this process, the meibocytes go through severalstages that can be differentiated morphologically (basal, differ-entiating, mature, and hypermature), depending on severalstructural characteristics as described by Gorgas.34Cell organ -elles that are necessary for lipid production inside the cellsincrease in number and size during this process—in particular,the smooth-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum (sER) and peroxi-somes.34The lipid droplets are encircled by multilamellarmembrane structures that are assumed to originate from themembrane of the sER.34Similar multilamellar structures arealso integrated into the lipid droplets and hence contribute tothe meibum.35All the components of the whole cell includinglipids, proteins, and nucleic acids contribute to the oily secre-tory product, which is also called meibum.33
tory product, which is also called meibum.33The ductal system may contribute to the ﬁnal secretoryproduct that is released onto the posterior lid margin in anactive or passive way, since (1) nerve ﬁbers are observed notonly around the acini but also around the ductal system,39and(2) the originally secreted meibomian lipids are conceivably, atleast in part, modiﬁed by hydrolyzing enzymes from commen-sal bacteria inside the ductal system that lead to a breakdownof triglycerides into free fatty acids and small portions of mono-and diglycerides and other modiﬁcations40in patients withblepharitis.41and even in the normal condition. Commensalbacterial species have been cultured in most expressedmeibum samples42from blepharitis patients, but similarly alsofrom normal subjects.Mechanisms of Secretion and Delivery. Because of the
length of the meibomian glands, there is frequently a longdistance between the cell biological process of secretion of themeibum in the secretory acini and its actual delivery onto thelid margin where it exerts its functions. Therefore, it appearsadvisable to follow the nomenclature suggested by Bron andTiffany43and to separate secretion of the meibum from itsdelivery.The constant production of new meibocytes in the secre-tory acini and their disintegration into the ﬁnal secretory prod-uct generates a continuous secretory force that drives themeibomian oils within the ductal system of the gland towardthe oriﬁce at the free lid margin (Fig. 3). The hypothesis of acontinuous production is not only supported by the observedgeneration time of new meibocytes36but also by the ﬁndingthat in the morning after sleep, during which the lids are
closed, an increased amount of lipid that has apparently accu-mulated within the ductal system is then delivered in increasedamounts onto the lid margin.44,45The constant secretion ofmeibum further represents a basis for the generation of in-creased pressure within an obstructed gland.The same observation further supports the conclusion that
44,45The constant secretion ofmeibum further represents a basis for the generation of in-creased pressure within an obstructed gland.The same observation further supports the conclusion thatthe mechanical action of the lid muscles contributes to delivery(Fig. 5), as suggested by Linton et al.46During the movementof the eyelids during a blink, the orbicularis muscle, located onthe external side of the tarsal plate, generates a compression ofthe tarsal plate and the enclosed tarsal glands of Meibom. It wasconcluded that this “would promote the ﬂow of secretion by amilking action.”46It has been suggested that the embedding ofthe glands inside the tarsal tissue provides for a homogeneouseffect on compression of the individual glands along the lidmargin.37The contraction of Riolan’s muscle conceivably ex -
erts compression of the terminal part of the ductal system andacini and contributes to the delivery of the oily meibum ontothe surface of the lid margin. This notion may be supported bythe incidental observation that meibum is released onto the lidmargin in the form of jets of liquid.47It has been assumed thatthe constrictive forces of Riolan’s muscle may also close theterminal part of the meibomian gland and hence prevent theoutﬂow (i.e., act in a somewhat antagonistic way on the ﬂowof meibum compared to the pretarsal orbicularis muscle).46Ithas been further speculated that, in the act of a blink, thepretarsal orbicularis performs a “milking action” while Riolan’smuscle is relaxed and, conversely, between blinks, while theorbicularis is relaxed, Riolan’s muscle contracts to prevent theoutﬂow of meibum.46Contraction of Riolan’s muscle may alsoaid in limiting unwanted outﬂow of meibum (e.g., at night),although then the orbicularis muscle is relaxed, according toLinton et al.,
46and does not perform a propulsive action on themeibum. Although these speculations may offer attractive ex-planations for the delivery of meibum, there is no evidence ofsuch an antagonistic action of the marginal muscle of Riolancompared with the pretarsal orbicularis muscle. There is alsono evidence of a potential inﬂuence of the smooth ﬁbers of thesuperior and inferior tarsal muscles or of an inﬂuence of age-related or pathologic changes in the composition and shape ofthe tarsal plate and lids that could inﬂuence meibomian glandfunction and meibum delivery. These questions may needfurther investigation.After an absence of blinking and muscular action overnight,the accumulated meibum from within the ductal system isdelivered in increased amounts. This action has been observedby meibometry44in the morning during the ﬁrst hour or soafter awaking and has been clinically observed after a pro-longed time of concentrated work associated with reducedblinking frequency.
45,46Consequently, muscular action duringrepeated enforced blinks signiﬁcantly increases the lipid layerthickness48and is also an appropriate therapeutic approach toovercoming a certain minor degree of obstruction in patientswith incipient obstructive meibomian gland disease.3Lid Topography and Meibomian Gland Function. Thedifferential contribution of the meibomian glands in the upperversus lower eyelids has been insufﬁciently investigated todate. Because of the calculated higher volume of the meibo-mian glands in the upper lids,25it can be assumed that theyalso have a higher secretory capacity and contribute more tothe lipid pool at the lid margin and subsequently to the tearﬁlm lipid layer. However, because of the better accessibility ofthe margin of the lower lids, most investigations of the mor-phology and secretory capacity of the meibomian glands havefocused on the lower lids.This focus applies in particular to meibometry, introducedby Bron and Tiffany
by Bron and Tiffany43and Chew and colleagues,44,45which isable to measure effective amounts of lipid on the lid margin.44Research has shown the amount of meibomian lipids on the lid
by Bron and Tiffany43and Chew and colleagues,44,45which isable to measure effective amounts of lipid on the lid margin.44Research has shown the amount of meibomian lipids on the lidmargin, and the rate of delivery is dependent on age, sex, anddiurnal conditions.45,49In these investigations it has been as -1942 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
sumed that mixing of the meibum of the upper and lower lidsduring blinking means that the lower reservoir is likely to besimilar to the value obtained from the upper lid. The amount oflipid in the marginal reservoir is lower in children younger than14 years compared with adults, higher in adult males than inadult females, equal in both sexes after the age of 50 years, andstable or even slightly increased up to the eighth decade ofage.45,50The rising amount of lipids in the marginal reservoirwith age is in some contrast to the described decrease of activemeibomian glands with age50and can probably be explainedby a decreased removal of lipids from the lipid layer andreservoir.43,50,51The secretory activity of glands, as analyzed by Norn52bythe staining of delivered lipid at the meibomian oriﬁce, foundactive delivery in only 45% of gland openings at one time pointand a decrease of active glands by 50% from the age of 20 yearsto the age of 80 years.
52The morphologic equivalent of such adecrease in function may be represented by an age-dependentdisappearance of gland tissue (gland dropout) as observedmore recently by meibography.53The secretory activity ofglands was analyzed in more detail by Korb and Blackie51,54,55by their ability to deliver a liquid secretory product on diag-nostic expression involving application of mild external pres-sure in the physiological range of 1.25 g/mm2, performed toreveal delivery without overcoming a potential obstruction ofthe oriﬁce. These studies supported that not all glands deliveroil at the same time. In addition, it was observed for the ﬁrsttime, that the number of active glands in lower lids dependson their location along the lid margin and is highest in the nasalthird,51lower in the middle of the lid, and lower still in thetemporal third meibomian glands. It was also observed that
there is a correlation between the number of actively deliver-ing meibomian glands in the lower eyelid and dry eye symp-toms.51The time necessary for full expression of a gland, at thespeciﬁed mild pressure until delivery stopped was approxi-mately 12 seconds, on average, and the recovery time untilnew oil could again be expressed from the same gland wasapproximately 2 hours.54When individual glands were repeat -edly expressed, with intervals of 3 hours between expressionsover a daytime period of 9 hours (i.e., four times), it wasobserved that a single gland is capable of secreting oil ondemand over the course of a working day.55This continuousactivity of the meibomian glands also showed a similar depen-dence on the position along the lid margin, as observed before.Investigations on the secretory activity and capacity of the
meibomian glands in the upper lid are desirable, to betteranalyze the physiological functions of the glands and theiralterations in different types of disease.Innervation. In contrast to the sebaceous glands of theskin elsewhere in the body that are mainly regulated via hor-mones and other factors, the meibomian glands also have adistinct neural innervation.The meibomian glands of the human have a dense mesh-work of unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers (nerve plexus) around theacini that are described by electron microscopy32and also byhistochemistry.56The network consists of nerve ﬁbers thathave terminal buttons containing small vesicles ﬁlled by gran-
ules that contain neurotransmitters. The nerve endings arelocated closely around the acini but remain outside the base-ment membrane and constitute so-called synapses en passantthat lack a direct postsynaptic structure in the target cell, as ischaracteristic of the autonomic nervous system. Such nerveﬁbers are also observed around the ductal system,56which mayindicate that the ductal epithelium contributes to the compo-sition of the ﬁnally delivered meibum. Many nerve ﬁbers occuraround and within the wall of the small vessels39that build a
56which mayindicate that the ductal epithelium contributes to the compo-sition of the ﬁnally delivered meibum. Many nerve ﬁbers occuraround and within the wall of the small vessels39that build adense meshwork around the acini.20The nerve ﬁbers of the human meibomian gland are mainlypositive for acetylcholinesterase and are hence supposed torepresent a part of the cholinergic parasympathetic nervoussystem.56In addition they contain the neuropeptides calci -tonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and substance P,57whichare markers for the sensory nervous system but also occur inthe parasympathetic system, and, in addition, the parasympa-thetic vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.58These results sub -stantiate a prevailing parasympathetic innervation of the mei-bomian gland.In summary, the innervation of the meibomian glands is
maintained via a dense meshwork of nerve ﬁbers that containdifferent neurotransmitters and originate from differentsources. They include, besides the mainly parasympatheticnerves from the pterygopalatine ganglion, sympathetic nervesfrom the superior cervical ganglion and sensory ﬁbers from thetrigeminal ganglion. In the rat it has been shown, that theparasympathetic ﬁbers via the pterygopalatine ganglion origi-nate from the superior salivatory nucleus59that is also respon -sible for the innervation of the lacrimal gland. This innervationpattern offers the possibility of a common regulation24of theocular surface glands that contribute the different components
of the tear ﬁlm (meibomian glands for the lipids and lacrimalgland and accessory glands for the aqueous phase) to achievean optimal composition of the tear ﬁlm. The goblet cells thatproduce the secreted mucins which represent the main com-ponent of the mucous phase of the preocular tear ﬁlm appearto be regulated in the same way.60Whether and how themeibomian glands are actually integrated into the neural feed-back loop,61,62similar to the lacrimal gland, is yet to belearned.Less information is available at present on the release of thetransmitters observed in the nerve ﬁbers, on respective recep-tors on the target tissue, and on the mode of action that istransmitted by their interaction.KeratinizationProcess of Epithelial Keratinization. Meibomian glands
share principal features of the embryologic developmentalcourse and of the structural organization with the hair fol-licles of the eyelashes. These features include a generalcommitment of the epithelium to keratinization. Keratohy-alin granules represent incipient stages of keratinization andcontain proteins such as ﬁlaggrin that are later released intothe cytoplasm and serve the function of interconnecting theintermediate keratin ﬁlaments leading to the formation of adensely packed meshwork. The keratin meshwork increas-ingly occupies the cytoplasm of the keratinizing epidermalcells, termed keratinocytes.63The cross-linking of keratinbundles goes along with an enforcement of the cell mem-brane that is transformed into the corniﬁed envelope.64After degeneration and loss of their nuclei, these cells formthe superﬁcial keratin lamellae that indicate full keratiniza-tion (corniﬁcation)63and serve the purpose of protectingagainst physical and chemical stress factors.
against physical and chemical stress factors.Incipient KeratinizationElectron microscopy has shown that the ductal epithelium ofnormal meibomian glands contains keratohyalin granules in theapical cell layer of the rabbit and monkey.32Although noobvious keratinization occurs in the normal human meibomiangland, recent histologic investigations (Knop E, et al. IOVS2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 4833) could verify that the wholeepithelium of the central duct and ductules of the humanmeibomian gland also contains keratohyalin granules andhence preserves a commitment to keratinization. Thus, themeibomian gland can in principle be regarded as a “hair folliclewithout a hair shaft.”30IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1943
30IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1943Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
MEIBOMIAN GLAND STEMCELLS ANDCELLDYNAMICSAs a special type of large sebaceous gland, the meibomianglands, unassociated with hairs, share certain principle rules ofbiology and cell dynamics with the more conventional hair-associated sebaceous glands of the skin. However, comparedwith the latter, the knowledge of basic information on stemcells and cell dynamics is very limited for the meibomian glandin general and in particular for the human. The same applies toanother sebaceous gland without association to hairs, the pre-putial gland. Therefore, it is at present frequently necessary toconsider more general phenomena of sebaceous gland biologyin the skin, the validity of which is awaiting experimental prooffor the meibomian gland.Meibocyte Generation and Migration
Meibocyte Generation and MigrationAs a sebaceous gland, the meibomian gland produces its secre-tum (meibum) by the holocrine secretion mechanism. Thismeans that the contents of the whole glandular cells form themeibum, as shown in Figure 4A. After a process of maturationincluding lipid synthesis and accumulation, centripetal cellmovement, and eventual cell degeneration and membrane dis-integration, the lipids and other cell components are shed intothe lumen of the ductal system. This holocrine secretion pro-cess hence results in the structural consequence that thewhole secretory acinus is ﬁlled by secretory cells and in thedynamic consequence that secretory cells are continuously lostand replaced. This process is in distinct contrast to the mero-crine secretion mode of the aqueous lacrimal gland, whereonly the secretory products are released from intact secretorycells.65The continuous loss of acinar cells requires a conse -
quent continuous production of new cells and therefore acontinuous cell turnover and differentiation within the acinus.Even though it has long been assumed that the regeneration ofthe meibocytes arises from the peripheral layer of basal cellslocated on the basement membrane,66in a way that is equiv -alent to the regeneration of other epithelial tissues from theirbasal layer,67this was only proven in 2001 by Olami et al.36Agradient in maturation, with more undifferentiated immaturecells in the basal layer, has been observed by transmissionelectron microscopy in the mouse34and the human35meibo -mian gland and has also been indicated by histology.Olami et al.36labeled dividing cells in the mouse meibomiangland with the radioactive nucleotide [3H]-thymidine, which is
integrated as a marker into the nuclei during mitosis. Theywere able to show, after observation at different time points,that the labeled dividing cells were initially only found in thebasal cell layer. At later time points, the number of labeled cellsgradually increased, indicating basal cell mitosis and multipli-cation. Later, labeled cells were observed in locations closer tothe center of the acinus, thus verifying the assumed centripetalmovement of meibocytes. It has been calculated that in themouse meibomian gland, the meibocytes have a generationtime of 4.1 days between each division. Newly formed cellsmove from the basal layer at a velocity of 0.62/H9262m per daytoward the center of the acinus and need approximately 9 daysfrom their formation in the basal layer for their movement andeventual shedding in the center. These results36showed forthe ﬁrst time the location of meibocyte progenitor cells in the
basal cell layer, together with the constant and synchronouscentripetal movement of their progeny. This movement ex-plains the constant secretion of meibum, as observed by mei-bometry,44and provides the basis for a previously assumedconstant secretory force43that, together with the muscularaction46of the orbicularis muscle on the outside of the tarsalplate and of Riolan’s muscle around the terminal parts of themeibomian glands, leads to the delivery of the oil onto the
action46of the orbicularis muscle on the outside of the tarsalplate and of Riolan’s muscle around the terminal parts of themeibomian glands, leads to the delivery of the oil onto theposterior lid margin. It can be assumed that basic similarcharacteristics also apply to the human meibomian gland, but,since the human acinus is larger in diameter and is ﬁlled bymore cells, the exact numerical values may be slightly differ-ent.Meibomian Gland Stem CellsOlami et al. concluded from their observations that the stemcells of the meibomian glands lie at the circumference of eachacinus. There have been almost no investigations of stem cellsin the meibomian gland to date, with the exception of Olami’swork and one abstract (Lavker RM, et al. IOVS 2003;44:ARVO
E-Abstract 3781). The latter group was concerned with meibo-mian gland stem cells in general and also reported that, afterlabeling with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) or [3H]-thymidine,most of the rapidly cycling cells were seen in the “basalsebocytes,” which refers to the basal acinar meibocytes. How-ever, these cells are not regarded as real stem cells which aredeﬁned as a slow-cycling cell population,68similar to those inthe corneal limbus69–71and skin,72analogous to those deﬁnedin the hematopoietic system.73Rather they are regarded asprogenitor cells (transient amplifying [TA] cells). TA cells aredaughters of the stem cells, with more rapid division but alimited further number of divisions and a restricted differenti-ation program,68that eventually give rise to terminally differ -entiated cells. There were only a few if any slow-cycling stemcells observed in the acini (Lavker RM, et al. IOVS 2003;44:
ARVO E-Abstract 3781), but most of the fast-cycling cells of themeibomian glands were located there.The presence of fast-cycling TA cells in the basal acinarepithelium appears sufﬁcient to explain the continuous gener-ation of meibocytes, if it is additionally assumed that thesebasal cells are continuously replenished by the migration ofyoung TA cells from a stem cell source outside the acinus.Similarly, the corneal epithelium is apparently maintained bythe migration and division of TA cells that originate from thestem cell source at the limbus and can also remain intact aftera prolonged time of limbal stem cell insufﬁciency.69–71Thesame applies to the skin epithelium, which is also regeneratedby several generations of basal TA cells that originate from thestem cells located in the hair follicles68or in interfollicularepidermal rete pegs.74Slow-cycling, and hence label retaining, putative stem cells
have been found concentrated in the ductal epithelium of themeibomian gland (Lavker RM, et al. IOVS 2003;44:ARVO E-Ab-stract 3781). In addition, many of the cells “in the uppermostportion of the meibomian gland ductal epithelium” have showlabel dilution indicative of rapid dividing TA cells (Lavker RM,et al. IOVS 2003;44:ARVO E-Abstract 3781). Such highly pro-liferative cells also occurred farther out in the zone of themucocutaneous junction on the inner lid margin.Similarities to Hair Follicles. This situation in the mei-bomian glands shows immediate similarity with the arrange-ment of stem cells and TA cells in the hair follicle—consis-tently downward with the lower hair root epithelium andupward with the skin epithelium. Cotsarelis et al.75ob-
75ob-served that, in the hair–skin unit, the slow-cycling putativestem cells are almost exclusively localized in a speciﬁc zone(the hair bulge) at about the middle of the hair follicleswhere the permanent upper part of the hair follicle ends andthe arrector pili muscle inserts into the follicle. Later inves-tigations by Taylor et al.68conﬁrmed the initial hypothesisthat TA cells originate from slow-cycling cells in the hair-
68conﬁrmed the initial hypothesisthat TA cells originate from slow-cycling cells in the hair-bulge zone and populate two different tissue compartments.From the differential location and cell-cycling characteristicsit was concluded that they form (1) the lower hair follicle1944 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
and also the hair shaft and (2) the epithelium of the upperhair follicle and the epidermis.It was therefore concluded that the hair-bulge stem cells arebipotent, follow two distinct differentiation pathways, and areable to give rise to two different populations of TA cells thatform either the hair or the epidermis (Fig. 6). The reportedresults of Lavker RM, et al. ( IOVS 2003;44:E-Abstract 3781) inthe meibomian gland share certain similarities with the situa-tion observed earlier in the hair follicle.68,75In addition to aslow-cycling stem cell zone in the epithelial lining of a canal
(either of the hair follicle or of the meibomian duct) tworegions of more rapidly cycling, differentiating TA cells occur.TA cells are located downstream (in either the lower hairfollicle or in the acinus of the meibomian gland) and upstream(in either the upper hair follicle and lid margin epidermis onthe outside or in the uppermost part of the meibomian glandduct and in the MCJ on the outside). It is therefore tempting tospeculate that the renewal of the epithelial tissue by stem andTA cells follows a course in the meibomian gland similar to thatin the hair follicle. A basic similarity between the hair folliclesof the cilia and the meibomian glands, that would explain whyhyperkeratinization is a typical pathology in MGD, is furthervalidated by their similar structure and their joint embryologicdevelopment,26–28as reviewed in Knop et al.24Cell Dynamics and Functional Compartments
Cell Dynamics and Functional CompartmentsThe meibomian glands have conceivably at least three struc-tural and functional domains (Fig. 7) that require a uniquedifferentiation status maintained by differential regulation ofintracellular signaling pathways. These are constituted by(1) the holocrine secretory compartment of the acini ﬁlledwith the secretory meibocytes that produce the meibomianoil, (2) the tubular four-layered squamous ductal system thatdrains the oil, and (3) the uppermost (distal) part of the longcentral duct, the excretory duct, that delivers the oil ontothe posterior lid margin and represents an extension of themultilayered corniﬁed skin epithelium (epidermis).At present it is unclear how the boundaries of such struc-
tural and functional compartments are established and main-tained. It can be assumed that different receptors are expressedon the surface of cells in the excretory duct versus the ductalsystem versus the secretory meibocytes. Furthermore, a differ-ential expression of proteins in the cytoplasm that are relatedto the differential maturation and function of these tissues canbe assumed. Little detailed information on these assumptions isavailable today, even though microarray analyses by Sullivan,Schirra, and colleagues76–81have generated substantial data onthe gene expression proﬁles of the meibomian glands in healthand disease.Cell Dynamics in Sebaceous Glands
and disease.Cell Dynamics in Sebaceous GlandsThe development of sebaceous glands, some of which are themeibomian glands, is governed by a hierarchy of factors: (1) Alineage commitment of undifferentiated stem cells into seba-ceous gland stem cells is followed by (2) their proliferation andorganization into a gland structure, which is completed by (3)the terminal differentiation of secretory cells inside the acinusand their functional lipid production.82,83Each of these steps isgoverned by regulatory factors, the speciﬁcity and interactionof which is insufﬁciently resolved to date.FIGURE 7.Structural and functional domains of the meibomianglands. The human meibomian glands are composed of at least threedifferent structural and functional compartments. These are (1) theholocrine acinus with its basal cycling and luminal differentiating,lipid-producing meibocytes ( yellow ); (2) the four-layered stratiﬁed
squamous epithelium of the ductal system (connecting ductules andlong central duct), which has physiological incipient ( pink ) keratini-
squamous epithelium of the ductal system (connecting ductules andlong central duct), which has physiological incipient ( pink ) keratini-zation; and (3) the epidermis of the excretory duct, which representsan ingrowth of the stratiﬁed squamous, fully corniﬁed ( red) epidermisof the skin from the free lid margin. It can be assumed from studies ofstem cells of the epidermis and of hair-associated sebaceous glands thateach of these compartments is provided with lineage-committed pro-genitor cells. The basement membrane that separates the epithelialtissues from the underlying connective tissue is indicated by a dottedline. Schematic drawing of a section through a meibomian gland andthe posterior lid margin, mcj, mucocutaneous junction [compare withFig. 3]. Modiﬁed from Knop N, Knop E. [Meibomian glands, Part I:anatomy, embryology and histology of the meibomian glands]. Mei-bom-Dru ¨sen, Teil I: Anatomie, Embryologie und Histologie der Mei-
bom-Dru ¨sen. Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:872–883 with the kind per-mission of Springer Science and Business Media.FIGURE 6.Stem cells in the hair follicle as a potential model for themeibomian gland. Stem cells (SCs) are located in the bulge area (Niche)of the outer root sheet (ORS) of the hair follicle. Two different popu-lations of transient amplifying (TA) cells arise from this stem cellsource and migrate ( solid arrows ) into two directions: hair-forming TA
cells (hTA) migrate downward, whereas epidermis-forming TA (eTA)cells migrate upward. Both of them gradually differentiate and maturevia different intermediate stages (TA1, TA2. . . to TAn) into the termi-nally differentiated corniﬁed cells (TDcc) of the epidermis and hair,respectively. Inner root sheet (IRS) and (I); upper follicle (UF); hairmedulla (M); hair shaft (HS); cortex (C); skin epidermis (E). In thebulge region and epidermis further differentiated cells generally moveupward ( dashed arrows ) to the lumen. Schematic drawing of a sectionthrough the skin and a hair follicle. Reprinted from Taylor G, LehrerMS, Jensen PJ, Sun TT, Lavker RM, Involvement of follicular stem cellsin forming not only the follicle but also the epidermis, Cell, 102, pp.451–461, ©2000 with permission from Cell Press.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1945Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Location and Lineage Commitment of the SebaceousGland Stem Cells. Even though there is a relatively large bodyof literature on sebaceous glands, the formation of the seba-ceous gland tissue from stem cells is still insufﬁciently under-stood. From Taylor et al.,68it can be assumed that the subpop -ulation of hair-bulge stem cells that migrate upward topopulate the epidermis also represent the stem cells for thehair-associated sebaceous glands that are located on the wayfrom the bulge toward the epidermal surface. This notion issupported by studies in which it was found that isolated andtransplanted hair-bulge stem cells can form all skin cell lineagesand constitute the respective tissues (i.e., hair follicles, seba-ceous glands, and epidermis).84,85More recent results indicatethat epidermal stem cells from regions between hair follicles(interfollicular epidermis) are also bipotent, similar to the hair-bulge stem cells,68and form two lineages.86One of them
68and form two lineages.86One of themdifferentiates into epidermal cells that express keratinizationmarkers, and the other differentiates into sebocytes under theinﬂuence of the transcription factor c-myc. Another study74indicated multiple classes of stem cells are present in cutane-ous epithelium, independent of the hair-bulge cells, and cancontribute to the development of epidermal structures includ-ing hairs and sebaceous glands. This group also showed, byretroviral lineage tracing in the mouse, that in approximatelyone third of the labeled hair units, only the sebaceous glandwas selectively labeled, which indicates the presence of a poolof long-lived, slow-cycling cells that conceivably represents apool of lineage-speciﬁc glandular stem cells (Fig. 8). Thesepresumed gland progenitors are located at the transition zonefrom the acinus to the hair follicle,74and, in the same position,presumed mouse sebaceous gland–speciﬁc progenitors were
later characterized by a transcription factor.82This ﬁnding is insome contrast to the location of slow-cycling progenitors in theductal epithelium of the mouse meibomian gland (Lavker RM,et al. IOVS 2003;44:E-Abstract 3781).87Differences in the lo -cation of holocrine acinar stem cells may be related to the factthat the mouse hair–associated skin sebaceous glands appar-ently do not have a distinct connecting ductule, in contrast tothe human hair sebaceous glands and the meibomian glands.At present, it is thought that there are at least three inde-pendent stem cell populations in the skin88: the multipotenthair-bulge stem cells, for the cyclic reformation of the hair, andlineage-committed stem cells for the sebaceous glands and theinterfollicular epidermis. In addition, there are isthmus-resi-dent cells in the upper hair follicle close to the sebaceousgland. Under pathologic conditions such as wounding, the
bulge stem cells become activated and can in fact replenish thesebaceous glands82and the epidermis between the hair folli -cles.88Development of Sebaceous Glands. The transcriptionfactor c-myc governs the expression of a large number ofgenes, including some that are essential for skin development.In skin, c-myc represents a kind of switch that determines thedevelopment of stem cells into keratinizing epidermal cellsversus sebaceous gland cells. Increased expression of c-mycfavors their differentiation into sebocytes.83The differentiationof sebocytes can also be induced by c-myc activation in stemcells of the interfollicular epidermis between hair follicles.86The further differentiation and proliferation of stem cells
of sebocytes can also be induced by c-myc activation in stemcells of the interfollicular epidermis between hair follicles.86The further differentiation and proliferation of stem cellscommitted to sebaceous gland development is governed by thetranscription factor B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein1 (BLIMP1), originally discovered as a factor that inhibits thefurther proliferation but promotes the differentiation of B-lym-phocytes into antibody-secreting plasma cells. Experiments inthe mouse showed that a loss of the Blimp1-positive glandprogenitor cells at the transition from the acinus to the hairfollicle sebaceous gland (Fig. 8) resulted in increased cell ac-tivity in the hair-bulge stem cell compartment and led toreformation of gland tissue, although in a hyperplasic state.74
74From these observations it was concluded that the BLIMP1-positive cells represented the unipotent, lineage-committedprogenitor cells that control the development and homeostasisof the sebaceous gland. A later study in the mouse and human,however, did not show that BLIMP1 distinguishes stem cellsundergoing differentiation into sebaceous gland versus hairfollicle versus interfollicular epidermal cells.86Recently, it wasobserved that the BLIMP1 protein does in fact occur in allappendages of the skin including hair follicles, nail organs,sebaceous glands, and the epidermal granular layer, at least inthe human.89In addition, BLIMP1 protein was mainly found inthe most mature cells; therefore, the authors concluded thatBLIMP1 has a major role in terminal differentiation, including acentral function in skin barrier homeostasis, as indicated by itspresence in the epidermal granular layer.89However, the func -
89However, the func -tion of BLIMP1 may be more complex, since in BLIMP1 knock-outs, an increased cell division activity has been observed inthe multipotent stem cells of the hair bulge, conceivably serv-ing to replace the dysfunctional sebaceous gland cells. Thisoccurrence results in a disturbance of sebaceous gland homeo-stasis with formation of enlarged, hyperplasic glands and anFIGURE 8.Location of sebaceousgland progenitors in the mouse skin.The expression of sebaceous gland–committed progenitor cells wasfound to be restricted to the transi-tion zone between the acinus andthe hair follicle in skin sebaceousglands. Such progenitor cells, labeledby retroviral transfer ( A–C), are seenin a hair met in longitudinal section(A) as well as in cross-sections ( B,C).Another marker (BLIMP1) that is as-sumed to characterize lineage-com-mitted sebaceous gland progenitorsindicates respective cells at the sameposition in a schematic drawing ( D).(A–C)Reprinted by permission from
(A–C)Reprinted by permission fromMacmillan Publishers Ltd: EMBO J ,Ghazizadeh S, Taichman LB. Multipleclasses of stem cells in cutaneous ep-ithelium: a lineage analysis of adultmouse skin. 2001;76:1215–22, ©2001. ( D) Reprinted from Cell, 126, Horsley V, O’Carroll D, Tooze R et al., Blimp1 deﬁnes a progenitor population that governs cellular input tothe sebaceous gland, 597–609, © 2006 with, permission from Cell Press.1946 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
oily fur.82Other regulatory factors also contribute to sebocytedifferentiation and proliferation via the Hedgehog, Wnt, Notch,and other signaling pathways.90Hedgehog91and Indian hedge -hog92signaling stimulates sebocyte proliferation, whereastheir inhibition results in suppression of gland development.Terminal Maturation of Sebocytes. The maturation ofsebocytes within the sebaceous gland involves signaling byperoxisome proliferator activated receptor-/H9253(PPAR- /H9253), a mem-ber of the PPAR subfamily of nuclear hormone receptors. It isa ligand-activated transcription factor that plays an importantrole in the control of gene expression in a large number oftissues with lipid-producing cell types, even including keratin-ocytes,93and is activated by fatty acids.94PPARs regulate mul -tiple lipid metabolic genes via PPAR response elements locatedin cell organelles, such as peroxisomes, microsomes, and mi-tochondria, which are involved in lipid metabolism.95PPAR- /H9253
95PPAR- /H9253is necessary for the differentiation of adipose tissue in vivo andin vitro.96Signaling to PPAR- /H9253, (e.g., by long–chain fatty acidssuch as linoleic acid)97initiates lipogenesis and the accumula -tion of large intracellular lipid droplets.98PPAR- /H9253is also involvedin the terminal differentiation of sebocytes in the non–hair-asso-ciated rat preputial gland.97The growth and development ofsebaceous glands is dependent on androgens, but they are notsufﬁcient for the full maturation of the sebocytes, as dissected incell culture experiments.99Androgens appear to inﬂuenceearly steps of sebocyte differentiation, probably including theupregulation of PPAR- /H9253, whereas full differentiation and matu-ration of sebocytes, including the formation of the typical largelipid droplets, requires the action of PPAR-/H9253.97Therefore, theaction of androgens is related to but distinct from that of
PPAR- /H9253. Still, in cell culture, the effects of dihydrotestosteroneand the speciﬁc PPAR- /H9253ligand thiazolidinedione BRL-49653were additive in increasing the lipidogenesis of rat preputialsebocytes,97which points to the importance of sex hor -mones—in particular, androgens—in the regulation of seba-ceous gland function.Cell Differentiation and Dynamics in theMeibomian GlandMolecules that are involved in the differentiation and functionof sebaceous glands are also present in the meibomian glands,as observed by Nien et al.87BLIMP1 was described as a differ -entiation marker for the sebaceous lineage stem cells,82butwas observed later in the epidermis and basically in all skinappendages89and was also found in the meibomian glandductal system87and in the luminal layers of the eye lid epider -mis. The sebocyte differentiation marker PPAR- /H9253was also ob-
served in mouse meibocytes. It showed an age dependenceand changed from a cytoplasmic staining of basal cells of younganimals, to cytoplasmic staining in most meibocytes of youngadults, to a nuclear staining of all meibocytes in old animals.87This rearrangement was paralleled by a decrease in acinar sizeand in lipid production, as veriﬁed by oil red O staining.Furthermore, in young and young adult animals, many of thebasal acinar cells were recognized as proliferative by Ki67staining, whereas the proliferation rate decreased in olderanimals. The noted absence of BLIMP1 from basal acinar cellsmay be explained by the recent ﬁnding that it does not repre-sent a lineage marker for sebaceous stem cells, as originallyassumed82and does not discriminate between stem cells ofdifferent lineages in the mouse,86but in fact occurs every -where in the human epidermis.89The terminal differentiation of meibocytes shares similari-
ties with that of the secretory cells (sebocytes) of sebaceousglands, as can be assumed from their structure and function forlipid production. Intracellular lipids, after their synthesis via aPPAR-
ties with that of the secretory cells (sebocytes) of sebaceousglands, as can be assumed from their structure and function forlipid production. Intracellular lipids, after their synthesis via aPPAR-/H9253-dependent pathway, are maintained inside specializedcompartments (lipid droplets) that contain the associated mol-ecule adipose differentiation-related protein (ADRP, or adi-pophilin) in their periphery.100ADRP is an intrinsic lipid stor -age protein found in lipid droplets of different cell types and inall cells that produce lipids to any degree, from muscle cellsto adipocytes. ADRP stimulates the uptake of long-chain fattyacids and its own expression is also upregulated101by thepresence of these fatty acids that represent a prominent com-ponent in the meibomian oil (Green-Church KB, et al. IOVS2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 533).102–105ADRP has been de -scribed in rat meibomian gland tissue by Northern and Westernblot analysis and by immunohistochemistry.106The latter
106The lattershowed ADRP localization at the margins of the lipid dropletswith a generally higher level of expression in the more maturemeibocytes located toward the center of the acinus in situ andin more mature cells in the cell culture of isolated meibocytes.ADPR was hence suggested to be a differentiation marker formature meibocytes.Relation of Stem Cells to MeibomianGland DiseaseDefects in stem cell formation and their migration may con-tribute to MGD and disease. This assumption is mainly basedon observations in cutaneous hair-associated sebaceous glands,but also on ﬁndings in the meibomian glands itself.In the skin, these defects are relevant (e.g., in the onset ofacne107and sebaceous cancer).108Related diseases also occurin the meibomian gland in the form of hyperkeratinizing seb-orrheic conditions7,109,110and cancers of the meibomian glandtissue.111Alterations of sebaceous glands can occur on all levels of
development, from commitment to stem cell lineage, to glandtissue formation, to terminal sebocyte maturation inside theacini, as discussed by Horsley et al.82Overexpression of thebasal transcription factor c-myc, which acts as a kind of switchbetween the developmental directions into epidermis versussebaceous gland formation, favors sebaceous gland hyperpla-sia,112which conceivably results in primary seborrhea.BLIMP1, a more downstream transcription factor that repressesc-myc and inhibits further proliferation but stimulates the dif-ferentiation of progenitor cells,113is essential for lineage de -termination of sebaceous gland stem cells.114,115Disturbanceof sebaceous gland homeostasis due to loss of BLIMP1-positive,gland-committed progenitors can result in excessive repairprocesses with formation of enlarged, hyperplastic glands andseborrhea.82The terminal maturation of sebocytes inside theacinus is maintained by PPAR- /H9253, which is a key factor for all
lipid-producing cells.98Cells with deﬁciency of PPAR, such asknockout cells, can only poorly contribute to the formation ofsecretory acini.96In line with this observation in sebaceousglands may be the ﬁnding that the expression pattern ofPPAR- /H9253gradually redistributes from a cytoplasmic location inyoung and young adult mice to a nuclear location in old mice.This change in location is paralleled by development of acinaratrophy with a decrease in the size of the acini in general andof the lipid droplets within individual meibocytes in particu-lar.87A lack of PPAR- /H9253could therefore contribute to potentialage-related atrophic processes of the meibomian gland. Ago-nists and antagonists of PPAR- /H9253can modulate the function ofsebaceous glands and may also provide potential therapeuticapproaches.87In wounding conditions, stem cell differentiation tends todevelop a higher degree of plasticity,74and the lineage com -
mitment can switch, leading to a replacement of altered or lostprogenitor cells.82,88This process may also apply to events
develop a higher degree of plasticity,74and the lineage com -mitment can switch, leading to a replacement of altered or lostprogenitor cells.82,88This process may also apply to eventsobserved in MGD that may exert stress on the cells, such asthat due to stasis with downstream mechanical pressure stressIOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1947Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
in obstruction or due to increased bacterial growth and down-stream release of bacterial lipases, toxic mediators, or inﬂam-matory mediators. Stem cell–based repair mechanisms, how-ever, do not always result in intact tissue reconstruction butcan lead to alterations in structure and function. This alterationcan result in hyperplastic acini with increased lipid produc-tion82that could contribute to the pathogenesis of MGD, assimilarly described in the pathogenesis of acne,107but it mayalso be involved in the development of meibomian gland can-cer.111LIPIDSYNTHESIS IN MEIBOMIAN GLANDSOverview
There are few studies on lipid synthesis or uptake in themeibomian gland. A primary reason for the scant number ofstudies is that information about which lipids are synthesizedhas been lacking. Meibomian lipid characterization has reacheda point where it may now be possible to identify those lipidsynthetic pathways that lead to very long fatty acids. Scienceremains challenged, however, in that not all animal modelswould produce the same lipid mixtures as humans, and be-cause the energy needs and hormonal stimulation needed forlipid production are not fully understood. Enormous amountsof energy are required to add two carbons to a growing lipidchain (1ATP, 2NADPH; 16C palmitic acid requires 7ATP plus14NADPH). For this to occur, the meibocytes need both asufﬁcient supply of oxygen and a reliable carbon source. Al-though the basal cells in the acini have access to oxygen fromcapillaries, as the cells mature, they continually plump up withlipids, and they distance themselves from the
withlipids, and they distance themselves from the capillaries (Fig.4). Both glucose (the typical carbon source) and oxygen do notdiffuse well through lipids—hence, the conundrum as to howthese resources are supplied to the maturing acinar cells. Inmature meibocytes according to Jester et al.
32“the mitochon -dria are shrunken and electron-dense.” In contrast, Gorgas andVo¨lkl34have not reported any degeneration of mitochondria inmature meibocytes but only the presence of osmophilic, denseinclusion bodies that occur in all stages of meibocyte differen-tiation. Despite this, the cells ﬁll with lipids; therefore, theresources for producing the lipids must be accessible to thecentral acinar cells. It remains unclear whether this processoccurs via transport or diffusion.There are also questions about hormonal regulation of the
lipid production process, because insulin and glucagon aretypically involved with fat and sugar metabolism. They arewater soluble and would have little access to the maturingacinar cells. By contrast, steroid hormones (particularly andro-gens) are known to inﬂuence the acinar cells, and their lipidsolubility would give them access to the maturing acinar cells.In addition to the synthesis of meibomian lipids, the ultrastruc-ture of meibocytes indicates that there are special features ofstacked membrane arrays and peroxisomes, which means thatthese cells must also have the machinery to synthesize polarlipids, such as phospholipids and cholesterol, for synthesis oftheir internal membranes. There remains the possibility, how-ever, that some of these polar lipids and others, such as ( O-acyl)-/H9275-hydroxy fatty acids, are speciﬁcally synthesized for se-
cretion. Before the puzzle of how the synthesis of these lipidsis controlled versus those speciﬁcally destined for secretioncan be systematically considered, a consensus must be reachedon the composition of normal meibomian secretions. It is alsohighly likely that some of the enzymes associated with the lipidsynthesis are membrane bound, which makes them difﬁcult tostudy. Immunohistochemical studies may resolve this dilemma,because they will help determine the compartmentalization ofthe enzymes—an important factor, in that enzyme location isan indication of the end destination of the lipids. Unfortu-nately, no easily accessible primer text about the biochemicalpathways has been published to date.
nately, no easily accessible primer text about the biochemicalpathways has been published to date.The most abundant components of the meibomian lipidsare wax and sterol esters, consisting of fatty acids and fattyalcohols, long-chain ( /H1102220C) fatty acids and alcohols, and ste-rols, particularly cholesterol. The most abundant fatty acid isoleic acid, which has 18C and is monounsaturated (18:1(cis/H90049), which means it has 18C with the ninth bond being acisdouble bond. Wax esters are formed by condensation offatty alcohols with fatty acids, and sterol esters are formed bycondensation of sterols with fatty acids.103,116Theoretically,these lipid components could either be synthesized de novo inthe acinar cells or taken up from the bloodstream or both. Theevidence for de novo synthesis is supported because the syn-thetic enzymes for the components and the transesterases toform the ﬁnal products have been detected either directly orindirectly (mRNA) in the acinar cells.
77,81,117There is no directevidence to date that the lipids are taken up from the blood-stream (this does not refer to steroid hormones, which arelipids, being taken up by the acinar cells as part of theirhormonal action) and this is an area that warrants furtherinvestigations. Such uptake could show variations in lipid com-position with change in diet, and the plasma cholesterol levelswarrant further investigation relative to the cholesterol118orcholesterol esters in tear ﬂuid or meibomian secretions. Re-cently, patients with blepharitis and taking ﬂaxseed oil (ome-ga-3) showed no difference in omega-3 fatty acids, omega-6fatty acids, total monounsaturated, poly, or monounsaturatedfatty acids, despite levels of omega-3 fatty acids being higher inthe blood.119And if diet is important, it would not explain howthe meibomian lipids of koalas, which have a very restricted
and speciﬁc lipid dietary intake (sole diet of eucalyptus leaves),have a lipid proﬁle similar to other mammals (Butovich IA,Millar TJ. IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 2545). However, acorrelation has been shown between polar lipid proﬁles andvariations in diet in women with Sjo ¨gren’s syndrome; that is,those with a single polar lipid peak after HPLC analysis hadabout double the intake of omega-3 fatty acids compared withthose who had multiple polar lipid peaks.120Therefore, it ismost likely that all the lipids secreted by the meibomian glandsare synthesized by the gland and we must understand fatty acidand cholesterol synthesis, the key enzymes involved in thesepathways, and in which cellular compartments they are lo-cated.A Skeletal Overview of Lipid Synthesis
A Skeletal Overview of Lipid SynthesisFatty acid synthesis catalyzed by fatty acid synthase occurs inthe cytoplasm, but the carbons come from the mitochondria(Fig. 9). Therefore, mitochondria are necessary, not only forgenerating the large amounts of energy needed for lipid syn-thesis, but also for the carbons of lipids. This fact is enigmaticin the context of meibomian glands, where the more matureacinar cells continue to plump up with lipids, but at the sametime their mitochondrial number decrease, and they are fur-ther displaced from their oxygen source.Fatty Acid SynthesisThe carbon chain of the fatty acids is built two carbons at atime after repeated enzymatic cycles. As part of this process,the acetyl-CoA has to be activated to a higher energy level. Thisactivation is induced by adding carbon dioxide to it to formmalonyl-CoA (Fig. 10). With each cycle of fatty acid synthesis,two new carbons from malonyl-CoA are added to the chain,and the third carbon is released as CO
2(Fig. 11 ). With eachcycle, through several different reactions catalyzed by differentdomains of the enzyme fatty acid synthase, two reductions1948 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
occur, each of which converts one NADPH to NADP. Each ofthese steps is about the same as consuming three ATPs. Theresult is an even-numbered fatty acid, typically 16C long(palmitic acid), which is cleaved from the enzyme by a thio-lase. Many of the fatty acids in the meibomian gland are muchlonger than 16C, and the further elongation requires differentenzymes. If an odd-numbered straight-chain fatty acid is to besynthesized, propionyl-CoA (4C) is initially used as the carbonsource instead of malonyl-CoA, and when CO2is displaced,three carbons are added to the chain, resulting in an odd-numbered fatty acid.Straight-Chain Fatty Acids. For chain elongation, thepalmitoyl component of palmitoyl ACP is transferred to coen-zyme A (CoA-SH) to form palmitoyl-CoA. Then, elongation(C18–C28) occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum,121and someof these are converted by additional enzymes into fatty alco-hols. The elongation process occurs in the same way as de-
scribed above, except that in this case, CoA is the carrier. Twonew carbons are loaded from malonyl-CoA onto palmitoyl-CoA,followed by reduction, dehydration, and reduction to form thenew saturated chain extended by 2C. In forming the mostprominent fatty acid in meibomian gland secretions, oleic acid,the palmitic acid (16C), has to be elongated and then desatu-rated. Fatty acyl-CoA desaturase catalyzes the introduction of adouble bond into the acyl chain (bond 9 of stearic acid), toform oleic acid. This oxidation occurs on the inner face of theendoplasmic reticulum and involves coupled electron transfersthrough cytochrome- b5, FADH2, and NADPH, which is con-verted to NADP/H11001. This enzyme in mammals readily desaturatesthe bond between C9 and C10 but does not desaturate thebonds between C10 and the terminal methyl group. Fatty acidswith desaturation between C10 and the terminal such as lino-
FIGURE 9.Transfer of carbons for lipid synthesis from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm. When the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in themitochondria is blocked due to an excess of the high-energy molecule NADH, there is a buildup of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA that indicates tothe cell that it has a surfeit of energy and therefore does not need to oxidize carbons to obtain more energy. Instead, it is more desirable to storethe carbons as fats until the energy is needed. The acetyl group (2C) of acetyl-CoA is passed to oxaloacetate (4C) to form citrate (6C), and citrateis transferred across the mitochondrial membrane into the cytoplasm. It is then lysed (citrate lyase) and coupled to cytoplasmic CoA to formcytoplasmic acetyl-CoA, which is used for fatty acid synthesis, and oxaloacetate, which is cycled back (indirectly) to the mitochondrial matrix.Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.FIGURE 10. Formation of malonyl-
FIGURE 10. Formation of malonyl-CoA. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1949Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
leic acid (18:2; all- cis/H90049,12) and linolenic acid (18:3; all-cis/H90049,12,15) are normally obtained from the diet. These fattyacids have been detected in human meibomian gland secre-tions, albeit in small amounts.122One possibility is that thereare additional desaturase enzymatic activities in the meibomiangland that are able to desaturate /H9275-3 or /H9275-6 bonds in C18 fattyacids. One example of such enzymatic activity is the product ofthe gene fat-1 , which has been found in animals.123Thesedesaturases are membrane bound and probably require othermembrane-linked cofactors, such as cytochrome- b5for theiractivity. The presence of large numbers of ordered peroxi-somes in more mature cells in the meibomian gland acini34
34may be the location of these enzymes, but this still has to bedemonstrated. That these enzymes are membrane boundmeans that they are very difﬁcult to purify, and thereforesearching for their gene expression is more likely to revealtheir presence. Another important highlight of plant mem-brane-bound desaturases is that they use glycerolipids as theirsubstrates and not acyl-CoA. The presence of this substrate isalso likely to be the case for similar desaturases (e.g., FAT-1), ifthey exist, in meibomian glands. This notion implies that thecarbon chain source would be from the membrane lipids of theendoplasmic reticulum.Branched-Chain Fatty Acids. Some branched-chain fattyacids have been detected as components of meibomian lip-ids.116,124,125It appears from studies of rabbit meibomianglands, with the use of radioactive labeled precursors, that the
branched carbon chain is supplied from branched side-chainamino acids. In rabbits, isoleucine has been used predomi-nantly in vivo, whereas, in vitro, valine has also been used. Inneither case has leucine been used as a precursor.126For these,the incorporation must have been at the initial loading of theacyl carrier domain of fatty acid synthase, because thebranched fatty acids were either iso- or anteiso-branched (at
the omega end of the carbon chain). Since the new chaingrows from the carboxyl end, if incorporation were not atinitiation, there would be multiple branching along the lengthof the chain. Similarly, if it were incorporated after the initialsynthesis of palmitic acid, the extension phase for longer chainfatty acids, they would also occur randomly and possibly asmultiple branched methyl groups near the carboxyl end, butthis is not the case. Whether the preference order for theamino acid precursors for branched-chain fatty acids is thesame in other animals as it is in rabbits still has to be estab-lished.Fatty Alcohols. Fatty alcohols are synthesized from theircorresponding fatty acids. The fatty acid component of acylCoA is reduced to form the corresponding fatty alcohol (acyl-CoA reductase).127,128Whether the cofactor in the meibomiangland is NADPH or NADH is not known, but two high-energy
compounds are consumed in the reaction. In the meibomiangland, there appears to be a preference for long-chain fattyacids, because long-chain fatty alcohols seem to be the pre-dominant species found to be associated with cholesterol andwax esters. This association may come about because of anenzymatic preference for longer chain fatty acids or becausethe shorter chain fatty acids are preferentially used for the acidcomponent of wax esters or ( O-acyl)-/H9275-hydroxy fatty acids.122The location of the fatty alcohols could be in the peroxi-somes,34whereas in other tissues they are involved in makingether bonds (condensation of two alcohols), but in this case itwould be likely that they form ester bonds with fatty acids toform the wax esters.Cholesterol Synthesis. An overview of cholesterol synthe-sis is that all 27C compounds come from acetic acid, in theform of acetyl-CoA. As above, the acetyl component of acetyl-
Cholesterol Synthesis. An overview of cholesterol synthe-sis is that all 27C compounds come from acetic acid, in theform of acetyl-CoA. As above, the acetyl component of acetyl-FIGURE 11. Various activities of fatty acid synthase. The functional enzyme is a dimer with multiple functions in different regions. On each cycle,the growing chain is transferred to a malonyl-loaded acyl carrier protein domain of the protein, and in so doing displaces CO2, which increasesthe chain length by 2C. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.1950 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
CoA is transferred from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm viacitrate (Fig. 9). It is then converted to HMG-CoA (Fig. 12),which is converted to mevalonate (Fig. 13). This reaction iscatalyzed by HMG reductase, which is activated by insulin andinhibited by glucagon. Therefore, it would be of interest toexamine the composition of meibomian lipids from patientswith uncontrolled diabetes, as in theory, this critical enzymewould have decreased activity, and hence less cholesterolwould be synthesized. Mevalonate is converted to a 5C com-pound, isopentenyl pyrophosphate (Figs. 13, 14). Three ofthese are joined to form a 15C compound—farnesyl pyrophos-phate—and two farnesyl pyrophosphates are joined to form a30C compound, squalene (Fig. 15). Squalene is cyclized toform lanosterol, and three methyl groups are then removed toform cholesterol.The mRNAs for the enzymes associated with this pathway
have been identiﬁed in mouse meibomian gland extracts, andmost of them are increased by testosterone, which is an indi-cation that this pathway is upregulated by testosterone.77,121This suggestion is supported by the histochemical detection ofvarious hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases in meibomian glandacinar cells. These enzymes were located in developing andmature, but not basal, acinar cells of the meibomian gland.129These enzymes are not found in all sebaceous glands, but areassociated with sebaceous glands of the face and neck.130,131In sebaceous glands, the levels of these enzymes decrease withage, which does not seem to be the case with meibomianglands. Perra et al.56did not mention this, even though sampleswere taken from 18- to 60-year-olds. In terms of function, theenzymes are located in the endoplasmic reticulum and are ableto catalyze the conversion of androgens into their potent met-abolic forms, particularly dihydrotestosterone, which is associ-
ated with upregulation of gene transcription for enzymes as-sociated with fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis, as well asother functions associated with lipid metabolism.Other Synthetic PathwaysTriglycerols have also been reported to be components ofmeibomian lipids. The pathway for synthesis of triglycerolsinvolves having one of the intermediates of glycolysis, dihy-droxyacetone phosphate, converted to glycerol 3-phosphate(glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase), which uses NADH asthe hydrogen source. Acyl transferases sequentially catalyzethe transfer of acyl groups from acyl-CoA to C1and then C2of the glycerol 3-phosphate to form phosphatidic acid. Phos-phatidic acid phosphatase catalyzes the dephosphorylationof phosphatidic acid to form diacylglycerol, which is thenconverted to triacylglycerol by transfer of an acyl groupfrom acyl-CoA (acyl transferase).The suggestion and, more recently, the detection of ( O-acyl)-/H9275-hydroxy fatty acids33,121means that /H9275-hydroxy fatty
acids must be synthesized in the meibomian glands. The enzy-matic pathway for /H9275-hydroxy fatty acids is not known. At thisstage, only long-chain /H9275-hydroxy fatty acids have been de-tected, which tends to indicate that the hydroxylation occursat the end of acyl chain synthesis, not at the beginning. Hy-droxylation of an inert terminal methyl group would be veryunusual and normally needs several intermediates. Such inter-mediates have yet to be detected. However, many of thesecompounds, which may be in low amounts, would be unde-tected unless speciﬁcally sought.FIGURE 12. /H9252-Hydroxy- /H9252-methyl glutaryl-CoA (HMG-Co A). HMG-CoA synthase 1 (4.1.3.5) is located in the cytoplasm, unlike HMG-CoA synthase2 (4.1.3.4), which is located in the mitochondria. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.FIGURE 13. Formation of 3-phospho-5-pyrophosphomevalonate. 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl-CoA is converted on the endoplasmic reticulum to
FIGURE 13. Formation of 3-phospho-5-pyrophosphomevalonate. 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl-CoA is converted on the endoplasmic reticulum tothe energetically activated 3-phospho-5-pyrophosphomevalonate. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1951Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Cholesterol esters tend to have long-chain ( /H11022C20) fattyacids attached to them,132which indicates that the cholesteroltransacylase(s) involved prefer long-chain acids. This prefer-ence differs from that of the wax acyl-CoA:alcohol transacy-lases, which do not appear to be speciﬁc for chain lengths.125The ( O-acyl)- /H9275-hydroxy fatty acids tend to have long-chain /H9275hydroxyl fatty acids (C30:1, C32:1, and C34:1) acetylatedthrough their /H9275-hydroxyls by a C18:1-FA,132which indicatesthat the transacylases may be very speciﬁc.Comments on the Synthesis of Lipids inMeibomian GlandsVascular Supply. Fat synthesis needs both energy and anexcellent blood supply as the source of its oxygen. This neces-sity is reﬂected in adipose tissue development, where lipocytedensity correlates positively with capillary density, and thecells tend to cluster around large blood vessels.133Examinationof the published literature on the structure of the meibomian
gland and structural studies of meibomian gland developmenthave not paid particular attention to capillary size and density.Although this may not be particularly essential in development,a study of the capillaries could be of beneﬁt in understandingthe aging process, in which gland atrophy has been noted.Local swelling, such as occurs when there is a blockage of themeibomian gland duct, may also lead to poor blood ﬂow andatrophy of the glands. In other fat cells, angiogenesis factorssuch as PGE2 (ubiquitous) andL-butyrylglycerol (speciﬁc to fatcells) are synthesized and secreted by adipocytes. To date,secretion of these factors by meibocytes has not been investi-gated.The predominant source of energy in these synthetic
pathways is NADPH, typically produced by a side path ofglycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway. Key enzymesassociated with this pathway (glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-genase and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase) have beendetected in the differentiating and degenerating cells ofhuman meibomian glands, but not in the basal cells. Theneed for this pathway means that, to produce lipids, meibo-cytes require a rich supply of glucose and therefore dependheavily on insulin and a rich blood supply for glucose up-take. Insulin also stimulates lipid synthesis (many kinasesthat control activation of lipid synthetic enzymes are sensi-tive to insulin). Similarly, glucocorticoids have been longknown to increase adipose tissue mass via their hypertro-FIGURE 14. Formation of 10C geranylpyrophosphate. The 5C isopentenylpyrophosphate and its isomer are formed from 3-phospho-5-phospho-mevelanate, which are then joined to form 10C geranylpyrophosphate. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.
FIGURE 15. Formation of cholesterol. Formation of 15C farnesyl pyrophosphate, followed by 30C squalene, which is then converted through avariety of reactions to 27C cholesterol. Figure courtesy of Tom Millar.1952 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
phic effect. A clinical method of testing this hypothesiswould be the assessment of the meibomian glands that arealtered in patients who have Cushing’s syndrome or arereceiving cortisol treatment.The membranes between acinar cells are particularly andunusually interdigitated35and could be a region of cytoplasmicexchange. On the positive side, published micrographs alsoshow, on casual inspection, that there is a concentration ofmitochondria around lipid droplets that is consistent with themolecules that come from the mitochondria being a carbonsource for the new lipids.32Similarly, some lipid droplets aresurrounded by organized concentric layers of endoplasmic
reticulum. This arrangement is consistent with the enzymesassociated with fatty acyl chain elongation and oxidation (for-mation of double bonds) occurring in these regions. It may alsomean that, at this stage, different lipids are in different lipiddroplets, but it probably has no impact at the end, when thecells disintegrate as part of the holocrine secretion.Proteins and the Meibomian GlandThere is emerging evidence that speciﬁc lipoproteins134orother proteins (Thangavelu M, et al. IOVS 2010;51:ARVO E-Ab-stract 2373) may be associated with meibomian lipids. Therehas been a study on adipose differentiation-related protein, aprotein that marks the differentiation of adipose tissue.106Thisprotein seemed to localize adjacent to the lipid droplets and, inmicrographs, appeared to be present at lower levels in themost mature cells in the follicle. The low magniﬁcation madethis difﬁcult to ascertain. Lipocalin has also been found inhuman meibomian gland secretions,
134and hence it is possiblethat this lipocalin also sequesters lipids. It may originate fromthe meibomian gland, given that lipocalin mRNA has beenidentiﬁed in the mouse meibomian gland.81,135Physical Properties of Meibomian LipidsThe transition temperature from a solid to a liquid for meibo-mian lipids is actually a range, 28°C to 32°C, because of themixture of lipids. This transition has been explained by thearrangement of lipids from their transconformation (orderedand rigid) to their gauche conformation (disordered and ﬂuid),as evidenced by infrared spectroscopy.136The temperature ofthe eyelids will therefore affect the liquidity of meibomianlipids and hence their viscosity. In liquids, viscosity ( /H9257)i sa
measure of resistance to ﬂow at a particular temperature. Insubstances that exhibit Newtonian viscosity, if the force isdoubled, the ﬂow rate doubles, and hence the resistance toﬂow (viscosity) remains the same. Other substances alter theirviscosity (non-Newtonian) depending on the force applied. (Agood example is toothpaste, which is very viscous when sittingon a toothbrush, but ﬂows easily out of a tube when force isapplied.) This phenomenon is called shear thinning. Tiffanyand Dart137have reported the viscosity of human meibomianlipid samples to vary between 9.7 and 19.5 Pa /H18528s, (cf. honey, 10Pa/H18528s; glycerine, 1 Pa /H18528s; olive oil, 0.1 Pa /H18528s; and water, 1 mPa /H18528
s), depending on the force applied. Therefore, the viscosity ofmeibomian lipids exhibits non-Newtonian behavior. The tem-perature at which the viscosity was measured in these exper-iments was not indicated, but considering the data, it is likelythat it was below the transition temperature (30°C). In apractical sense, these data represent the viscosity of the mei-bomian secretion sitting in the ducts. Blinking would applyshearing force that would lower the viscosity, making thelipids easier to eject from the meibomian oriﬁces. This shearingforce would be increased by having narrow openings in com-parison to the diameter of the duct (as anatomic studies indi-cate is the case), and this effect would also reduce the viscos-ity. A lower viscosity would also occur because thetemperature of the eyelid (35°C–37°C) would be above the
transition temperature. In the same experiments, the viscosityof lipids extracted from chalazion secretions were so high thatonly one measurement, despite heating to 70°C, could bemade, and that was 69.9 Pa /H18528s. This material contained morephospholipids, free fatty acids, cholesterol, and triglyceridesthan do normal meibomian lipids.Viscosity measurements on thin ﬁlms are complex, andseveral different experimental parameters, such as frequencyand amplitude of shear forces and surface pressure of the ﬁlm,are varied to come up with appropriate measures of viscos-ity.138–140Films made from human meibomian lipids showincreasing viscosity (complex viscosity) with surface pressureand attain a viscosity of 1 mPa /H18528s at a surface pressure ofapproximately 25 mN/m, dropping to 0.1 mPa /H18528s at 35°C, at ashear frequency of 6.2 rads/H110021.141The refractive index of meibomian lipids varies between
1.46 and 1.53 per the visible spectrum, with a small, relativelylinear decrease over a temperature range from 25°C to 45°C.The refractive index of human skin lipids is approximately0.013 less. This high refractive index probably has little overallrefractive inﬂuence over a pure air–water interface because thelipid layer is very thin.142Although there seems to be an abundance of lipids availableon the eyelid margins (300 /H9262g) compared with the amount oflipids estimated to be in the lipid layer of the tear ﬁlm (9 /H9262g),48we still do not know what enables them to spread from thereservoir across the ocular surface to form a ﬁlm. There isindirect evidence that a bigger reservoir of lipids on the eyelidmargins leads to a thicker lipid layer. The amount of lipids ishigher on the eyelid margins just after waking,45and there is athicker oil ﬁlm on the eye surface in the morning.143A surfac -
tant is needed for lipids to spread across an aqueous surface. Inthe absence of a surfactant, the lipids form lenses on thesurface. One of the main questions about meibomian lipidscenters on what enables them to spread. Holly144proposedthat this could be achieved by an initial spread of polar lipidsover the aqueous surface followed by nonpolar lipids. How-ever, it is most likely that the lipid ﬁlm is not respread on eachblink, but instead collapses and expands, as indicated by thesame interference patterns seen over multiple blinks; only afterthis is a new layer formed. What conveys these properties isstill not understood and whether proteins from the aqueouslayer become part of this outer layer of the tear ﬁlm, as somemodels suggest, still has to be demonstrated. Conversely, thereis also no evidence they are not part of this outer layer.REGULATION OF THE MEIBOMIAN GLAND IN HEALTHANDDISEASESebaceous glands are present throughout the body and are
classiﬁed into two major types: pilosebaceous, which are asso-ciated with hair follicles, and free (i.e., preputial and meibo-mian), which occur in the transitional zone between the skinand mucous membranes.145An extensive amount of informa -tion is known about sebaceous glands, and a review of theirphysiological regulation in health and disease would be chal-lenging. More than 6000 articles have been published aboutthese glands since 1904, and numerous factors are known tomodulate the development, proliferation, differentiation, mat-uration, lipogenesis, and secretion of sebaceous glandsthroughout the body (Table 1). These factors include sexsteroids, corticosteroids, hypothalamic and pituitary hor-mones, insulin, retinoids, thyroxine, melanocortins, neu-rotransmitters, growth factors, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ligands (Table 1).40,98,145–156The control
40,98,145–156The controlpoints for sebaceous gland regulation often involve effects onIOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1953Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
gene expression, protein synthesis, and lipid production.There appear to be considerable differences in the controlmechanisms, however, as well as in the lipid composition, ofsebaceous glands between species and between different typesof sebaceous glands.145In contrast to sebaceous glands in general, there is relativelylittle information about the physiological regulation of the meibo-mian gland. Fewer than 850 articles about the meibomian glandhave been published in the past 106 years (Table 2), and fewer
than 50 of these papers, including reviews, address the topic ofphysiological control. The paucity of studies is astonishing,given that recent research has demonstrated the presence ofmore than 270 receptor mRNAs in the mouse meibomian glandalone (Table 3). Yet it is unknown whether most of thesetranscripts are translated and functional. Of particular interestis the lack of knowledge about the neural inﬂuence on themeibomian gland. This tissue is the only sebaceous gland in thehuman body that has rich sensory, sympathetic, and parasym-pathetic innervation,145including contact with nerve ﬁbersreactive for acetylcholinesterase, substance P, vasoactive intes-tinal peptide, dopamine /H9252-hydroxylase, nitric oxide synthase,tyrosine hydroxylase, somatostatin, neuropeptide Y (NPY), andCGRP.39,56,57,59,81,157–169Further, the meibomian gland con -tains mRNAs for serotonin, adrenergic, CGRP, cholinergic,dopamine,/H9253-aminobutyric acid, glutamate, NPY, neurotensin,
and somatostatin receptors (Table 3).81It is entirely unclear,however, whether neurotransmitters are released in the vicin-ity of the meibomian gland, act on glandular receptors, orinduce a physiological effect.Almost all of our understanding of the physiological, as wellas pathophysiological, regulation of the meibomian gland orig-inates from research exploring the effects of androgens, estro-gens, progestins, all- trans retinoic acid, and growth factors onthis tissue and/or its epithelial cells. This topic is discussed inthe following sections.AndrogensAndrogen Regulation of Sebaceous Glands. Androgensexert a signiﬁcant impact on the meibomian gland.81This inﬂu -ence is not surprising, given that androgens control the develop-ment, differentiation, and lipid production of sebaceous glandsthroughout the body.40,81,145,146,148,151,153,156,170–188Androgensact primarily on acinar epithelial cells in sebaceous glands, and
these cells contain both androgen receptor mRNA and protein(in their nuclei). Acinar cells respond to androgens by increas-ing the transcription of multiple genes and synthesizing pro-teins that augment both the elaboration and secretion of lipids.Sebaceous gland activity and secretion may be inhibited byorchiectomy or topical antiandrogen treatment.182,189–192Ofparticular interest, sebaceous gland function declines withage.193This aging-associated dysfunction has been correlatedwith both an atrophy of acinar epithelial cells and a decrease inserum androgen levels.193Indeed, the age-related cellularshrinkage in certain sebaceous glands has been directly corre-lated with a reduction in androgen levels in the surroundingskin.193Androgen activity in sebaceous glands is signiﬁcantlyinﬂuenced by the activity of certain enzymes, particularly5/H9251-reductase (converts testosterone into the potent andro-gen 5 /H9251-dihydrotestosterone), aromatase (converts testoster-
one to 17 /H9252-estradiol, androstenedione to estrone), and17/H9252-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD; regulates the in-terconversion of 17-ketosteroids with their corresponding17/H9252-hydroxysteroids and is necessary for the intracrine for-mation and/or inactivation of all active androgens and estro-gens in sebaceous glands).194–200These enzymes are vital,given that most of the androgens and estrogens in humans are
mation and/or inactivation of all active androgens and estro-gens in sebaceous glands).194–200These enzymes are vital,given that most of the androgens and estrogens in humans aresynthesized in peripheral tissues (e.g., sebaceous glands) fromadrenal sex steroid precursors (i.e., dehydroepiandrosterone[DHEA] and DHEA-sulfate) and that these enzymes regulate thecritical steroidogenic pathways (Fig. 16).194–197Of interest,the activity of these enzymes may vary according to sex, tissuelocation in the body, or cellular position within a piloseba-ceous unit and may also be induced by microenvironmentalfactors (e.g., proinﬂammatory cytokines).200–203Androgens also regulate numerous pathways of lipid metab-olism. For instance, depending on the tissue, androgens con-trol:TABLE 2.Articles with the Phrase “Meibomian Gland” Cited inPubMed from 1903 through November 2009TopicNumber ofArticles%o fArticlesClinical assessment and treatment 405 48.0
Clinical assessment and treatment 405 48.0Cancer 141 16.7Lipid analysis, properties andsynthesis99 11.7Literature reviews (partial) 52 6.2Anatomy and histochemistry 50 5.9Physiological regulation 48 5.7Pathology (experimental) 25 3.0Neural innervation 17 2.0Culture systems 4 0.5Stem cells 3 0.4A total of 844 articles were evaluated. The category LiteratureReviews (Partial) does not include topics related to lipid analysis,neural innervation, or physiological regulation. Those reviews areplaced in their speciﬁc topic areas.TABLE 1.Control of Sebaceous Gland and/or Sebocyte Growth andLipid ProductionFactor GrowthLipidProductionAdrenocorticotropic hormone 1Androgen 11Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor 1Calcitonin gene-related peptide R RCorticotropin-releasing hormone 11Epidermal growth factor 1Estrogen 22Growth hormone 1Hydrocortisone 1Insulin 1Insulin-like growth factor-I 1Insulin-like growth factor-II 1Keratinocyte growth factor 1
Keratinocyte growth factor 1Neuropeptide Y R RPeroxisome proliferator activatedreceptor ligands1Pituitary extract (bovine) 1Progestin /H11011Retinoid 22Substance P 11Thyroid-stimulating hormone 1Thyroxine 21Transforming growth factor-/H9251 1Vasoactive intestinal peptide R R/H9251-Melanocyte stimulating hormone 11/H9252-Adrenergic agonist Permissive/H9252-Endorphin 21Growth refers to sebocyte proliferation, sebocyte differentiation,and/or glandular size. Lipid production refers to lipogenesis and/orlipid secretion. R, functional receptors have been identiﬁed, but theirrole has yet to be determined; 1, increase; 2, decrease; /H11011, increase,decrease, or no effect, depending, on the type of sebaceous gland.1954 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
TABLE 3.Receptor mRNAs Present in the Mouse Meibomian Gland835-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1a5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1b5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1d5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 3b5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 5b5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 65-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 77 transmembrane g-protein coupled receptorActivin a receptor, type 1Activin a receptor, type 1bActivin a receptor, type ii-like 1Activin receptor iiaActivin receptor iibAdenosine a2b receptorAdenosine receptor retinoid x receptor interactingproteinAdenylate cyclase activating polypeptide 1receptor 1Adrenergic receptor,/H92511bAdrenergic receptor, /H92512aAdrenergic receptor, /H92512cAdrenergic receptor, /H92523
Adrenergic receptor, /H92523Adrenomedullin receptorArginine vasopressin receptor 1aArginine vasopressin receptor 1bArginine vasopressin receptor 2Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocatorAryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-likeAryl-hydrocarbon receptorAryl-hydrocarbon receptor repressorAryl-hydrocarbon receptor-interacting proteinAsialoglycoprotein receptor 1B-cell receptor-associated protein 29B-cell receptor-associated protein 31B-cell receptor-associated protein 37Benzodiazepine receptor, peripheralBone morphogenetic protein receptor, type 1bBradykinin receptor,/H9252Cadherin EGF lag seven-pass g-type receptorCadherin EGF lag seven-pass g-type receptor 2Calcitonin gene-related peptide-receptorcomponent proteinCalcitonin receptorCalcitonin receptor-likeCandidate taste receptor t2r19Cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor ii receptor precursorCd36 antigen (collagen type i receptor,
Cd36 antigen (collagen type i receptor,thrombospondin receptor)-like 2Chemokine (c-c) receptor 2Chemokine (c-c) receptor 4Chemokine (c-c) receptor 5Chemokine (c-x-c) receptor 2Chemokine (c-x-c) receptor 3Chemokine (c-x-c) receptor 4Chemokine orphan receptor 1Cholecystokinin a receptorCholinergic receptor, nicotinic, apolypeptide 1Cholinergic receptor, nicotinic, apolypeptide 6Cholinergic receptor, nicotinic, bpolypeptide 1Colony stimulating factor 2 receptor, a, low-afﬁnityColony stimulating factor 2 receptor, b 1, low-afﬁnityColony stimulating factor 2 receptor, b 2, low-afﬁnityComplement component 5, receptor 1Complement receptor related proteinCorticotropin releasing hormone receptor 2Coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptorCytokine receptor-like factor 3D6 b-chemokine receptorDopamine receptor 4Endothelial differentiation, lysophosphatidic acidg-protein-coupled receptor 7Endothelial differentiation, lysophosphatidic acidg-protein-coupled receptor 4
g-protein-coupled receptor 4Endothelial differentiation, sphingolipid g-protein-coupled receptor, 8Endothelial-speciﬁc receptor tyrosine kinaseEndothelin receptor type bEph receptor a2Eph receptor a4Eph receptor a5Eph receptor a6Eph receptor b6Eph-related receptor tyrosine kinaseEpidermal growth factor receptorEpidermal growth factor receptor pathwaysubstrate 15Epidermal growth factor receptor pathwaysubstrate 15, related sequenceEpidermal growth factor receptor pathwaysubstrate 8Estrogen receptor/H9252Estrogen receptor-binding fragment-associatedgene 9Estrogen related receptor, /H9251Fc receptor, IgE, high afﬁnity i, /H9253polypeptideFc receptor, IgE, low afﬁnity ii, /H9251polypeptideFc receptor, IgG, low afﬁnity iibFc receptor, IgG, low afﬁnity iiiFc receptor, IgG,/H9251chain transporter
/H9251chain transporterFormyl peptide receptor-related sequence 4Formyl peptide receptor-like 1G protein-coupled receptor 34G protein-coupled receptor 35G protein-coupled receptor 37G protein-coupled receptor 44G protein-coupled receptor 49G protein-coupled receptor 66G protein-coupled receptor 83G protein-coupled receptor 87G protein-coupled receptor g2aG protein-coupled receptor kinase 5G protein-coupled receptor kinase-interactor 2G protein-coupled receptor, family c, group 5,member d
member d/H9253-aminobutyric acid (gaba-a) receptor, subunitrho 1/H9253-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein/H9253-aminobutyric acid (gaba-a) receptor, subunitgamma 3Gastrin-releasing peptide receptorGlial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor familyreceptor/H92513Glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor familyreceptor /H92514Glutamate receptor, ionotropic, kainate 2 ( /H92522)Glutamate receptor, ionotropic, kainate 5 ( /H92532)Glutamate receptor, ionotropic, /H92542Golgi snap receptor complex member 1G-protein coupled receptor 12G-protein coupled receptor 25G-protein coupled receptor 26G-protein coupled receptor 3G-protein-coupled receptor 50Growth factor receptor bound protein 14Growth factor receptor bound protein 2Growth factor receptor bound protein 2-associated protein 1
associated protein 1Growth factor receptor bound protein 7Growth hormone receptorHistamine receptor h 2Hyaluronan mediated motility receptorHybrid receptor gp250 precursorInositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (type 2)Insulin receptorInsulin receptor-related receptorInsulin-like growth factor i receptorInterferon (/H9251and/H9252) receptorInterferon /H9253receptorInterleukin 1 receptor antagonistInterleukin 1 receptor, type iInterleukin 1 receptor, type iiInterleukin 1 receptor-associated kinaseInterleukin 10 receptor,/H9252Interleukin 11 receptor, /H9251chain 1Interleukin 13 receptor, /H92512Interleukin 15 receptor, /H9251chainInterleukin 2 receptor, /H9252chainInterleukin 2 receptor, /H9253chainInterleukin 3 receptor, /H9251chainInterleukin 4 receptor, /H9251Interleukin 7 receptorKiller cell lectin-like receptor subfamily g,member 1Killer cell lectin-like receptor, subfamily a,member 5
member 5Kinase insert domain protein receptorLaminin receptor 1Low density lipoprotein receptor relatedprotein 1Low-density lipoprotein receptor-relatedprotein 10Macrophage scavenger receptor 1Macrophage scavenger receptor 2Macrophage stimulating 1 receptorMammary tumor virus receptor 2Mannose receptor, c type 1Mannose-6-phosphate receptor, cation dependentNerve growth factor receptor associatedprotein 1Neuromedin b receptorNeuropeptide Y receptor Y2Neurotensin receptorNeurotrophic tyrosine kinase, receptor, type 2Nmda receptor-regulated gene 1Nuclear receptor binding factor 1Nuclear receptor binding factor 2Nuclear receptor coactivator 4Nuclear receptor coactivator 6Nuclear receptor coactivator 6 interacting proteinNuclear receptor co-repressor 1Nuclear receptor co-repressor 2Nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group h,member 2Nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group c,member 1Nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group e,member 3Nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group f,member 6
Nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group f,member 6Nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group a,member 1Nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group a,member 2Nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group a,member 3Nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group a,member 2Odorant receptor a16Olfactory receptor 17Olfactory receptor 37cOlfactory receptor 4 cluster, gene 3Olfactory receptor 64Olfactory receptor 70Olfactory receptor 71Olfactory receptor 7bOncostatin receptorOpioid receptor, sigma 1Opioid receptor,/H92541Oxidized LDL receptorParathyroid hormone receptorPeroxisome proliferator activated receptor/H9251Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor /H9253Pheromone receptor v3r4Phosphatidylserine receptorPhospholipase a2, group ib, pancreas, receptorPhotolyase/blue-light receptor homolog 2Platelet derived growth factor receptor,/H9251polypeptidePlatelet derived growth factor receptor, /H9252polypeptide
Progesterone receptor membrane component 1Prolactin receptorProstacyclin receptorProstaglandin e receptor 4 (subtype ep4)Prostaglandin f receptorProtein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, aProtein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, cpolypeptide-associated proteinProtein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, kProtein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, 1Protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor-type, finteracting protein, binding protein 2
Protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, kProtein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, 1Protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor-type, finteracting protein, binding protein 2Protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor-type, nPurinergic receptor p2x, ligand-gated ionchannel 4Purinergic receptor p2x, ligand-gated ionchannel, 1Pyrimidinergic receptor p2y, g-protein coupled, 4RAR-related orphan receptor/H9251(continues )IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1955Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
●the induction of genes involved in fatty acid and choles-terol synthesis, including fatty acid synthase, ATP-citrate lyase,malic enzyme, acetyl-CoA-carboxylase, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-taryl CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase, HMG-CoA reductase, glycerol3-phosphate acyl transferase, farnesyl diphosphate synthase,and FAR-17c;●fatty acid saturation and branching;●the incorporation of fatty acids into neutral lipids andphospholipids;●the content of total lipids, neutral lipids, cholesterol,phospholipids, triglycerides, and neutral glycosphingolipids;●the secretion rate of wax esters and various other lipids;and●the activity of lipases and the metabolism of lipopro-teins.184,204–219In addition, androgens stimulate the expression of sterol reg-ulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs), which are tran-scription factors that play an important role in the coordinateregulation of lipogenic enzymes.215–218,220,221Androgen Regulation of the Meibomian Gland. Andro-
gens regulate the meibomian gland and modulate gene expres-sion and lipid production within this tissue.77,81,117,222–225These hormonal actions appear to be mediated, at least in part,through binding to classic nuclear receptors. Sex steroid recep-tors typically bind their speciﬁc hormone, and the activated hor-mone–receptor complex then associates with a response elementin the regulatory region of target genes and controls gene tran-scription and eventually protein synthesis.226–228The meibomianglands of male and female rats, rabbits, and humans containandrogen receptor mRNA and androgen receptor protein withinthe acinar epithelial cell nuclei.223,229,230Further, androgens reg -ulate the expression of numerous genes in mouse, rabbit, andhuman meibomian glands.77,117,222,224,225,231These genomic ac -tions appear to be dependent on the presence of functionalandrogen receptors.224,225The effects of androgens and estrogen on the human meibo-
mian gland may be exerted predominantly after the local forma-tion of sex steroids from adrenal precursors. Human meibomianglands contain all the following steroidogenic and metabolic en-zyme mRNAs: steroid sulfatase, 3/H9252-HSD-/H90045-/H90044-isomerase type1,17/H9252-HSD types 1 and 3, types 1 and 2 5 /H9251-reductase, aromatase,glucuronosyl-transferase, and sulfotransferase.78,229Moreover, ata minimum, 3 /H9251-HSD, 3 /H9252-HSD, and 17 /H9252-HSD are known to betranslated in epithelial cells of the human meibomian gland.129These ﬁndings suggest that the human meibomian gland harborsthe enzymatic machinery necessary for the intracrine synthesisand metabolism of sex steroids.Androgens exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on gene expressionin the meibomian gland. Testosterone, for example, regulatesthe expression of more than 1580 genes in the male mousemeibomian gland.77,81,117,222,225Many of the upregulatedgenes are related to lipid metabolism (Fig. 17), lipid transport,
sterol biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism, intracellular proteintransport, oxidoreductase activity, peroxisomes, mitochondriaand early endosomes.77,81,117,222,225Moreover, some of theproteins and pathways encoded by these upregulated geneshave been the focus of recent research. For example:●ATP-citrate lyase, acetyl-CoA-synthase, acetyl-CoA-carbox-ylase, acetoacetyl-CoA-synthase, fatty acid synthase, HMG-CoAsynthase, HMG-CoA reductase, mevalonate kinase, phospho-TABLE 3(continued ). Receptor mRNAs Present in the Mouse Meibomian Gland83RAR-related orphan receptor /H9253Receptor (calcitonin) activity modifying protein 2Receptor-interacting serine-threonine kinase 1Receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphataseRetinoic acid receptor,/H9251Retinoid x receptor- /H9253Ryanodine receptor type 2Scavenger receptor class b1Serine/threonine kinase receptor associatedproteinSignal recognition particle receptor, b subunitSignal sequence receptor,/H9254
Ryanodine receptor type 2Scavenger receptor class b1Serine/threonine kinase receptor associatedproteinSignal recognition particle receptor, b subunitSignal sequence receptor,/H9254Single ig il-1 receptor related proteinSkeletal muscle ryanodine receptorSomatostatin receptor 2Somatostatin receptor 3Steroid receptor RNA activator 1Steroid receptor-interacting snf2 domain proteinStromal cell derived factor receptor 2Taste receptor, type 1, member 2Taste receptor, type 1, member 3T-cell receptor/H9252, variable 13Thymic stromal-derived lymphopoietin, receptorThyroid hormone receptor interactor 4
Thyroid hormone receptor interactor 6Tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factor 4Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 1Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 5Toll-like receptor 1Toll-like receptor 2Toll-like receptor 3Toll-like receptor 4 adaptor proteinToll-like receptor 9Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor andumor necrosis factor receptor associated proteinTransferrin receptorTransferrin receptor 2Transforming growth factor,/H9252receptor iiTransient receptor potential cation channel, subfamilym, member 7Transient receptor protein 1Transient receptor protein 2Transient receptor protein 4, associated proteinTumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 10bTumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 11aTumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 11bTumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 17Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 18
member 18Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 1aTumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 4Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,member 8Type 1 tumor necrosis factor receptorshedding aminopeptidase regulatorTyrosine kinase receptor 1Vanilloid receptor-like protein 1Very low density lipoprotein receptorVomeronasal 1 receptor, a5Vomeronasal 2, receptor, 15Vps10 domain receptor protein sores 2Zona pellucida 3 receptorAll receptor mRNAs had an intensity level greater than 0.5 in CodeLink Bioarrays. Data originate from the National Center for BiotechnologyInformation’s Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) via series accession number GSE1582.FIGURE 16. Major biosynthetic and inactivation pathways of andro-gens and estrogens in humans. Direction of enzymatic action is shownbyarrows . Abbreviations include Sulfatase, steroid sulfatase; ST, sul-
fotransferase; Sulf Met, sulfated metabolites; HSD, hydroxysteroid de-hydrogenase; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHEA-S, DHEA sulfate;Estrone S, estrone sulfate; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; 5-diol, 5-andro-stene-3/H9252,17/H9252-diol; ADT-G, androsterone-glucuronide; 3 /H9251-diol-G, andro-stane-3 /H9251,1 7/H9252-diol-glucuronide. Reproduced from Schirra F, Suzuki T,Dickinson DP, Townsend DJ, Gipson IK, Sullivan DA. Identiﬁcation ofsteroidogenic enzyme mRNAs in the human lacrimal gland, meibomiangland, cornea, and conjunctiva . Cornea. 2006;25:438–442 with per-mission from Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.1956 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
mevalonate kinase, mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase,isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase, geranylgeranyl pyro-phosphate synthase, squalene epoxidase, lanosterol demethyl-ase, and /H90047-sterol reductase are all key enzymes involved in theimitation and progression of cholesterol, fatty acid, sex steroid,and/or lipid synthesis.232,233Fatty acid synthase is also knownto be regulated by androgens in other tissues214,218and isexpressed in meibomian gland epithelial cells (Richards SM, etal.IOVS 2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 3150).●Fatty acid transport protein 4 facilitates the cellular up-take and metabolism of long- and very-long-chain fatty acids.234●The elongation of very-long-chain fatty acid-like types 1and 3 enhance the tissue-speciﬁc synthesis of very-long-chainfatty acids and sphingolipids.233,235These proteins could beinvolved in the androgen-induced increase of long-chain fattyacids in the total lipid fraction of rabbit meibomian glands.223
●Monoglyceride lipase promotes hydrolysis of tri- andmonoglycerides to fatty acids and glycerol.236●Abca1 and Abcd3, which are members of the ATP-bindingcassette family, transport various molecules across extra- andintracellular membranes. Abca1 serves as a cholesterol efﬂuxpump in the lipid-removal pathway237and thereby functions asa key regulator of cholesterol distribution.238,239Abcd3 regu -lates the importation of fatty acids and/or fatty acyl-CoAs intoperoxisomes.240●Oxysterol-binding protein-like 1A, sterol carrier protein 2,liver, lipocalin 3, and phosphatidylcholine transfer protein areinvolved in the binding and/or transfer of phospholipids.233●SREBP 1 promotes the fatty acid synthesis pathway, andSREBP 2 enhances the cholesterol synthesis pathway.241–244●Multiple genes are involved in the peroxisome prolifera-tor-activated receptor signaling pathway, which modulates li-pogenesis, ketogenesis, lipid transport, and fatty acid transportand oxidation.98
98Androgens also modulate a series of genes that may be veryimportant in the endocrine regulation of the meibomian gland.81For instance, testosterone increases the mRNA levels of:●17/H9252-HSD 7, an enzyme that regulates the interconversionof 17-ketosteroids with their corresponding 17 /H9252-hydroxys-teroids.245This enzymatic activity is critical for the metabolismof all active androgens and estrogens in peripheral tissues245and may mediate the local intracrine synthesis of androgensfrom adrenal precursors in the meibomian gland;●insulin-like growth factor 1, a pleiotropic protein thatstimulates sebaceous cell DNA synthesis and differentiation147;●estrogen receptor (ER) /H9252, a receptor that is upregulatedby androgen in the prostate246and may inhibit the activity ofER/H9251247; and●11/H9252-HSD 1, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion ofcortisol to the inactive metabolite, cortisone.233Of interest, testosterone downregulates genes associated
with keratinization,81,135as well as the gene for retinaldehydedehydrogenase 3,81an enzyme that promotes retinoic acidbiosynthesis.233Androgens also stimulate the expression ofgenes involved in the sorting, trafﬁcking and hydrolysis ofproteins in various cellular locations, including the endosome,Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, lysosome, protea-some, nucleus, and mitochondrion.81In addition to these ﬁndings, investigators have found thatandrogen treatment signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the expression ofmore than 1000 genes in the female mouse meibomiangland.135Many of the genes modulated by testosterone infemale tissues are identical with those controlled by androgensin male meibomian glands. Some genes, however, are regu-lated in a sex-speciﬁc manner.135Androgens also affect the lipid, and possibly protein, com-
in male meibomian glands. Some genes, however, are regu-lated in a sex-speciﬁc manner.135Androgens also affect the lipid, and possibly protein, com-position within the meibomian gland. Orchiectomy causes amarked change in the lipid pattern of rabbit meibomian glands,whereas the topical or systemic administration of 19-nortestos-terone (versus placebo) for 2 weeks begins to restore the lipidproﬁle toward that found in intact animals.223Further, re -searchers speculate that androgen signaling machinery regu-lates the expression of secretoglobin in human meibomiangland epithelial cells.248This protein may be secreted and havea lipocalin-like function in the tear ﬁlm.248Whether all effects of androgens on the meibomian glandare mediated through classic receptors is unclear. It is possiblethat the action also involves binding to glandular membranereceptors, stimulation of signal transduction cascades, and con-sequent alteration of gene transcription.249,250In addition,
249,250In addition,androgens may act indirectly, by regulating the secretion of thehypothalamic and anterior pituitary hormones that inﬂuencethe meibomian gland.Inﬂuence of Androgen Deﬁciency and Treatment.Given the inﬂuence of androgens on meibomian gland func-tion, researchers have hypothesized that androgen deﬁciency,such as occurs during menopause (decrease in ovarian andadrenal androgen secretion),251aging in both sexes (decline inthe total androgen pool),196,251autoimmune disease (e.g.,FIGURE 17. A schematic diagram of the two major lipogenic path-ways,77which result in the synthesis of cholesterol (and steroid hor -
mones) and fatty acids (and triglycerides and phospholipids). Bothpathways typically require the generation and secretion of acetyl-CoAfrom mitochondria, the transcriptional control by SREBPs in the nu-cleus, and the action of lipogenic enzymes in the cytosol. The extentof the androgen upregulation of speciﬁc genes for SREBPs and enzymesis shown within the diagram. Reprinted from Exp Eye Res , 83, SchirraF, Richards SM, Liu M, Suzuki T, Yamagami H, Sullivan DA, Androgenregulation of lipogenic pathways in the mouse meibomian gland,291–296, © 2006, with permission from Elsevier.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1957Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Sjo¨gren’s syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and rheu-matoid arthritis),201,252,253complete androgen insensitivitysyndrome (CAIS; women with dysfunctional androgen recep-tors),254,255and the use of antiandrogen medications (e.g., forprostatic hypertrophy or cancer)256all lead to MGD, alteredlipid proﬁles in meibomian gland secretions, decreased tearﬁlm stability, and evaporative dry eye.257–260When compared with control groups, it has been found thatsubjects taking antiandrogen therapy have signiﬁcant changesin their meibomian glands, including oriﬁce metaplasia (a con-dition deﬁned as an abnormal growth and keratinization of theduct epithelium),261reduced quality of secretions, a strikingalteration in the neutral lipid proﬁle of secretions, and a mor-phologic appearance consistent with severe disease.258,260Many of the lipid changes are all or none, identical in botheyes, and feature characteristic shifts in fatty acid patterns.260
260In addition, patients have a signiﬁcantly greater frequency oftear ﬁlm (i.e., debris, abnormal menisci, and instability), con-junctival (i.e., tarsal injection, and inferior staining), corneal(staining), and lid (i.e., irregular posterior lid margins, sleeves,and collarettes) abnormalities, as well as an increased appear-ance of ocular surface symptoms (i.e., light sensitivity, painfuleyes, and blurred vision).258These ﬁndings add to another thatdetermined that leuprolide acetate administration to reducetestosterone levels is associated with ophthalmic problems andblurred vision in some patients.262These results may helpexplain the signiﬁcant association between the use of medica-tions to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia and dry eye dis-ease.263Researchers have also discovered that androgen receptor
dysfunction in patients with CAIS is associated with a signiﬁ-cant increase in dry eye signs and symptoms. This particulargroup of patients have a signiﬁcantly higher frequency ofmeibomian gland oriﬁce metaplasia and irregular posterior lidmargins, as well as a decreased quality of meibomian glandsecretions, when compared to normal, age-matched males andfemales. Patients with CAIS also have striking alterations in theneutral and polar lipid patterns of their meibomian gland se-cretions, relative to those of normal male and female con-trols.257,259The normal aging process is also associated with asigniﬁcant reduction in the quality of meibomian gland secre-tions and a signiﬁcant increase in the frequency of metaplasiaof meibomian gland oriﬁces.105,264Both the polar and neutrallipid proﬁles of meibomian gland secretions are signiﬁcantlyaltered with aging.105,264These ﬁndings were observed whencomparing 37- and 70-year-old patients, and the period be-
tween the fourth and eighth decades coincides with a dramaticdecline in androgen levels in both sexes.251In addition to these observations, investigators have foundthat patients with nonautoimmune dry eye and MGD are an-drogen-deﬁcient,265and others have observed that the topicaladministration of DHEA, an androgen precursor, to humans,rabbits, and dogs stimulates the production and release ofmeibomian gland lipids and prolongs the tear ﬁlm break-uptime (TBUT).266Further, studies have reported that reducedserum levels of testosterone are more prevalent in women withdry eye and correlate with the subjective severity of ocularsymptoms267and that serum testosterone concentrations cor -relate positively with meibomian gland secretion volume andoriﬁce diameter in pre- and postmenopausal women, respec-tively (Suzuki T, et al. IOVS 2007;48:ARVO E-Abstract 434;Suzuki T, et al. IOVS 2008;49:ARVO E-Abstract 92). However,
the meaning of the results in the latter studies is unclear, giventhat serum testosterone levels represent only a very smallfraction ( /H110210.2% in women) of the total androgen pool inhumans268and have little or no value except as an index of
humans268and have little or no value except as an index ofovarian activity.251,268,269The majority of or all androgens(75% before and 100% after menopause) in women are synthe-sized in peripheral tissues from adrenal sex steroid precursors(DHEA and DHEA-sulfate).269Perhaps the only valid and reli -able estimate of the total androgen pool in humans is the serumconcentration of conjugated dihydrotestosterone metabolites(androsterone glucuronide and androstane-3/H925117/H9252-diol-gluc-uronide)251,270,271that reﬂect the total intracrine productionand metabolism of androgens in peripheral tissues throughoutthe body.269Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that the meibomian gland isan androgen target organ, androgens promote lipogenesis andsuppress keratinization within this tissue, and androgen deﬁ-ciency may lead to MGD and evaporative dry eye. This appar-ent interrelationship of androgen deﬁciency with MGD and
evaporative dry eye may help to explain why topical or systemicandrogen administration has been reported to alleviate the signsand symptoms of dry eye in women and men.266,272–278Effortsdirected at alleviating this endocrine imbalance (e.g., topical an-drogen application) may prove beneﬁcial in the treatment ofMGD and the associated evaporative dry eye, in androgen-deﬁcient individuals. Consistent with this possibility are clini-cal trial results that suggest that treatment of MGD with topicaltestosterone would improve the quality of meibomian glandsecretions and reduce ocular discomfort (Schiffman RM, et al.IOVS 2006;47:ARVO E-Abstract 5608).EstrogensEstrogen Regulation of Sebaceous Glands. Estrogenscause a signiﬁcant decrease in the size, activity, and lipidproduction of sebaceous glands in a variety of spe-cies.145,181,192,279–283Indeed, estrogen was once termed theprototype agent for the suppression of sebum production,282
and for several years, estrogen treatment was used to reducesebaceous gland function and sebum secretion in hu-mans.180,181,280,281,284,285One mechanism proposed for this hormone action is thatestrogen induces the release of lysosomal enzymes withinsebocytes, leading to premature cellular destruction and de-creased sebum output.282,286Additional suggested mecha -nisms are that estrogens reduce testosterone uptake, interferewith testosterone’s conversion to dihydrotestosterone, and an-tagonize androgen action in the sebaceous gland.279,282,283Infact, estrogens have been described as the mainstay of treat-ment to decrease the effects of androgens on the sebaceousgland.180These antiandrogen actions of estrogens are dose-dependent, and may be overridden by treatment with physio-logical levels of androgens.181,280Of interest, androgen treatment causes a signiﬁcant de-crease in the number of estradiol-binding sites,177,286and both
hormones antagonize each other’s modulation of their ownreceptors283in sebaceous glands. Further, some androgen ef -fects are believed to be dependent on low levels of estro-gen.287Estrogen Regulation of the Meibomian Gland. The mei-bomian gland contains estrogen receptor mRNA and pro-tein,230,288,289and estrogen administration to ovariectomizedmice appears to result in characteristic alterations in glandularmorphology.290Estradiol-17 /H9252also regulates the expression ofalmost 200 genes in mouse meibomian glands,291includingthose related to tyrosine kinases (ﬁbroblast growth factor re-ceptor 1) immune factors (interleukin 1 receptor, type II),extracellular matrix components (matrix metallopeptidase 3),steroidogenesis (17/H9252-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 7, whichconverts estrone to biologically active estradiol292), prolactinactivity (prolactin receptor), and lipid metabolism, to name afew.Estrogen increases the expression of selected genes associ-
ated with lipid dynamics, such as phosphatidylcholine transferprotein,291which replenishes the plasma membrane with1958 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4
ated with lipid dynamics, such as phosphatidylcholine transferprotein,291which replenishes the plasma membrane with1958 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
phosphatidylcholines,293and downregulates others,291includ -ing carboxylesterase 3, a lipase.294These hormone actionssuggest that 17 /H9252-estradiol promotes lipid production in themeibomian gland; however, researchers have found that mostof estrogen’s effects are not consistent with this conclusion.Rather, 17/H9252-estradiol seems to have an overall negative inﬂu-ence on lipid generation. For example, estrogen stimulates theexpression of several genes involved in lipid and/or fatty acidcatabolism (the anti-lipogenic STAT5A295) and suppressesgenes involved with lipid biosynthesis, mobilization, process-ing, and membrane trafﬁcking.291Given these latter antagonistic effects, as well as the impactof estrogens on sebaceous glands in general, it is logical topresume that estrogen treatment reduces lipid synthesis in themeibomian gland and promotes both MGD and evaporative dryeye. The following studies support this statement:●An epidemiologic evaluation of 25,665 postmenopausal
women found that those who receive estrogen replacementtherapy had a signiﬁcantly higher prevalence of severe dry eyesymptoms and clinically diagnosed dry eye syndrome than didwomen who never received the treatment.296●An assessment of 44,257 women with dry eye showedthat one of the highest prevalences of comorbid conditionswas the use of estrogen replacement therapy.297●Estrogen treatment of women in two studies led to tearﬁlm instability, foreign body sensation, contact lens (CL) intol-erance, and ocular surface dryness.298,299Other genes in the meibomian gland are suppressed by17/H9252-estradiol, but stimulated by testosterone.291Some of thesegenes encode for secreted acidic cysteine-rich glycoprotein
(regulates cell growth), vascular endothelial growth factor A(promotes cell migration), cathepsin K (degrades extracellularmatrices), and matrix metalloproteinase 3 (degrades ﬁbronec-tin, laminin, gelatins, and collagens). These genes could beinvolved in cell maturation, migration, and holocrine secretionin the meibomian gland. If so, these hormone responses wouldbe consistent with an antisebaceous gland effect of estrogensand a prosebaceous gland effect of androgens.ProgestinsProgestin Regulation of Sebaceous Glands. It was oncebelieved that progesterone was the trophic hormone that reg-ulated sebaceous gland secretion in women,181analogous toandrogens in men, because progestin treatment signiﬁcantlyincreased sebum production.146,181,300However, earlier andlater studies disagreed, ﬁnding that progestin administrationhad no effect on sebaceous gland output,191,300and still othersreported that these hormones reduce sebaceous gland function
by inhibiting local androgen metabolism and activity.301–304One explanation of these conﬂicting ﬁndings is that progestin’seffect on different types of sebaceous glands seem to be sig-niﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the dose, endocrine environment, andthe subject’s sex.302,305–307Progestin Regulation of the Meibomian Gland. Themeibomian gland contains progesterone receptor mRNA andprotein230,288and responds to progesterone exposure with anapparent change in morphology.290The addition of progestinto estrogen hormone replacement therapy also causes a signif-icant decrease in the estrogen-related symptoms of dry eye,296which may reﬂect a positive inﬂuence on meibomian glandactivity. A deﬁnitive link between the action glandular proges-tin and ocular surface symptoms has yet to be shown.Researchers have demonstrated recently that progesteronehas a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on gene expression in the mousemeibomian gland.291Most genes are downregulated by proges -
291Most genes are downregulated by proges -terone, including those associated with immune processes,gluconeogenesis, and energy transduction.291The most strik -ing effect is the downregulation of all genes related to ribo-some biogenesis, assembly, and structure,291suggesting thatprogesterone has an overall suppressive impact on protein,
ing effect is the downregulation of all genes related to ribo-some biogenesis, assembly, and structure,291suggesting thatprogesterone has an overall suppressive impact on protein,macromolecule, and cellular biosynthesis in the meibomiangland.Combined administration of progesterone with estradiol-17/H9252also has a signiﬁcant effect on the expression of more than300 genes in the mouse meibomian gland.291Most molecularbiological responses duplicate those of estradiol or progester-one treatment alone. However, some do not, including aunique upregulation of genes involved with the localizationontology.291The explanation of this combined progestin/es -trogen response is unclear.Sex Steroid Involvement in Sex Differences in theMeibomian GlandIn summary, sex steroids have a signiﬁcant impact on meibomian
gland function and, depending on the speciﬁc steroid, may pre-vent or promote MGD and evaporative dry eye. In addition, thedifferential action of sex steroids, as with other sebaceousglands,172,175,181,189,308may well mediate the sex-related differ -ences known to occur in the morphologic appearance, geneexpression, neutral and polar lipid proﬁles, and secretory outputof the meibomian gland.44,76,105,120,259,263,264,290,309–312Consis -tent with this proposal is the observation that androgens appearto mediate almost 30% of the sex-associated variations in geneexpression of the mouse meibomian gland.76Moreover, it ispossible that sex-speciﬁc aromatase activities also play a role inthe sex-related differences of the meibomian gland (Liu S, et al.IOVS 2007;48:ARVO E-Abstract 5657).Effect of all- trans Retinoic Acid on theMeibomian GlandThe compound all- trans retinoic acid decreases sebocyte growth,development, and lipid production and causes blepharoconjunc-tivitis.
313–318It is also known to be converted in sebocytes to13-cisretinoic acid (isotretinoin),319which leads to thick -ening and keratinization of meibomian gland ducts,320,321degeneration and necrosis of meibomian gland acinarcells,322periacinar ﬁbrosis, and reduced lipid content ofmeibomian tissue320,321in animal models. Isotretinoin is theagent that has revolutionized the dermatologic treatment ofsevere acne over the past several decades.323In humans, the administration of 13- cisretinoic acid resultsin blepharoconjunctivitis, abnormal meibomian gland secre-tions, meibomian gland atrophy, decreased TBUT, increasedtear ﬁlm osmolarity, and dry eye signs and symptoms.324–331Ineffect, the retinoic acid derivatives promote MGD and evapo-rative dry eye.330,332,333Major mechanisms involved in the action of retinoic acidinclude the suppression of androgen receptor mRNA and pro-tein334,335and the inhibition of retinol dehydrogenase-4,
which leads to a decrease in the local production of dihydrotes-tosterone.336Understanding the inﬂuence of retinoic acid onthe meibomian gland is very important, given that this com-pound is the key ingredient of many antiaging cosmetics foruse around the eye, and as people age they become moresusceptible to the development of dry eye.263,312Inﬂuence of Growth Factors and Other Agentsand Conditions on the Meibomian GlandVarious other components and conditions are known to inﬂu-ence the physiology and pathophysiology of the meibomiangland. These include:IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1959Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
●epidermal growth factor and bovine pituitary extract, whichpromote the proliferation and possibly the differentiation, of im-mortalized human meibomian gland epithelial cells (Liu S, et al.IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 3669). Epidermal growth factorhas also been shown to stimulate the differentiation of rabbitmeibomian337and human sebaceous155gland epithelial cells invitro. Treatment of cancer patients with epidermal growth factorinhibitors is associated with the appearance of MGD (Joshi J, et al.IOVS 2008;49: ARVO E-Abstract 2363);●topical epinephrine, which induces hyperkeratinizationof the duct epithelium and leads to plugging and dilation of themeibomian gland338;●/H9275-3 fatty acid, the intake of which has been correlatedwith variations in the polar lipid proﬁle120and saturated fattyacid content119of human meibomian gland secretions. In ad -dition, a reduced intake of /H9275-3 fatty acids has been found inwomen with Sjo ¨gren’s syndrome,339and these women typi -
cally have MGD340(Krenzer KL, et al. IOVS 1999;31:ARVOAbstract 2864);●hypothalamic hypogonadism, which was found to beassociated with obstructive MGD in a 35-year-old male pa-tient.162The clinicians proposed that this lid condition wasdue to androgen deﬁciency162;●aldosterone, possibly, given that mineralocorticoid recep-tors are present in human sebaceous glands.341However, apotential aldosterone target in human meibomian gland tissueis unknown. Aldosterone has no effect on the neutral lipid organglioside composition of rabbit meibomian glands342;●multiple endocrine deﬁciency (Addison’s disease and hy-poparathyroidism), which was found to be associated withsevere MGD.343Given this ﬁnding, it is of particular interestthat parathyroid hormone receptor mRNA is present in themeibomian gland (Table 3), but whether this receptor mRNA istranslated and is functional has yet to be determined.It is also intriguing that the human meibomian gland, likeother sebaceous glands,
other sebaceous glands,200,344–347secretes not only lipids, butalso proteins.134Such proteins may signiﬁcantly inﬂuence thestability of the tear ﬁlm as well as the appearance of the ocularsurface.134However, the regulation and role of this proteinsecretory process await clariﬁcation.Clearly, further studies are needed to delineate the natureand extent of the endocrine, neural, nutrient, and growthfactor (among others) inﬂuence on the meibomian gland, toincrease our understanding of the physiological mechanismscontrolling this tissue in both health and disease.PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGYHyperkeratinization
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGYHyperkeratinizationHyperkeratinization is a major reason for obstructive MGD andcauses degenerative gland dilatation and atrophy without in-ﬂammation. That this is a typical pathology of the meibomianglands comes as no surprise in view of the glands’ embryologicdevelopment. Hyperkeratinization could represent the removalof a developmental block of full keratinization (corniﬁcation)of the ductal epithelium that occurs because of various internaland external factors, rather than a de novo acquirement. Fac-tors increasing epithelial keratinization and meibomian glandobstruction range from advancing age50,87,348and hormonaldisturbances,257,291,349the toxic effects of medication andchemicals350,351and the breakdown products of meibomianlipids,41,352,353or inﬂuences of external factors such as epi -nephrine eye drops,354to CL wear.355Obstructive MGD due to hyperkeratinization was ﬁrstdescribed by Korb and Henriquez3,356in patients who had
only minimal or transient symptoms suggestive of oculardryness, but became clinically symptomatic because of CL
described by Korb and Henriquez3,356in patients who hadonly minimal or transient symptoms suggestive of oculardryness, but became clinically symptomatic because of CLintolerance. Manual expression of their meibomian glandsveriﬁed an obstruction of the oriﬁces and revealed hyper-keratotic clusters consisting of desquamated epithelial cellsand thickened meibum. After expression and removal of theplugs, the tear ﬁlm normalized and CL intolerance disap-peared. Histology of obstructed glands veriﬁed dilatation ofthe central duct by cell debris and sebaceous material.3,356Later histologic examinations of meibomian glands from
patients with symptomatic dry eye disease who had inspissa-tions of duct oriﬁces and expressible highly viscous meibum,veriﬁed signs of obstruction of the excretory duct by increasedkeratinization. Inside the gland, this resulted in obstruction anddilatation of the ducts as well as cystic degeneration and loss ofsecretory meibocytes (Figs. 18, 19) that were replaced by asquamous metaplasia of the acinar epithelium.357These alter -ations occurred without the presence of inﬂammatory leuko-cytes. It can be assumed that the observed acinar degenerationand atrophy that follows dilatation of the ductal system andresults from obstruction of the gland leads to a later secondaryhyposecretion due to the loss of secretory meibocytes. A sim-ilar pathology was observed in glands with cystic dilatation thatwere obstructed by surgical procedures or by neoplasia. Alsoin these cases, dilatation of the ductal system was reported,together with atrophy of the acini.31The dilatation of the
31The dilatation of theductal system appears more pronounced in this conditionwhen compared with ﬁndings in obstructive MGD.357A largehistopathologic study of the meibomian glands in 72 autopsiesconﬁrmed the morphology of cystic dilatation of ducts andacini and reported these pathologic alterations in 34.7% (25) ofthe cases.358At present, obstructive MGD (Figs. 18, 19) ap -pears to be the disease’s most common form.3,4,10,357–362Animal Models of MGDSeveral naturally occurring or induced animal models of MGDhave been identiﬁed or developed. These models, in turn, maybe very useful in exploring the pathophysiological mechanismsunderling this condition. Rabbit320,338,354,363,364and mon -key365models that feature hyperkeratinization have been pro -duced by the topical application of epinephrine,338,354,363,364the systemic administration of isotretinoin,320and polychlori -nated biphenyl poisoning.365As shown in Figure 20A, a com -
mon histopathologic ﬁnding in these rabbit and monkey mod-els is an abnormal dilatation of the ducts, which show luminaﬁlled with keratinized materials. In addition, the epithelium ofthe ductal oriﬁces is typically hyperkeratinized and ob-structed (Fig. 20B). It is currently believed that hyperkera-tinization of the oriﬁce itself, as well as the ductal epithe-lium, contributes signiﬁcantly to the luminal pluggingobserved in obstructive MGD.Mouse models of MGD and meibomian gland hyperplasia
(MGH) are also available. These are either natural or have beengenerated by immunization, mutation, or transgenic or knock-out technologies (Table 4). The resulting strains may present avariety of phenotypes, such as ductal hyperkeratinization, aci-nar cell loss, and progressive glandular atrophy; or no meibo-mian gland; or glandular enlargement (Table 4). Some of thesemodels may well have utility for studies of evaporative dry eyeand corresponding ocular surface sequelae. Consistent withthis proposal are the ﬁndings that the meibomian gland atro-phy in acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase-1–knockout mice isassociated with corneal erosions,366and that the meibomiangland’s absence in X-linked anhidrotic–hypohidrotic ectoder-mal dysplasia is often paralleled by corneal defects (e.g., neo-vascularization and keratinization) and ocular surface inﬂam-mation.367The ocular surface problems in these models,
mal dysplasia is often paralleled by corneal defects (e.g., neo-vascularization and keratinization) and ocular surface inﬂam-mation.367The ocular surface problems in these models,however, may not solely depend on glandular impairment.3671960 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
FIGURE 19. Cystic dilatation of a human meibomian gland. In cystic dilata-tion due to obstruction of the meibomian gland oriﬁce, the ductal system isdistinctly dilated, together with a dilation of the connecting ductules andatrophy of the acini. Figure reprinted from Obata H, Horiuchi H, Miyata K,Tsuru T, Machinami R. Histopathological study of the meibomian glands in 72autopsy cases (in Japanese). Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi . 1994;98:765–771 with permission from the Japanese Ophthalmological Society.FIGURE 20. Epinephrine-induced MGD in rabbit. ( A) The lumina of thedilated ducts are ﬁlled with keratinized material, representing keratin lamellaethat are shed from the hyperkeratinized ductal wall. ( B) The epithelium of theoriﬁce was also hyperkeratinized and obstructed. Figure courtesy of HirotoObata.FIGURE 18. Comparison of thestructure of a normal and an ob-structed human meibomian gland.(A,B) A histologic section through a
normal meibomian gland at the innerlid border. ( A) The terminal part ofthe central duct (cd) and the termi-nal acini are encircled by ﬁbers ofRiolan’s muscle (riol), which repre-sents the marginal inner part of theorbicularis muscle (orb) and is splitby the downgrowth of the ciliary (c)hairs [compare with Fig. 5]. The freelid margin is covered by the keratin-ized epidermis (ep), which trans-forms at the inner lid border into theconjunctival mucosa (conj). The sec-tion does not pass through the oriﬁceof the central duct (cd). ( B) In a mag-niﬁcation of ( A), it is seen that theconnecting ductules (de) from theacini (a) of a normal gland are typi-cally narrow and enter the centralduct in an oblique direction. ( C–E)Section through a meibomian glandwith obstructive MGD. ( C) The ori-ﬁce ( open arrow ) is in the typical
ﬁce ( open arrow ) is in the typicalposition, still within the keratinizedepidermis, which extends for abouthalf a millimeter into the central ductand forms an excretory duct. Eventhough the obstruction is not veryadvanced, as judged from the moder-ate dilatation of the central duct (cd),there are distinct alterations of the gland structure. The cd is already partly dilated, the epithelium of the wall is thinner than in the normal gland,and the wall is partly undulated. ( D) The oriﬁce is obstructed by numerous keratin lamellae ( small arrows ). (E) The secretory acini (a) are distinctlysmaller and more roundish than in a normal gland, whereas the ductules (de) are dilated and enter the central duct (cd) at about right angles ( smallarrows ). An atypical lumen ( asterisk ) has formed within the acini, and the secretory meibocytes are reduced in number and form only a few
remaining cell layers ( arrowhead ). In one location, the residual meibocytes of a presumably disrupted acinus appear integrated into the wall ofthe central duct ( double arrowhead ). Inﬂammatory leukocytes are not apparent. Taken together, these ﬁndings indicate atrophy of the dilatedmeibomian gland. Light microscopic images of parafﬁn-embedded sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E); size markers are shown inthe images. Reprinted from Knop E, Knop N, Brewitt H et al. [Meibomian glands, Part III: meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD)—plaidoyer for adiscrete disease entity and as an important cause of dry eye.] Meibom-Dru ¨sen, Teil III: Meibomdru ¨sen Dysfunktionen (MGD)—Pla ¨doyer fu ¨r eineigensta ¨ndiges Krankheitsbild und wichtige Ursache fu ¨r das Trockene Auge. Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:966–979 with the kind permission ofSpringer Science and Business Media.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1961
Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Additional mouse models that display signiﬁcant alterationsin sebaceous gland structure and function82,320,338,354,363–384(Table 4) may also serve as MGD or MGH models, but thispossibility has not yet been evaluated.Cytology of Meibum: Meibomian SecretionIt is believed that normal meibomian gland secretion (i.e., themeibum), is clear; however, it may have turbid, inspissated, ortoothpaste-like consistency in MGD (Fig. 21A).To examine the cytologic features of turbid meibum, im-pression cytology of the meibum was performed in a largestudy by Obata et al. ( IOVS 2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 60) in 50elderly patients at least 60 years of age. The results demon-strated that keratinized materials were present in almost allcases, similar to the material ﬁrst described by Korb and Hen-riquez3,356and later analyzed by Ong et al.385with biochemicaland immunologic methods. Inﬂammatory cells were not de-
tected in most cases (Fig. 21B), which may serve as a support-ive indication that inﬂammation, at least based on the immi-gration of inﬂammatory leukocytes, does not represent a majoretiologic factor in obstructive MGD (Obata H, et al. IOVS2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 60), as previously observed in histol-TABLE 4.Possible Mouse Models of MGD, MGH, and Evaporative Dry Eye Syndrome*Condition Factor EffectGene knockoutStearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase 1 (3 types) No meibomian glandEctodysplasin-A (3 types) No meibomian glandEctodysplasin-A receptor (3 types) No meibomian glandAcyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase-1 Meibomian gland atrophy, corneal erosionsMelanocortin-5 receptor Decreased production of sebaceous lipidsSmad4 Ectopic row of hair follicles in place ofmeibomian glands (distichiasis)Aire T cell inﬁltration in meibomian glandsBlimp1 Enlarged meibomian glandsTumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 Modiﬁed meibomian glandsTransgenic or gene overexpression
Transgenic or gene overexpressionHuman apolipoprotein C1 Meibomian gland atrophyBiglycan overexpression, under control of the keratocyte-speciﬁc keratocan promoterMeibomian gland aplasiaRat erbB2 overexpression in basal layer of mouse epidermis,under control of the bovine keratin 5 promoterSebaceous gland enlargementSmad7 or parathormone-related protein overexpression Sebaceous gland hyperplasiac-Myc overexpression Enhanced sebum productionK14-noggin Formation of ectopic pilosebaceous units atthe expense of meibomian glandsEctodysplasin-A Sebaceous gland hyperplasiaEctodysplasin receptor Enlarged meibomian glandsKeratin 5-glucocorticoid receptor No meibomian glandMutationRhino Meibomian gland ductal hyperkeratinization,acinar cell loss and eventual atrophyRough fur (ruf) Sebaceous gland hypertrophyDownless (dl) locus Meibomian gland defectsExperimental systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)Murine immunization with a human monoclonal anti-DNA
antibody, bearing a major Id 16/6IdHypertrophic meibomian glands andchronic eyelid inﬂammationNaturalCrinkled No meibomian glandBare skin Sebaceous glands rudimentary* See Refs. 82, 320, 338, 354, 363–384.FIGURE 21. Features of pathologicmeibum. ( A) Yellowish white, turbidmeibum from a 72-year-old woman.(B) Impression cytology of yellowishwhite, turbid meibum from a 71-year-old man. An orange, keratinized ma-terial is seen on the nitrocellulosemembrane. Cellular componentssuch as inﬂammatory cells are notseen. Papanicolaou staining. Figurecourtesy of Hiroto Obata.1962 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
ogy.31,357,358The absence of inﬂammatory cells in meibummay not totally exclude a periacinar inﬂammatory event. How-ever, a relative absence of overt glandular inﬂammation sup-ports the notion that hyperkeratinization is one of the primarycomponents in the pathogenesis of obstructive MGD.Obata et al. ( IOVS 2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 60) dividedmeibum by appearance into three groups—oily, creamy,and toothpaste-like—and the color was classiﬁed into threegroups: yellow, yellowish white, and white. The cytologicfeatures were similar in each group, irrespective of theconsistence or color of meibum. This ﬁnding suggests that achange in the consistency and color of meibum may reﬂect thechange in lipid composition and not the degree of keratinization.It is assumed that color changes may be caused by lipid peroxi-dation.At present, obstructive MGD is thought to be caused by
hyperkeratinization of the excretory duct and oriﬁce, depen-dent on several endogenous and exogenous factors as ex-plained earlier. Secreted meibomian lipids can be altered bybacterial enzymes (e.g., lipases and esterases), which are pro-duced by commensal bacteria.41,353The bacteria are locatedon the lid margin42but are also cultivated from freshly ex -pressed meibum353in normal subjects and in patients withblepharitis.42These bacterial enzymes lead to the release oflipid breakdown products, such as free fatty acids, that causeirritation of the epithelia and stimulate more keratinization, asis thought to be the case on the lid margin41and has beenshown for the skin.386Altered lipid composition may alsoincrease the melting point, leading to a lipid of high viscositythat mixes with desquamated epithelial cells and causes ob-structive MGD.On the other hand, it is possible that changes in the lipidproﬁle, such as those in hormonal disturbances,223,257,259also
223,257,259alsooccur because of alterations in lipid synthesis within acinarepithelial cells of the meibomian gland. The extent to whichsuch changes contribute to meibomian gland obstruction re-mains to be determined.Acinar AtrophyIn addition to the large number of reports that show thecausative inﬂuence of hyperkeratinization and gland obstruc-tion on the clinical picture of obstructive MGD as the mostfrequent pathology found in the meibomian gland, there is alsoevidence that the gland may undergo a degenerative atrophicprocess with progressive destruction of the tissue inside thelid.3,31,356,357,387Atrophic degeneration can be explained bythe increase in intraglandular pressure due to the stasis ofcontinuously produced secretum. There is also evidence thatatrophy occurs with advancing age, as in other organs of thebody.53,358,387Inﬂuence of Aging. A natural aging process is indicated,
not only by increasing alterations of the posterior lid margin, asdescribed by Hykin and Bron,348but also by a decreasingnumber of active glands, as evidenced by vital stains,50diag-nostic expression,50and a decrease in visible gland tissue(gland dropout).53Norn50found that the number of activeoil-delivering glands decreases by half between the ages of 20and 80 years. However, the amount of lipids on the lid marginis more or less stable or even increases slightly,44conceivablybecause its excretion from the ocular surface follows a differ-ent dynamic4with reduced removal of lipid in elderly com -pared with younger individuals.37The inﬂuence of aging on the mouse meibomian gland wasinvestigated in a recent study by Nien et al.87who observedseveral indications of a reduced gland function in the sense of
atrophic changes due to an alteration of factors that are essen-tial for the maturation of sebaceous glands. Immunohistochem-ical results showed that with increasing age, a signiﬁcant re-
atrophic changes due to an alteration of factors that are essen-tial for the maturation of sebaceous glands. Immunohistochem-ical results showed that with increasing age, a signiﬁcant re-duction in mitosis in the proliferating cells, as evidenced byKi67 staining, occurred in the basal meibocyte layer. Thisreduction was paralleled by a decrease in the size of the aciniand a relocation of the meibocyte maturation marker PPAR-/H9253
/H9253from a cytoplasmic expression in young (2 months old) andyoung adult (6 months old) animals to a nuclear expression inold (2 years old) animals. Also, a decrease in lipid production,as veriﬁed by oil red O staining, from numerous smaller lipiddroplets in young individuals to fewer and larger ones in oldindividuals, was observed. In addition, cells that were positivefor BLIMP1 and for the bone marrow cell marker moleculeCD45 were observed around the acini. It is not clear from theseobservations whether the increase in the number of these cells,which occurred in the old animals and was assumed to reﬂectincreased inﬁltration of leukocytes, represented an event ac-companying the atrophic alterations or whether it contributedto the development and progression of acinar atrophy as acausative factor.Age-dependent alterations in humans were reported byObata et al.,358,387who described acinar atrophy without dis -tinct dilatation as one of the pathologic ﬁndings in meibomian
glands, which may suggest a primary acinar atrophy that leadsto a decrease in the meibomian gland secretion with aging.Atrophic acini were observed as small and irregularly shapedacini, as opposed to normal round-shaped acini (Fig. 22). Age-dependent alterations in humans also were reported by Arita etal.53who, using the technique of infrared meibography,showed a strong age-dependent increase in meibomian glanddropout (disappearance of the glandular tissue inside the tarsalplates) between the third and eighth decades of life. Thisincrease was accompanied by a decrease in TBUT. At present,it is not clear whether gland dropout really indicates the phys-ical disappearance of glandular tissue or whether it becomesinvisible because it assumes the characteristics of the surround-ing tarsal tissue. Later, the same group observed that CL wear-ers also had a high meibomian gland dropout rate.355Young CLwearers had a dropout rate comparable to normal individuals
in their 80s. The dropout was dependent on CL wearing time inlifetime years but independent of the type of lens. The pathogen-esis of gland dropout in CL wearers is not yet clear, as discussedby Arita et al.,355and may include obstructive events as well aschronic mechanical traumatization of the conjunctival and tarsaltissue. Inﬂammatory events, as observed in giant papillary con-junctivitis can also result in gland dropout.388It can hence beassumed that inﬂammatory mediators ﬁnd their way from theconjunctival tissue through the tarsus toward the meibomiangland and conceivably contribute to gland dropout and also po-tentially to acinar atrophy, as discussed by Knop and Knop.389The age-dependent atrophic changes in the mouse mei-bomian gland87were different from those typically observedin acinar atrophy due to obstructive MGD, because they didnot show the well-known hyperkeratinization and dilatationof the ductal system and the acini.3,4,31,357,358It is not clear
3,4,31,357,358It is not clearat present how this may relate to the supposed primaryatrophy occasionally observed in humans.358,385Therefore,there is apparently a difference in the mechanisms of atro-phy in murine age-dependent atrophy versus that based onpathologic obstruction. Both of these atrophic events, how-ever, most likely result in a decrease in oil production by themeibomian glands, with downstream negative inﬂuences onthe ocular surface and tear ﬁlm.While the possibility should be considered that there is aprimary, age-dependent form of MGD that leads to a gradualdecline of glandular function358(Figs. 22), the predominant
While the possibility should be considered that there is aprimary, age-dependent form of MGD that leads to a gradualdecline of glandular function358(Figs. 22), the predominantform of MGD apparently is due to hyperkeratotic obstructionof the gland, which presents the characteristic signs of dilata-tion (Figs. 18, 19).IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1963Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Atrophic events occur also in other ocular glands, such asthe acinar atrophy in the human lacrimal gland that was alsopredominantly found in aged tissues.390Extended periods ofautonomic denervation and transient denervation by intraglan-dular injection of botulinum toxin cause acinar atrophy insalivary glands.391,392Straatsma31speculated that obstructionof the oriﬁces enlarges the ducts and acini, which encounterresistance from the dense connective tissue of the tarsus, andthus leads to cystic changes. Eventually, increasing intracysticpressure may inhibit cell differentiation. Turning our attentionto other tissues, it is well known that obstruction by ductligation, for instance, causes atrophy in the salivary gland,391and it can be assumed that this effect is based on mechanismssimilar to those in the meibomian glands. Ischemia or hypoxiacauses atrophy in the prostate and pancreas.392,393Such phe -
392,393Such phe -nomena are well known as disuse atrophy, which is a commonconsequence of glandular obstruction.Basement Membrane Thickening of Acini. Basementmembrane thickening of acini is frequently associated withatrophy of acini and can be observed in hematoxylin and eosin(H&E) staining, but more clearly in periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)staining387(Fig. 22B). It is unclear whether the basementmembrane thickening is a primary or a secondary change afteracinar atrophy. In any case, basement membrane thickeningmay interfere with blood supply from capillaries around theacini and may hence negatively inﬂuence the homeostasis ofthe meibomian gland.Inﬂuence of Blood Supply. Large blood vessels are not
present in the tarsus and are inconspicuous in routine H&E-stained parafﬁn-embedded sections. Blood vessels in the tarsusare best observed by immunohistochemistry with a marker ofvascular endothelium. This labeling shows that capillary ves-sels surround the acini (Fig. 23) and that they contribute to thenutrition of the meibomian gland.InﬂammationMcCulley et al.394stated that primary meibomitis did not ap -pear to be a primarily infectious entity, but represents a facetof generalized sebaceous gland dysfunction. The deﬁnition andinvolvement of inﬂammation in MGD have been unclear in thepast for several reasons. First, there have been several coexist-ing terms, such as posterior blepharitis, meibomitis, and MGD,used interchangeably and ambiguously in distinguishing deﬁn-itively between the different disease entities. Second, there hasbeen an ongoing discussion of how to deﬁne inﬂammation. Itcan be deﬁned as an inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration in classic
pathology or as the involvement of inﬂammatory cytokines incurrent molecular biology, even when no inﬂammatory cellinﬁltration is found by light microscopy. The latter wouldconstitute a proinﬂammatory state, as opposed to overt inﬂam-mation, that would still be able to alter the differentiation ofthe tissue. Third, inﬂammation can be divided into two cate-gories: infectious and noninfectious. Although it was foundthat the observed bacteria were commensal species that occurin normal individuals and, in a larger number, in those withblepharitis,41,42,353it reﬂects an increased growth rather thanan infection.42Unifying deﬁnitions for these ﬁndings havebeen suggested.Few reports are available that mention an inﬂammatory cellinﬁltration in the meibomian glands in MGD. In a histopatho-logic study of tarsal tissues obtained at autopsy,358,387li-
358,387li-pogranulomatous inﬂammation and granulation tissue showinginﬂammatory cell inﬁltration were observed. However, it is notcertain whether these changes represent pathologic features ofMGD. It is important to note that, in the presently availablestudies, an inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration was not observed inFIGURE 22. Acinar atrophy of human meibomian gland. ( A) Acinar atrophy: Atrophic acini show a smalland irregular, not rounded, shape ( arrows ); the duct appears slightly dilated. No inﬂammatory cell
and irregular, not rounded, shape ( arrows ); the duct appears slightly dilated. No inﬂammatory cellinﬁltration is seen. Figure reprinted from Obata H, Horiuchi H, Miyata K, Tsuru T, Machinami R.Histopathological study of the meibomian glands in 72 autopsy cases (in Japanese). Nippon GankaGakkai Zasshi . 1994;98:765–771 with permission from the Japanese Ophthalmological Society. ( B)Basement membrane thickening of the acini: Basement membrane thickening ( arrows ) is frequentlyassociated with atrophy of acini. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining. Figure courtesy of Hiroto Obata.FIGURE 23. Capillary vessels in a normal human meibomian gland.Immunostaining of factor VIII, a marker of vascular endothelial cells,reveals capillary vessels surrounding the acini. Figure courtesy ofHiroto Obata.1964 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
specimens of cystic dilatation and acinar atrophy of the mei-bomian gland.31,357,358,387In contrast, in vivo confocal micros -copy reported inﬂammation in the tarsal conjunctival epithe-lium and stroma in patients with blepharitis and meibomitis,suggesting that the presence of an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate en-ables the differentiation between MGD and meibomitis.395Inanother in vivo confocal microscopy study, a periglandularinﬂammatory cell inﬁltration was observed in the eyelids ofpatients with obstructive MGD, and the inﬁltration was clearedby treatment with topical levoﬂoxacin, topical 0.1% ﬂuoro-metholone, and oral minocycline.396The differentiation be -tween individual cell types is difﬁcult in confocal microscopy,however, and frequently it is not possible to differentiateclearly between activated stromal cells and leukocytes. Assuch, in vivo confocal microscopy cannot identify the pres-ence or absence of inﬂammation as clearly as has beenachieved by histopathology.
3,31,356,357,387If obstructive MGD increases the intraglandular pressure,ductal and acinar epithelia may undergo cell stress. It is spec-ulated that this stress also triggers MAP kinase activity in themeibomian gland, with downstream release of chemokines andcytokines and ultimately the occurrence of inﬂammation, asobserved in the epithelium of the conjunctiva and cornea.397Further studies are needed to explore the involvement ofinﬂammation in MGD.Infection and TherapyThe pathophysiology of MGD is complex and whether bac-terial infection is a cause of MGD remains controversial. It iswell known that commensal bacteria such as coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS), Staphylococcus aureus , andPropionibacterium acnes are related to and contribute tothe pathologic course of chronic blepharitis.41,398In con -trast, Gutgesell et al.357described that the inﬂammationrelated to bacterial infection was not an important factor in
obstructive MGD, because only a minimal or absent inﬂam-matory cell inﬁltration was found in histopathology. Bacte-rial infection can, in principle, focally destroy the meibo-mian gland structure as seen in hordeolum. Although suchdirect and active bacterial infection is reportedly not in-volved in the pathogenesis of MGD, bacterial products suchas lipase and toxins (without infection) are still believed tobe pathogenically relevant.7,41Dougherty and McCulley41reported that the greatest bacterial lipolytic activity wasfound in those patients with meibomian gland abnormalityamong six clinical groups of chronic blepharitis. Bacteriallipase could alter the lipid composition, inﬂuencing thephysical characteristics of the tear ﬁlm and causing evapo-rative dry eye. Effective antibiotics used in the treatment ofMGD are tetracycline, doxycycline, and minocy-cline.41,399,400Tetracycline and doxycycline are used atdoses that are not antimicrobial, but the dose of minocycline
is. At the doses typically prescribed, the antibiotics arehypothesized to have suppressive effects on lipases andinﬂammation.It has been well known that Demodex infestation can beassociated with blepharitis.401–403To date, the pathogenicpotential of these mites in MGD remains unclear.7FUNCTIONAL INTERACTIONS IN THE PATHOGENESISOFMGDCourse of Structural Alterations of the MeibomianGland in Obstructive MGDThe clinically more obvious consequence of obstructive MGD is inthe occurrence of dry eye symptoms5,6,8,10,12,49,51,261,404–406be-cause of a deﬁciency in the tear ﬁlm lipid layer2,5,43,407,408anddownstream events, such as a hyperosmolarity of the tears,409–412due to increased evaporation12and decreased TBUT,413,414among others, which result in a wetting deﬁciency with me-chanical irritation through increased friction,415the onset ofinﬂammatory cascades at the ocular surface,397,416–418andunstable visual acuity.419Altogether, this result represents a
complex dysregulation of the functional anatomy of the ocular
inﬂammatory cascades at the ocular surface,397,416–418andunstable visual acuity.419Altogether, this result represents acomplex dysregulation of the functional anatomy of the ocularsurface.3,15,404,420,421In addition, obstructive MGD results inan atrophic process in the glandular tissue itself inside thetarsal plates of the eyelids, determined by histopathologic in-vestigations and conceivably also indicated by gland drop-out.10,53,355,362,422,423Atrophic degeneration of the meibo -mian gland is clinically less obvious and conceivablyunderestimated, except when more sophisticated methodssuch as meibography53,354,413,424–426are applied.The literature suggests a course of progression in ob-structive MGD (Knop E, et al. IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Ab-stract 4833; Knop E, et al. IOVS 2010;51:ARVO E-Abstract2366)3,6,31,351,354,357,358,377,427(Fig. 24 ) and that the pathol-ogy in the disease starts with an obstruction of the oriﬁce and
excretory ducts by hyperkeratinization and/or a pathologic,highly viscous meibum. The involvement of hyperkeratiniza-tion as a causative factor in obstructive MGD (1) was raised byclinical observations,3(2) was substantiated by histologic ob -servations (Knop E, et al. IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract4833),3,31,357,358and by the ﬁnding of keratinized cell materialin the opaque thickened meibum expressed from obstructedglands,3and (3) was further veriﬁed by the presence of kera -tinized cell material in the expressed meibum of patients inmolecular biological and immunologic assays (Obata H, et al.IOVS 2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 60).385Animal models of ob -structive MGD also supported hyperkeratinization as a majorcausative factor.351,354,377When the delivery of meibum onto the lid margin and tearﬁlm is blocked by an obstruction, meibum accumulates withinthe ductal system of the gland due to the continuing secretionfrom the secretory acini.36Persistent accumulation of meibum
36Persistent accumulation of meibuminside the obstructed glands conceivably results in a progres-sive increase in pressure inside the ductal system and thus inprogressive widening of the ductal system. After a prolongedtime, this increased internal pressure also extends into thesecretory acini, via a widening of the small connectingductules. The acini undergo atrophic changes, with a loss ofsecretory meibocytes357(Fig. 18) and eventually a squamousmetaplasia that can result in full corniﬁcation of the epitheliumof the ducts and acini.31The consequence of acinar atrophy isa secondary hyposecretion, and acinar atrophy is conceivablyalso the reason for the gland dropout seen on meibography.Acinar atrophy appears mainly as a pressure atrophy, becausethe dilatation of the meibomian gland is limited by the morerigid tarsal connective tissue,31although other factors thatinterfere with cell differentiation may also contribute to it.
It was pointed out in the earliest histopathologic descrip-tion of meibomian gland dilatation in the human31and veriﬁedby later studies3,357,358that this process of obstructive atrophyof the meibomian gland occurs in the absence of overt inﬂam-mation and in the absence of inﬂammatory leukocytes in theglandular tissue. Although recent in vivo confocal investiga-tion395,396points to a potential presence of periglandular in -ﬂammatory cells in certain cases, this technique provides onlylimited information compared with histopathology. In light ofthe rapidly increasing knowledge of ocular surface immunol-ogy and tissue homeostasis,416,428,429it can be hypothesizedthat at least subclinical inﬂammatory events contribute to thedegenerative process. Inﬂammatory reactions are exerted byfactors such as irritative lipid species (e.g., free fatty acids)41or
41orby proinﬂammatory downstream agonists (e.g., phospholipaseIOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1965Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
A2, leukotrienes, or arachidonic acid430) and by induced in -ﬂammatory cytokines, possibly triggered by MAP kinase397orother pathways. Such factors are also described in the obstruc-tive alteration of the hair-associated sebaceous glands of theskin (acne).107The extent of the dilatation and atrophicchanges in the gland structure conceivably depends on thegrade of obstruction and on the duration of the process, whichpoints to the necessity of a timely diagnosis and appropriatetherapy of obstructive MGD.6,389Interacting Pathways in the Pathogenesis of MGDCore Mechanisms. Many underlying factors such as age,
sex, hormonal disturbances, and environmental factors, as wellas changes in the composition of meibum, contribute to thepathogenesis of obstructive MGD. These factors appear toform different pathways that interact in an interrelated se-quence of events (Fig. 25) and also give rise to several viciouscircles that reinforce the process and can aggravate the dys-function if they are not limited by effective and timely thera-peutic interventions.Obstruction. Obstruction of the meibomian gland as a coremechanism of MGD leads to two limbs of downstream conse-quences, both of which result in a decreased availability ofmeibomian lipids at the lid margin and tear ﬁlm and hence inan evaporative dry eye condition: (1) directly via a low deliveryof oil onto the lid margin and (2) indirectly via a stasis ofmeibum inside the gland that results in several downstreamevents, such as increased pressure, resultant dilatation, and,eventually, acinar atrophy, which causes low secretion .
Hyperkeratinization. Various endogenous and exogenousfactors (Fig. 25) that can inﬂuence the pathologic course ofMGD lead to hyperkeratinization of the epithelium at the lidmargin and meibomian gland, either directly or by a possibleinﬂuence on cell differentiation.Hyperkeratinization appears as the main pathomechanismof MGD, as indicated by a large body of literature (Knop E, etal.IOVS 2009;50:ARVO E-Abstract 4833).3,31,351,354,357,358,377This can be explained by the fact that the meibomian glandsshare strong similarities with the hair follicles of the cilia inembryologic development and structure.26–28The meibomianglands have preserved an incipient stage of keratinization inthe form of keratohyalin granules throughout the luminal layerof the ductal epithelium in animals32and in the human.30Asmentioned earlier in the article, these observations have led tothe statement that the meibomian gland can be regarded as ahair follicle without a hair shaft.
24,431The hyperkeratinizationin obstructive MGD may therefore be caused by the removal ofa developmental block that prevents progression of the naturalincipient keratinization into full corniﬁcation. In disease, suchas chronic blepharitis, the meibomian glands can still developa hair, a condition known as distichiasis.432,433Hyperkeratini -zation may also be inﬂuenced by an aberrant differentiation ormigration of stem cells. The migration and differentiation ofstem cells generally assumes a higher degree of plasticity dueto wounding434and probably also due to mechanical stress orto the occurrence of mediators of a subclinical inﬂammation.Such factors are shown to be inﬂuential in the development ofacne in the hair-associated sebaceous glands.107Other factorsshown to increase keratinization of the lid margin and meibo-mian gland are topical354or systemic320,435medications andchemical toxins.365With advancing age, degenerative changes, including hyper-
keratotic events, generally increase at the posterior lid marginand also affect the oriﬁces of the meibomian glands by oriﬁcenarrowing.348Meibomian gland drop out, which conceivablyreﬂects a loss of functional glandular tissue and represents anendstage of acinar atrophy, results in respective symptoms ofocular dryness that proceed strongly with aging.53Hormonal inﬂuences on meibomian gland function are well
endstage of acinar atrophy, results in respective symptoms ofocular dryness that proceed strongly with aging.53Hormonal inﬂuences on meibomian gland function are welldescribed. Pathologic alterations (in particular of androgenaction406) result in hyperkeratinization of the epithelium at thelid margin, obstructive MGD with a lack of meibum on the lidmargin and on the tear ﬁlm, an altered lipid proﬁle, and asso-ciated dry eye symptoms.105,257–260Increased Viscosity. Besides hyperkeratinization, increasedviscosity of meibum is the other most important pathogeneticFIGURE 24. Course of structural al-terations of the meibomian glands inobstructive MGD. Schematic draw-ing of a meibomian gland and theposterior lid margin. ( A) Normal: Inthe normal meibomian gland, the se-cretory product (meibum, yellow ar-rows ) that is produced inside the
rows ) that is produced inside theacini is transported through the con-necting ductules into the centralduct and is ﬁnally delivered throughthe excretory duct and oriﬁce that islocated within the keratinized epi-dermis ( red) at the posterior lid bor-der. The ductal system has an incip-ient stage of keratinization ( pink).The acini are spherical to elongated,and the connecting ductules are nar-row. ( B) Obstruction: When the ori-ﬁce and excretory duct are obstructedby hyperkeratinization of the epithe-lium and/or increased viscosity of themeibum, the delivery of meibum onto the lid margin is reduced or completely inhibited. ( C) Additional dilatation: The continuing secretion of meibumin the acini generates an increasing pressure inside the glands that leads to a gradual dilatation, ﬁrst of the central duct. ( D) Additional atrophy: After a
prolonged time, the increased pressure inside the gland leads to dilatation of the connecting ductules and a pressure atrophy of the acini with rarefa ctionof secretory meibocytes. This effect causes shrinkage of the whole acini that may represent the histopathologic equivalent of the clinically detect ablegland dropout and results in a presumed secondary hyposecretion. ( E) Additional corniﬁcation of the glandular epithelium: In late stages the whole ductalepithelium can become corniﬁed and the meibocytes replaced by a stratiﬁed squamous corniﬁed epithelium. Reprinted from Knop E, Knop N.[Meibomian glands. Part IV: Functional interactions in the pathogenesis of meibomian gland Dysfunction (MGD).] Meibom-Dru ¨sen, Teil IV: FunktionelleInteraktionen in der Pathogenese der Dysfunktion (MGD). Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:980–987 with the kind permission of Springer Science and BusinessMedia.1966 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4
Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
factor in MGD. It is observed in all cases of obstructiveMGD,3,4,10,359,385,420,436,437also occurs in animal mod -els,351,354,377and may be primary258or secondary. A secondarychange in obstructive MGD appears to be due to the stasis ofmeibum inside the ductal system of obstructed glands and tothe potential inﬂuence of lipid degrading enzymes. Stasis ofmeibum thus can, in a vicious circle, further aggravate theobstruction. Highly viscous meibum is mixed with hyperkera-totic cell material, as seen in expressed pathologic humanmeibum prepared as smears3or in impression cytology (ObataH, et al. IOVS 2002;43:ARVO E-Abstract 60) (Fig. 21) and inhistopathology,3,356as veriﬁed by molecular biology and im -munohistochemistry.385Increased viscosity has also been ob -served inside the obstructed glands of animal models338(Fig. 20).Increasing age, which brings about hormonal changes, is
associated with increased frequency of changes in lipidcomposition, such as alterations of the polar and neutrallipid proﬁles.105Qualitative lipid changes may result in anincreased viscosity of meibum, as observed in the decreasein monounsaturated fatty acid, speciﬁcally oleic acid, inpatients with chronic blepharitis.438Since a decreased de -saturation of lipid raises its melting point and hence leads toits thickening,407this phenomenon can reinforce an ob -structive process and explains an elevated rate of obstruc-tion in blepharitis. A loss of the polar lipids that are assumedto maintain the adherence of the superﬁcial nonpolar lipidlayer to the aqueous tear ﬁlm2,102,439may contribute to anincrease in tear ﬁlm instability and evaporation in patientswith MGD.FIGURE 25. Pathways and proposedsequence of events that lead to self-enforcing vicious circles in MGD.Mechanisms and interactions ( ar-rows ) in MGD occur as a result ofunderlying causative factors ( colored
underlying causative factors ( coloredsquare boxes located in the periph-ery). The core mechanisms of glandobstruction due to ductal hyperkera-tinization and increased viscosity ofthe meibomian oil (meibum) areshown in the center of the ﬁgure onayellow underlay and result in twoeffector limbs (wide shadoweddownstream arrows , also on yellowunderlay). Associated functional com-plexes, such as progenitor cell differ-entiation, bacterial growth, inﬂamma-tion, and seborrhea, are shown oncolor-shaded spherical zones aroundthe core mechanisms. Dashed arrowsdepict likely interactions; functionalcomplexes of likely but insufﬁcientlyclariﬁed importance are shown indashed circles . Vicious circles thatresult in a progressive process of dys-function are indicated by red bentarrows . Hyperkeratinization of the
arrows . Hyperkeratinization of theepithelium of the excretory duct andoriﬁce is the main factor that leadsto obstruction of the meibomianglands. This effect is inﬂuenced by endogenous factors such as age, sex, and hormonal disturbances as well as by exogenous factors, such as topicalmedication. These may act, at least in part, via the release of a physiological inhibition of full keratinization and via an aberrant differentiation of progenito rcells. Increased viscosity of meibum through qualitative changes of its composition is the other important causative factor that contributes to theobstructive process. It may occur independently, because of the inﬂuence of endogenous or exogenous factors or a preexisting obstructive stasis ofsecretum. Obstruction leads on the one hand (left effector limb arrow ) to the immediate clinically observable low delivery of meibum onto the lid margin
and tear ﬁlm that results in an evaporative dry eye condition. On the other hand (right effector limb arrow ), obstruction also results in several consecutivenegative effects directly inside the meibomian glands, because of an internal stasis of meibum. Stasis can be associated with increased viscosity of the
negative effects directly inside the meibomian glands, because of an internal stasis of meibum. Stasis can be associated with increased viscosity of themeibum, which reinforces the obstruction in a vicious circle. The continuous secretory activity of the meibocytes leads to a progressive increase inpressure within the glands. This increased pressure can, in another vicious circle, induce an activation of the epithelial cells that reinforces hyp erkera-tinization. Pressure further leads to a dilatation, ﬁrst of the ductal system and, after a prolonged time, also to atrophy of the acini, with rarefacti on of theirsecretory meibocytes, and thus results in a secondary hyposecretion with low secretion of lipids. Atrophy may be the reason for the clinically detect able
gland dropout, and CL wear is, by presently unknown mechanisms, associated with gland dropout. Stasis of meibum also promotes the growth of bacteriaon the ocular surface and possibly inside the glands, usually pre-existing commensals, that produce lipid-degrading enzymes. Their action on themeibomian lipids leads to the production of toxic mediators, such as free fatty acids, that may initiate subclinical inﬂammatory reactions with rele ase ofinﬂammatory cytokines. Toxic and inﬂammatory mediators may promote subclinical inﬂammatory events inside the gland, in the periglandularconjunctiva, on the lid margin, and on the ocular surface, as suggested by observations in dermatology (e.g., in acne pathogenesis and skin irritatio n).Toxic mediators are also assumed to have negative effects on tear ﬁlm stability. Furthermore, they can lead to qualitative changes in the composition of
meibum that increase its viscosity or, through activation of epithelia on the lid margin and possibly inside the gland, they can reinforce keratiniza tion.Altogether, these events can give rise to several vicious circles ( red arrows ) that increase the preexisting obstruction, if not limited by timely diagnosisand therapeutic intervention. There is evidence from a mouse model that acinar atrophy may also occur due to the aging process. If MGD occurs inconjunction with systemic skin diseases such as seborrheic dermatitis, possibly accompanied by blepharitis, an increased amount of oil (seborrhea ) withdecreased viscosity can be observed on the lid margin. Seborrheic blepharitis, similar to stasis, can be associated with increased bacterial growth and its
downstream negative effects. The seborrheic oil has a different composition than that of normal meibum and thus may have negative effects on the tearﬁlm. All major mechanisms of the schematically depicted process are supported by ﬁndings in the literature. Reprinted from Knop E, Knop N. [Meibomianglands, Part IV: functional interactions in the pathogenesis of meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD).] Meibom-Dru ¨sen, Teil IV: Funktionelle Interaktionenin der Pathogenese der Dysfunktion (MGD). Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:980–987 with the kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1967Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
Associated Functional Complexes. Apart from the coremechanism of MGD as an obstructive process that is caused byhyperkeratinization of the meibomian duct and oriﬁce, to-gether with increased viscosity of meibum, there are also someassociated functional complexes that interact with the patho-genesis.Altered Cell Differentiation. An aberrant differentiation ofstem cells and progenitor cells inside the meibomian glands oron the lid margin can result from alterations in the endogenousand exogenous underlying factors (such as age, sex, and hor-mone levels). In ductal cells, this change can lead to hyperke-ratinization (as explained earlier) and may contribute to alter-ations in the lipid proﬁle in the acinar cell. Alterations in celldifferentiation can also generally be assumed to be involved inthe aging process of the human and are shown in acinaratrophy of the mouse.87Aberrant cell differentiation is alsoresponsible for general pathologic alterations of the meibo-mian gland.
mian gland.Seborrhea. For a long time, disease affectations at the lidmargin, including the meibomian gland, were simply termedblepharitis because a clear distinction between anterior andposterior blepharitis or MGD was not always made.6,7In theirblepharitis classiﬁcation, McCulley et al.394reported a largepercentage of the seborrheic type of blepharitis. In most ofthese patients, it was associated with generalized skin disease,mainly seborrheic dermatitis, which affects areas of the skinrich in sebaceous glands. It frequently, but not always, presentswith copious amounts of oil of low viscosity and is generallyassociated with hyperkeratinization.440This helps explain whyseborrheic dermatitis may be associated with hyperkeratotic
obstructive MGD. Seborrhea is assumed to give rise to severalfeedback mechanisms that can reinforce qualitative and quan-titative changes in meibum and epithelial hyperkeratinization.An increased sebum production is also known to promote theobstructive disease of the skin sebaceous glands in acne.148Inpatients with chronic blepharitis and seborrhea, qualitativechanges in lipid composition were observed, including ahigher amount of monounsaturated fatty acids that lead to adecreased melting point and hence explain the ﬂuid appear-ance of oil on the lid margin in this condition.438Seborrheicblepharitis, similar to obstructive MGD, is also associated withincreased bacterial growth and hence shares the presence ofbacterial lipid-modifying enzymes and respective alterations ofthe lipid composition as well as the downstream effects oftoxic mediators and negative inﬂuences on the tissue andconceivably on the tear ﬁlm.398We can therefore link sebor -
398We can therefore link sebor -rhea with increased bacterial growth and subclinical inﬂamma-tion in the pathogenesis of blepharitis. Deﬁnitions for thevarious subtypes of blepharitis and MGD can be found in theDeﬁnition and Classiﬁcation Report.Inﬂuence of Bacteria: Commensal Bacterial Growth. MGDcan be associated with an increased growth of bacteria on thelid margin, but conceivably inside the obstructed ductal systemas well, which represents an ideal undisturbed niche full ofnutrients. Evaluation of bacteriology in patients with chronicblepharitis and normal controls has revealed commensal bac-teria, mainly of the species S. aureus , coagulase negativeStaphylococcus spp., lipophilic Corynebacterium spp., with P.acnes as the most frequently isolated organism, found on 98%of lid margins.42The same species were cultured from 52% offreshly expressed meibum samples after lid margin cleaningwith a sterile swab.42Even though this technique does not
totally exclude the possibility of contamination of the freshly
freshly expressed meibum samples after lid margin cleaningwith a sterile swab.42Even though this technique does nottotally exclude the possibility of contamination of the freshlyexpressed meibum with bacteria from the lid margin, theﬁndings in this study give a strong indication that commensalbacteria also may be naturally present inside the meibomiangland. It is important to note that this bacterial colonizationdoes not represent an infection, but rather an increased growthof preexisting commensal species.42,353The observation of ahigh degree of association of MGD with all the seborrheicgroups of blepharitis394led to the hypothesis that lipid abnor -malities are a causative factor in the disease. In a later study, itwas observed that the previously cultured bacterial specieswere able to degrade meibomian lipids by their lipid-degradingenzymes (lipases and esterases),41which modify the normalmeibomian lipids and lead to an altered lipid spectrum.441This
degrading inﬂuence resulted in signiﬁcant changes in somefree fatty acids. It is known that free fatty acids are irritants toepithelia, can penetrate the epidermal barrier, and can causeinﬂammation and hyperkeratinization.386They are also recog -nized as factors that promote the obstructive disease in skinsebaceous acne.107,442,443In particular, free fatty acids andfatty acid alcohols are thought to contribute signiﬁcantly tochronic blepharitis, and it is assumed that they can result inirritation of the epithelium and stimulate keratinization.444,445Increased availability of cholesterol from cholesterol es-terase activity can further promote bacterial growth.444Theincreased growth of commensal bacteria and the down-
stream presence of irritative lipid species and toxic media-tors must be regarded as an inﬂuencing factor in MGD.These factors do not appear to present a primary cause ofobstructive MGD, however, but rather a secondary phenom-enon that becomes important due to a preexisting obstruc-tion and stasis. Bacterial growth negatively reinforces hyper-keratinization and may play a role in qualitative andquantitative changes in the meibum.Inﬂammatory Mediators. Increased bacterial growth islinked with subclinical inﬂammatory events through therelease of lipid species, such as free fatty acids,41that mayirritate and act in a proinﬂammatory manner on the tissueand potentially on the tear ﬁlm as well. Increased amounts ofphospholipase A2 are found in the meibum of patients withblepharitis.446Phospholipase A2 can induce the formationof arachidonic acid, an unsaturated fatty acid, from which
prostaglandins and leukotrienes are synthesized. These fac-tors have a central position in inﬂammatory processes. Theycan irritate and activate the ocular surface epithelium and itis speculated that they also result in tear ﬁlm instabil-ity.41,445Activated epithelial cells then produce inﬂamma -tory cytokines such as TNF- and interleukin- /H9251and - /H9252andpromote a subclinical inﬂammatory microenviron-ment.4,41,407,430,447,448Such inﬂammatory cytokines are alsoproduced by normal and stressed sebocytes.148,449,450Theaddition of IL-1- /H9251to isolated pilosebaceous units in vitroresults in hypercorniﬁcation,451as discussed by Zoubou -lis.151Similar events are described in the obstructive disease(acne) of the hair-associated sebaceous glands of the skin, asdiscussed by Kurokawa et al.107In acne, three distinctiveevents occur. First, desaturated fatty acids, lipoperoxides,and commensal bacteria such as P. acnes that also occur at
the lid margin can induce the production of inﬂammatorycytokines by epithelial cells.452Second, inﬂammatory cyto -kines such as IL-1 /H9251activate epithelial cells and induce analteration of normal epithelial differentiation toward in-creased proliferation and keratinization,453which togetherresults in obstructive sebaceous gland disease. Third, perox-
alteration of normal epithelial differentiation toward in-creased proliferation and keratinization,453which togetherresults in obstructive sebaceous gland disease. Third, perox-ides, such as the lipoperoxides that arise during the patho-logic modiﬁcation of meibomian lipids, can act as ligands forthe transcription factor PPAR-/H9253, which promotes cell matu-ration and lipid production. These effects may contribute tothe seborrhea in acne but also in the seborrheic blepharitisassociated with MGD.Physiological Aging Process. An age-dependent degenera-tion of the human meibomian gland that may reﬂect physio-logical age-related changes is indicated by various observations.In the human, degenerative changes, including hyperkeratosis1968 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
and meibomian oriﬁce narrowing,348generally increase at theposterior lid margin with advancing age and are assumed toinduce obstructive MGD. Aging also results in changes in thecomposition of meibum that are reﬂected by alterations in thepolar and neutral lipid proﬁles,105as explained earlier. Ob -structive MGD may be responsible for the observed reductionby half in the number of actively secreting glands between theages of 20 and 80 years,50as well as for the drastic loss offunctional glandular tissue (gland dropout)53that is observedover the same age range and results in respective symptoms ofocular dryness. CL wear is found to cause alterations thatresemble an increased aging process,355although the exactpathomechanism that causes the gland dropout is not yetclear.Apart from the changes in the meibomian glands that canoccur secondary to obstruction, there are also indicationsthat age-dependent alterations may affect the glandular tis-sue’s physiology directly.
387In a mouse model, Nien et al.87observed several indications of reduced gland function inthe sense of atrophic acinar changes due to an alteration offactors that are crucial for the differentiation and maturationof sebaceous glands. In old animals, a signiﬁcant reductionin meibocyte mitosis is paralleled by a decrease in the size ofthe acini, by a relocation of the meibocyte maturationmarker PPAR-/H9253, and by a decrease in lipid production. Thesealterations apparently occur without gland obstruction andhyperkeratinization. In contrast to the pathology in obstruc-tive MGD, an increased number of bone marrow–derivedcells occurs in the glandular tissue that are perceived asreﬂecting a cellular inﬂammatory reaction.From these ﬁndings, it may be assumed that, similar to other
organs in the body, the meibomian glands undergo a primaryage-dependent form of degeneration that leads to a gradualdecline in glandular function in contrast to a secondary patho-logic obstructive MGD. In a mouse model,87the atrophicchanges in the gland acini were apparently not accompaniedby hyperkeratinization and obstruction of the ducts and ori-ﬁces. These latter phenomena may represent useful criteria fordifferentiating between primary age-dependent degenerationand pathologic atrophic destruction of the glands due to ob-structive MGD. On the other hand, since these atrophicchanges in the mouse do not resemble the typical humanpathology they may also represent species-speciﬁc differencescompared with the typical human situation.CL Wear. CL wear is a widespread environmental factorassociated with MDG.454Although obstructive MGD was ﬁrstdescribed by Korb and Henriquez3as causative in patients withCL intolerance, several later studies did not provide an un-
equivocal opinion359,436,454–457on the association of obstruc -tive MGD with CL wear compared with non-CL wear.389Onthe other hand, MGD therapy by lid hygiene was found byPaugh et al.436to be effective in improving CL intolerance insuch patients. Ong and Larke458reported that the onset of CLwear results in an increased rate of MGD, independent of lenstype, with blocked glands and abnormal meibum. They re-ported in a later study359that CL wearers had only a slightlyincreased prevalence of MGD. There are clear data by Mathersand Billborough388on a distinctly increased rate of MGD, withthickened meibum and gland dropout in patients showingCL-associated giant papillary conjunctivitis that may supportthe potential involvement of inﬂammatory mediators in thepathogenesis of MGD. More recent data by Arita et al.355
355indicate a high prevalence of gland dropout together with dryeye symptoms in CL wearers. Dropout correlated with theduration of lens wear but was independent of the lens type.Such patients in their early 30s already had a degree of glanddropout that resembled a normal population in their 80s,53and
53andit was hence concluded that CL wear results in changes thataccelerate the natural aging process of the meibomian gland. Itmay thus be assumed that CL wear is associated with altera-tions of the meibomian gland in the sense of MGD, althoughthe exact pathomechanism is not yet clear and remains to beidentiﬁed.References1. Duke-Elder S, Wybar KC. The Anatomy of the Visual System.London: Henry Kimpton; 1961:577.2. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Gouveia SM, Yokoi N, Voon LW. Functionalaspects of the tear ﬁlm lipid layer. Exp Eye Res . 2004;78:347–360.3. Korb DR, Henriquez AS. Meibomian gland dysfunction and con-tact lens intolerance. J Am Optom Assoc . 1980;51:243–251.4. Foulks GN, Bron AJ. Meibomian gland dysfunction: a clinicalscheme for description, diagnosis, classiﬁcation, and grading.Ocul Surf . 2003;1:107–126.5. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The contribution of meibomian disease to dryeye. Ocul Surf . 2004;2:149–165.6. Knop E, Knop N, Brewitt H, et al. [Meibomian glands, Part III:
meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD)—plaidoyer for a discretedisease entity and as an important cause of dry eye]. Meibom-dru¨sen, Teil III: Meibomdru ¨sen Dysfunktionen (MGD)—Pla ¨doyerfu¨r ein eigensta ¨ndiges Krankheitsbild und wichtige Ursache fu ¨rdas Trockene Auge. Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:966–979.7. Driver PJ, Lemp MA. Meibomian gland dysfunction. Surv Oph-thalmol . 1996;40:343–367.8. Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Evans JE, et al. Androgen deﬁciency:meibomian gland dysfunction, and evaporative dry eye. A n nNYAcad Sci . 2002;966:211–222.9. Heiligenhaus A, Koch JM, Kemper D, Kruse FE, Waubke TN.[Therapy in tear ﬁlm deﬁciencies]. Therapie von Benetzung-ssto¨rungen. Klin Monatsbl Augenheilkd . 1994;204:162–168.10. Shimazaki J, Sakata M, Tsubota K. Ocular surface changes anddiscomfort in patients with meibomian gland dysfunction. ArchOphthalmo l. 1995;113:1266–1270.11. Horwath-Winter J, Berghold A, Schmut O, et al. Evaluation of the
Clinical Course of Dry Eye Syndrome. Arch Ophthalmo l. 2003;121:1364–1368.12. Mathers WD. Ocular evaporation in meibomian gland dysfunc-tion and dry eye. Ophthalmology . 1993;100:347–351.13. Bron AJ, Benjamin L, Snibson GR. Meibomian gland disease.Classiﬁcation and grading of lid changes. Eye. 1991;5:395–411.14. Paranjpe DR, Foulks GN. Therapy for meibomian gland disease.Ophthalmol Clin North Am . 2003;16:37–42.15. Knop E, Knop N, Brewitt H. [Dry eye disease as a complexdysregulation of the functional anatomy of the ocular surface.New impulses to understanding dry eye disease] Das trockeneAuge als komplexe Fehlregulation der funktionellen Anatomieder Augenoberﬂa ¨che. Neue Impulse zum Versta ¨ndnis des trock-enen Auges. Ophthalmologe . 2003;100:917–928.16. Heinrich Meibom, the younger 1638–1700 (doctor). 2010.Available at http://en wikipedia org/wiki/Heinrich_Meibom_%28poet%29. Accessed March 25, 2010.17. Heinrich Meibom, the elder 1555–1625 (poet). 2010. http://
wikipedia.org/wiki/ Heinrich_Meibom_%28poet%29. AccessedMarch 25, 2010.18. Heinrich Meibom, 1638–1700 (Nova et Vetera). BMJ. 1938:2:232.19. Meibom H. De Vasis Palpebrarum Novis Epistola Helmestadi:Typis & sumptibus. Helmstadt, Germany: Henningi Mulleri; 1666.20. Bron AJ, Tripathi DM, Tripathi BJ. Wolff’s Anatomy of the Eyeand Orbit. London: Chapman & Hall Medical; 1997: 231.21. Knop E, Knop N. Anatomical and developmental background ofthe meibomian gland. In: Tiffany JM, ed. Proceedings of theMeibom 2000 Workshop. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2000.22. Virchow H. Mikroskopische Anatomie der a ¨usseren Augenhautund des Lidapparates. In: Saemisch T, ed. Graefe-Saemisch Hand-buch der gesamten Augenheilkunde. Band 1, 1. Abteilung, Kapi-tel II. 2 ed. Leibzig: Verlag W. Engelmann; 1910:431.23. Wolff E. Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit. London: Lewis and Co.;1954.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1969
Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
24. Knop N, Knop E. [Meibomian glands, Part I: anatomy, embryol-ogy and histology of the meibomian glands]. Meibom-Dru ¨sen,Teil I: Anatomie, Embryologie und Histologie der Meibom-Dru¨sen. Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:872–883.25. Greiner JV, Glonek T, Korb DR, et al. Volume of the human andrabbit meibomian gland system. Adv Exp Med Biol . 1998;438:339–343.26. Mann I. The Development of the Human Eye. Cambridge UK:Cambridge University Press; 1928.27. Barber AN. Embryology of the Human Eye. St. Louis: C. V. MosbyCo.;1955:193–195.28. Andersen H, Ehlers N, Matthiessen ME. Histochemistry and de-velopment of the human eyelids. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh ).1965;43:642–668.29. Zhang H, Hara M, Seki K, Fukuda K, Nishida T. Eyelid fusion andepithelial differentiation at the ocular surface during mouse em-bryonic development. Jpn J Ophthalmol . 2005;49:195–204.30. Knop E, Ludescher M, Knop N. Keratinisation status and cytoker-atins of the Human Meibomian gland epithelium. Acta Ophthal-
mol. 2009;87:2232.31. Straatsma BR. Cystic Degeneration of the Meibomian Glands.AMA Arch Ophthalmo l. 1959;61:918–927.32. Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Smith RE. Meibomian gland studies: his-tologic and ultrastructural investigations. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci. 1981;20:537–547.33. Nicolaides N, Kaitaranta JK, Rawdah TN, Macy JI, Boswell FM,Smith RE. Meibomian gland studies: comparison of steer andhuman lipids. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1981;20:522–536.34. Gorgas K, Vo ¨lkl A. Peroxisomes in sebaceous glands. IV. Aggre-gates of tubular peroxisomes in the mouse Meibomian gland.Histochem J. 1984;16:1079–1098.35. Sirigu P, Shen RL, Pinto dS. Human meibomian glands: the ultra-structure of acinar cells as viewed by thin section and freeze-fracture transmission electron microscopies. Invest OphthalmolVis Sci . 1992;33:2284–2292.36. Olami Y, Zajicek G, Cogan M, Gnessin H, Pe’er J. Turnover andmigration of meibomian gland cells in rats’ eyelids. OphthalmicRes. 2001;33:170–175.
37. Knop E, Knop N. [Meibomian glands. Part II: Physiology, charac-teristics, distribution and function of meibomian oil] Meibom-Dru¨sen Teil II: Physiologie, Eigenschaften, Verteilung und Funk-tion des Meibom-O ¨ls.Ophthalmologe . 2009;106:884–892.38. Kozak I, Bron AJ, Kucharova K, et al. Morphologic and volumetricstudies of the meibomian glands in elderly human eyelids. Cor-nea. 2007;26:610–614.39. Seifert P, Spitznas M. Immunocytochemical and ultrastructuralevaluation of the distribution of nervous tissue and neuropep-tides in the meibomian gland. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthal-mol. 1996;234:648–656.40. Thiboutot D. Regulation of Human Sebaceous Glands. J InvestigDermatol . 2004;123:1–12.41. Dougherty JM, McCulley JP. Bacterial lipases and chronic bleph-aritis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1986;27:486–491.42. Dougherty JM, McCulley JP. Comparative bacteriology of chronicblepharitis. Br J Ophthalmol . 1984;68:524–528.
blepharitis. Br J Ophthalmol . 1984;68:524–528.43. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The meibomian glands and tear ﬁlm lipids.Structure, function, and control. Adv Exp Med Biol . 1998;438:281–295.44. Chew CK, Hykin PG, Jansweijer C, Dikstein S, Tiffany JM, BronAJ. The casual level of meibomian lipids in humans. Curr Eye Res .1993;12:255–259.45. Chew CK, Jansweijer C, Tiffany JM, Dikstein S, Bron AJ. Aninstrument for quantifying meibomian lipid on the lid margin: themeibometer. Curr Eye Res . 1993;12:247–254.46. Linton RG, Curnow DH, Riley WJ. The meibomian glands: Aninvestigation into the secretion and some aspects of the physiol-ogy. Br J Ophthalmol . 1961;45:718–723.47. Josephson JE. Appearance of the preocular tear ﬁlm lipid layer.Am J Optom Physiol Opt . 1983;60:883–887.48. Korb DR, Baron DF, Herman JP, et al. Tear ﬁlm lipid layerthickness as a function of blinking. Cornea . 1994;13:354–359.49. Yokoi N, Mossa F, Tiffany JM, Bron AJ. Assessment of meibomian
gland function in dry eye using meibometry. Arch Ophthalmo l.1999;117:723–729.
gland function in dry eye using meibometry. Arch Ophthalmo l.1999;117:723–729.50. Norn M. Expressibility of meibomian secretion: relation to age,lipid precorneal ﬁlm, scales, foam, hair and pigmentation. ActaOphthalmol (Copenh ). 1987;65:137–142.51. Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility:correlation with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea .2008;27:1142–1147.52. Norn M. Meibomian oriﬁces and Marx’s line; studied by triplevital staining. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh ). 1985;63:698–700.53. Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Amano S. Noncontact infrared meibog-raphy to document age-related changes of the meibomian glandsin a normal population. Ophthalmology . 2008;115:911–915.54. Blackie CA, Korb DR. Recovery time of an optimally secretingmeibomian gland . Cornea. 2009;28:293–297.55. Blackie CA, Korb DR. The diurnal secretory characteristics ofindividual meibomian glands . Cornea. 2010;29:34–38.
56. Perra MT, Serra A, Sirigu P, Turno F. Histochemical demonstra-tion of acetylcholinesterase activity in human Meibomian glands.Eur J Histochem . 1996;40:39–44.57. Luhtala J, Palkama A, Uusitalo H. Calcitonin gene-related peptideimmunoreactive nerve ﬁbers in the rat conjunctiva. Invest Oph-thalmol Vis Sci . 1991;32:640–645.58. Hartschuh W, Weihe E, Reinecke M. Peptidergic (neurotensin,VIP, substance P) nerve ﬁbres in the skin: immunohistochemicalevidence of an involvement of neuropeptides in nociception,pruritus and inﬂammation. Br J Dermatol . 1983;109(suppl 25):14–7:14–17.59. LeDoux MS, Zhou Q, Murphy RB, Greene ML, Ryan P. Parasym-pathetic innervation of the meibomian glands in rats. InvestOphthalmol Vis Sci . 2001;42:2434–2441.60. Diebold Y, Rios JD, Hodges RR, Rawe I, Dartt DA. Presence ofnerves and their receptors in mouse and human conjunctivalgoblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2001;42:2270–2282.
61. Stern ME, Gao J, Siemasko KF, Beuerman RW, Pﬂugfelder SC. Therole of the lacrimal functional unit in the pathophysiology of dryeye. Exp Eye Res . 2004;78:409–416.62. Stern ME, Beuerman RW, Fox RI, Gao J, Mircheff AK, PﬂugfelderSC. The pathology of dry eye: the interaction between the ocularsurface and lacrimal glands . Cornea. 1998;17:584–589.63. Alibardi L. Structural and immunocytochemical characterizationof keratinization in vertebrate epidermis and epidermal deriva-tives. In: Kwang WJ, ed. International Review of Cytology ASurvey of Cell Biology. Vol. 253. Academic Press; 2006:177–259.64. Candi E, Schmidt R, Melino G. The corniﬁed envelope: a model ofcell death in the skin. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2005;6:328–340.65. Dartt DA. Signal transduction and control of lacrimal gland pro-tein secretion: a review. Curr Eye Res . 1989;8:619–636.66. Wolff E. The Anatomy of Eye and Orbit. London: Lewis 1954:231.
231.67. Fuchs E. Skin stem cells: rising to the surface. J Cell Biol . 2008;180:273–284.68. Taylor G, Lehrer MS, Jensen PJ, Sun TT, Lavker RM. Involvementof follicular stem cells in forming not only the follicle but also theepidermis. Cell. 2000;102:451–461.69. Pellegrini G, Golisano O, Paterna P, et al. Location and clonalanalysis of stem cells and their differentiated progeny in thehuman ocular surface. J Cell Biol. 1999;145:769–782.70. Kruse FE. Stem cells and corneal epithelial regeneration. Eye.1994;8:170–183.71. Dua HS, Azuara-Blanco A. Limbal stem cells of the corneal epi-thelium. Surv Ophthalmol . 2000;44:415–425.72. Pellegrini G, Bondanza S, Guerra L, De Luca M. Cultivation ofhuman keratinocyte stem cells: current and future clinical appli-cations. Med Biol Eng Comput. 1998;36:778–790.73. Quesenberry PJ, Ramshaw H, Crittenden RB, et al. Engraftment ofnormal murine marrow into nonmyeloablated host mice. BloodCells . 1994;20:348–350.
Cells . 1994;20:348–350.74. Ghazizadeh S, Taichman LB. Multiple classes of stem cells incutaneous epithelium: a lineage analysis of adult mouse skin.EMBO J . 2001;20:1215–1222.1970 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4
cutaneous epithelium: a lineage analysis of adult mouse skin.EMBO J . 2001;20:1215–1222.1970 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
75. Cotsarelis G, Sun TT, Lavker RM. Label-retaining cells reside inthe bulge area of pilosebaceous unit: Implications for follicularstem cells, hair cycle, and skin carcinogenesis. Cell. 1990;61:1329–1337.76. Richards SM, Yamagami H, Schirra F, Suzuki T, Jensen RV, Sulli-van DA. Sex-related effect on gene expression in the mousemeibomian gland. Curr Eye Res . 2006;31:119–128.77. Schirra F, Richards SM, Liu M, Suzuki T, Yamagami H, Sullivan DA.Androgen regulation of lipogenic pathways in the mouse meibo-mian gland. Exp Eye Res . 2006;83:291–296.78. Schirra F, Suzuki T, Dickinson DP, Townsend DJ, Gipson IK,Sullivan DA. Identiﬁcation of steroidogenic enzyme mRNAs in thehuman lacrimal gland, meibomian gland, cornea, and conjunc-tiva. Cornea. 2006;25:438–442.79. Suzuki T, Schirra F, Richards SM, et al. Estrogen’s and progester-one’s impact on gene expression in the mouse lacrimal gland.Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2006;47:158–168.
80. Richards SM, Liu M, Jensen RV, et al. Androgen regulation of geneexpression in the mouse lacrimal gland. J Steroid Biochem MolBiol. 2005;96:401–413.81. Schirra F, Suzuki T, Richards SM, et al. Androgen control of geneexpression in the mouse meibomian gland. Invest OphthalmolVis Sci . 2005;46:3666–3675.82. Horsley V, O’Carroll D, Tooze R, et al. Blimp1 deﬁnes a progen-itor population that governs cellular input to the sebaceousgland. Cell. 2006;126:597–609.83. Fuchs E. Scratching the surface of skin development. Nature .2007;445:834–842.84. Morris RJ, Liu Y, Marles L, et al. Capturing and proﬁling adult hairfollicle stem cells. Nat Biotech . 2004;22:411–417.85. Oshima H, Rochat A, Kedzia C, Kobayashi K, Barrandon Y. Mor-phogenesis and renewal of hair follicles from adult multipotentstem cells . Cell. 2001;104:233–245.86. Lo CC, Berta MA, Braun KM, et al. Characterization of bipotential
epidermal progenitors derived from human sebaceous gland:contrasting roles of c-Myc and beta-catenin. Stem Cells . 2008;26:1241–1252.87. Nien CJ, Paugh JR, Massei S, Wahlert AJ, Kao WW, Jester JV.Age-related changes in the meibomian gland. Exp Eye Res . 2009;89:1021–1027.88. Blanpain C, Fuchs E. Epidermal homeostasis: a balancing act ofstem cells in the skin. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2009;10:207–217.89. Sellheyer K, Krahl D. Blimp-1: a marker of terminal differentiationbut not of sebocytic progenitor cells (review). J Cutan Pathol.2010;37:624–634.90. Fuchs E, Horsley V. More than one way to skin. Genes Dev .2008;22:976–985.91. Allen M, Grachtchouk M, Sheng H, et al. Hedgehog signalingregulates sebaceous gland development. Am J Pathol . 2003;163:2173–2178.92. Niemann C, Unden AB, Lyle S, Zouboulis C, Toftgard R, Watt FM.Indian hedgehog and beta-catenin signaling: role in the sebaceouslineage of normal and neoplastic mammalian epidermis. Proc
Natl Acad Sc iUSA . 2003;100(Suppl 1):11873–11880.93. Mao-Qiang M, Fowler AJ, Schmuth M, et al. Peroxisome-prolifera-tor-activated receptor (PPAR)-[gamma] activation stimulates ker-atinocyte differentiation. J Investig Dermatol . 2004;123:305–312.94. Tontonoz P, Spiegelman BM. Fat and beyond: the diverse biologyof PPARgamma. Annu Rev Biochem . 2008;77:289–312.95. Schoonjans K, Staels B, Auwerx J. The peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptors (PPARS) and their effects on lipid metabolismand adipocyte differentiation. Biochim Biophys Acta . 1996;1302:93–109.96. Rosen ED, Sarraf P, Troy AE, et al. PPAR gamma is required for thedifferentiation of adipose tissue in vivo and in vitro. Mol Cell .1999;4:611–617.97. Rosenﬁeld RL, Kentsis A, Deplewski D, Ciletti N. Rat Preputialsebocyte differentiation involves peroxisome proliferator-acti-vated receptors. J Investig Dermatol . 1999;112:226–232.98. Trivedi NR, Cong Z, Nelson AM, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors increase human sebum production. J InvestigDermatol . 2006;126:2002–2009.99. Rosenﬁeld RL, Deplewski D, Kentsis A, Ciletti N. Mechanisms of
activated receptors increase human sebum production. J InvestigDermatol . 2006;126:2002–2009.99. Rosenﬁeld RL, Deplewski D, Kentsis A, Ciletti N. Mechanisms ofandrogen induction of sebocyte differentiation. Dermatology .1998;196:43–46.100. Heid HW, Moll R, Schwetlick I, Rackwitz HR, Keenan TW. Adi-pophilin is a speciﬁc marker of lipid accumulation in diverse celltypes and diseases. Cell Tissue Res . 1998;294:309–321.101. Gao J, Ye H, Serrero G. Stimulation of adipose differentiationrelated protein (ADRP) expression in adipocyte precursors by thefatty acids. J Cell Physiol . 2000;182:297–302.102. Butovich IA, Millar TJ, Ham BM. Understanding and analyzingmeibomian lipids (review). Curr Eye Res. 2008;33:405–420.103. Butovich IA, Uchiyama E, McCulley JP. Lipids of human meibum:mass-spectrometric analysis and structural elucidation. J LipidRes. 2007;48:2220–2235.104. Tiffany JM. The lipid secretion of the meibomian glands. AdvLipid Res . 1987;22:1–62.
Lipid Res . 1987;22:1–62.105. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Inﬂuence of agingon the polar and neutral lipid proﬁles in human meibomian glandsecretions. Arch Ophthalmo l. 2006;124:1286–1292.106. Kutsuna M, Kodama T, Sumida M, et al. Presence of adiposedifferentiation-related protein in rat meibomian gland cells. ExpEye Res . 2007;84:687–693.107. Kurokawa I, Danby FW, Ju Q, et al. New developments in ourunderstanding of acne pathogenesis and treatment. Exp Derma-tol. 2009;18:821–832.108. Buitrago W, Joseph AK. Sebaceous carcinoma: the greatmasquerader: emgerging concepts in diagnosis and treatment.Dermatol Ther . 2008;21:459–466.109. Keith CG. Seborrheic blepharo-kerato-conjunctivitis. Trans Oph-thalmol Soc UK. 1967;87:85–103.110. Cowper HW. Meibomian seborrhea. Am J Ophthalmol. 1922;5:25–30.111. Shields JA, Demirci H, Marr BP, Eagle RC Jr, Shields CL. Sebaceouscarcinoma of the eyelids: personal experience with 60 cases.Ophthalmology. 2004;111:2151–2157.
112. Bull JJ, Pelengaris S, Hendrix S, Chronnell CM, Khan M, PhilpottMP. Ectopic expression of c-Myc in the skin affects the hairgrowth cycle and causes an enlargement of the sebaceous gland.Br J Dermatol . 2005;152:1125–1133.113. Lin Y, Wong Kk, Calame K. Repression of c-myc Transcription byBlimp-1, an inducer of terminal B cell differentiation. Science .1997;276:596–599.114. Ohinata Y, Payer B, O’Carroll D, et al. Blimp1 is a critical deter-minant of the germ cell lineage in mice. Nature . 2005;436:207–213.115. Saitou M, Payer B, O’Carroll D, Ohinata Y, Surani MA. Blimp1 andthe emergence of the germ line during development in themouse. Cell Cycle . 2005;4:1736–1740.116. Harvey DJ, Tiffany JM, Duerden JM, Pandher KS, Mengher LS.Identiﬁcation by combined gas chromatography-mass spectrom-etry of constituent long chain fatty acids and alcohols from themeibomian glands of the rat and a comparison with humanmeibomian lipids. J Chromatogr . 1987;414:253–263.
117. Schirra F, Richards SM, Sullivan DA. Androgen inﬂuence on cho-lesterogenic enzyme mRNA levels in the mouse meibomiangland. Curr Eye Res . 2007;32:393–398.118. Van Haeringen NJ, Glasius E. Cholesterol in human tear ﬂuid. ExpEye Res . 1975;20:271–274.119. Macsai MS. The role of omega-3 dietary supplementation inblepharitis and meibomian gland dysfunction (an AOS thesis).Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2008;106:336–356.120. Sullivan BD, Cermak JM, Sullivan RM, et al. Correlations betweennutrient intake and the polar lipid proﬁles of meibomian glandsecretions in women with Sjogren’s syndrome. Adv Exp MedBiol. 2002;506:441–447.121. Anderson GH, Kolattukudy PY. Fatty acid chain elongation bymicrosomal enzymes from the bovine meibomian gland. ArchBiochem Biophys 1984;237:177–185.122. Butovich IA, Wojtowicz JC, Molai M. Human tear ﬁlm and
meibum. Very long chain wax esters and (O-acyl)-omega-hydroxyfatty acids of meibum. J Lipid Res . 2009;50:2471–2485.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1971
Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
123. Spychalla J, Kinney A, Browse J. Identiﬁcation of an animal omega-3 fatty acid desaturase by heterologous expression in Arabidop-sis.Proc Natl Acad Sc iUSA . 1997;94:1142–1147.124. Andrews JS. Human tear ﬁlm lipids, I: composition of the princi-pal non- polar component. Exp Eye Res . 1970;10:223–227.125. Harvey DJ, Tiffany JM. Identiﬁcation of meibomian gland lipids bygas chromatography- mass spectrometry: application to the mei-bomian lipids of the mouse. J Chromatogr . 1984;301:173–187.126. Duerden JM, Tiffany JM. Lipid synthesis in vitro by rabbit meibo-mian gland tissue and its inhibition by tetracycline. BiochimBiophys Acta . 1990;1042:13–18.127. Bishop JE, Hajra AK. Mechanism and speciﬁcity of formation oflong chain alcohols by developing rat brain. J Biol Chem . 1981;256:9542–9550.128. Bishop JE, Hajra AK. Speciﬁcity of reduction of fatty acids to longchain alcohols by rat brain microsomes. J Neurochem . 1978;30:643–647.
643–647.129. Perra MT, Lantini MS, Serra A, Cossu M, De Martini G, Sirigu P.Human meibomian glands: a histochemical study for androgenmetabolic enzymes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1990;31:771–775.130. Baillie AH, Thomson J, Milne JA. The distribution of hydroxys-teroid dehydrogenase in human sebaceous glands. Br J Derma-tol. 1966;78:451–457.131. Baillie AH, Calman KC, Milne JA. Histochemical distribution ofhydroxysteroid dehydrogenases in human skin. Br J Dermatol .1965;77:610–616.132. Butovich IA. Cholesteryl esters as a depot for very long chain fattyacids in human meibum. J Lipid Res . 2009;50:501–513.133. Hausman GJ, Richardson RL. Cellular and vascular developmentin immature rat adipose tissue. J Lipid Res . 1983;24:522–532.134. Tsai PS, Evans JE, Green KM, et al. Proteomic analysis of humanmeibomian gland secretions. Br J Ophthalmol . 2006;90:372–377.135. Sullivan DA, Jensen RV, Suzuki T, Richards SM. Do sex steroids
exert sex-speciﬁc and/or opposite effects on gene expression inlacrimal and meibomian glands? Mol Vis . 2009;15:1553–1572.136. Borchman D, Foulks GN, Yappert MC, Ho DV. Temperature-induced conformational changes in human tearlipids hydrocar-bon chains. Biopolymers . 2007;87:124–133.137. Tiffany JM, Dart JKG. Normal and abnormal functions of meibo-mian secretion . R Soc Med Int Congr Symp Ser . 1981;40:1061–1064.138. Kaercher T, Mobius D, Welt R. Biophysical behaviour of theinfant Meibomian lipid layer. Int Ophthalmol . 1994;18:15–19.139. Kaercher T, Honig D, Mobius D. Brewster angle microscopy. Anew method of visualizing the spreading of Meibomian lipids. IntOphthalmol . 1993;17:341–348.140. Kaercher T, Mobius D, Welt R. Biophysical characteristics of theMeibomian lipid layer under in vitro conditions. Int Ophthalmol .1992;16:167–176.141. Leiske DL, Raju SR, Ketelson HA, Millar TJ, Fuller GG. The inter-
facial viscoelastic properties and structures of human and animalmeibomian lipids. Exp Eye Res . 2010;90(5):598–604142. Tiffany JM. Refractive index of meibomian and other lipids. CurrEye Res . 1986;5:887–889.143. Franck C. Fatty layer of the precorneal ﬁlm in the ‘ofﬁce eyesyndrome’. Acta Ophthalmol Copenh . 1991;69:737–743.144. Holly FJ. Formation and rupture of the tear ﬁlm. Exp Eye Res .1973;15:515–525.145. Thody AJ, Shuster S. Control and function of sebaceous glands.Physiol Rev . 1989;69:383–416.146. Thody AJ, Shuster S. Control of sebaceous gland function in therat by alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone. J Endocrinol .1975;64:503–510.147. Deplewski D, Rosenﬁeld RL. Growth hormone and insulin-likegrowth factors have different effects on sebaceous cell growthand differentiation. Endocrinology . 1999;140:4089–4094.148. Zouboulis CC, Xia L, Akamatsu H, et al. The human sebocyte culture
model provides new insights into development and management ofseborrhoea and acne. Dermatology . 1998;196:21–31.149. Boudou P, Soliman H, Chivot M, et al. Effect of oral isotretinoin
model provides new insights into development and management ofseborrhoea and acne. Dermatology . 1998;196:21–31.149. Boudou P, Soliman H, Chivot M, et al. Effect of oral isotretinointreatment on skin androgen receptor levels in male acneic pa-tients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1995;80:1158–1161.150. Chen W, Kelly MA, Opitz-Araya X, Thomas RE, Low MJ, Cone RD.Exocrine gland dysfunction in MC5-R-deﬁcient mice: evidence forcoordinated regulation of exocrine gland function by melanocor-tin peptides . Cell. 1997;91:789–798.151. Zouboulis CC. Acne and sebaceous gland function. Clin Derma-tol. 2004;22:360–366.152. Cabeza M, Miranda R, Arias E, Diaz de Leon L. Inhibitory effect ofpropranolol on lipid synthesis in gonadectomized male hamsterﬂank organs. Arch Med Res . 1998;29:291–295.153. Zouboulis CC, Bohm M. Neuroendocrine regulation of sebocytes:a pathogenetic link between stress and acne. Exp Dermatol .2004;13(suppl 4):31–35.
2004;13(suppl 4):31–35.154. Zouboulis CC, Seltmann H, Hiroi N, et al. Corticotropin-releasinghormone: an autocrine hormone that promotes lipogenesis inhuman sebocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sc iUSA . 2002;99:7148–7153.155. Zhang L, Anthonavage M, Huang Q, Li WH, Eisinger M. Proopio-melanocortin peptides and sebogenesis. Ann N Y Acad Sci . 2003;994:154–161.156. Downie MM, Guy R, Kealey T. Advances in sebaceous glandresearch: potential new approaches to acne management. Int JCosmet Sci . 2004;26:291–311.157. Aisa J, Lahoz M, Serrano P, et al. Acetylcholinesterase-positive andparaformaldehyde-induced-ﬂuorescence-positive innervation inthe upper eyelid of the sheep (Ovis aries). Histol Histopathol .2001;16:487–496.158. Chanthaphavong RS, Murphy SM, Anderson CR. Chemical codingof sympathetic neurons controlling the tarsal muscle of the rat.Auton Neur osci. 2003;105:77–89.159. Chung CW, Tigges M, Stone RA. Peptidergic innervation of the
primate meibomian gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1996;37:238–245.160. Fan Q, Smith PG. Decreased vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-immunoreactivity of parasympathetic neurons and target inner-vation following long-term sympathectomy. Regul Pept . 1993;48:337–343.161. Hartschuh W, Reinecke M, Weihe E, Yanaihara N. VIP-immuno-reactivity in the skin of various mammals: immunohistochemical,radioimmunological and experimental evidence for a dual local-ization in cutaneous nerves and merkel cells. Peptides . 1984;5:239–245.162. Horwath-Winter J, Flogel I, Ramschak-Schwarzer S, Hofer A, KroiselPM. Psoriasis and hypogonadism in chronic blepharokeratocon-junctivitis: a case report (in German). Ophthalmologe . 2002;99:380–383.163. Kirch W, Horneber M, Tamm ER. Characterization of Meibomiangland innervation in the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicu-laris). Anat Embryol (Berl). 1996;193:365–375.164. Lorber M. Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity (SLIR) in rat hard-
erian and meibomian glands and glands of Zeis. Adv Exp MedBiol. 2002;506:81–89.165. Luhtala J, Uusitalo H. The distribution and origin of substance Pimmunoreactive nerve ﬁbres in the rat conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res .1991;53:641–646.166. Montagna W, Ellis RA. Cholinergic innervation of the Meibomianglands. Anat Rec. 1959;135:121–127.167. Simons E, Smith PG. Sensory and autonomic innervation of the rateyelid: Neuronal origins and peptide phenotypes. J Chem Neu-roanat . 1994;7:35–47.168. Smith PG, Reddy H. Reorganization of cranial sympathetic path-ways following neonatal ganglionectomy in the rat. J CompNeurol. 1990;301:490–500.169. Sokolov VE, Shabadash SA, Zelikina TI. Innervation of speciﬁcskin glands in the rabbit: the cholinergic terminal reticulum (inRussian). Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1984;277:1245–1249.170. Akamatsu H, Zouboulis CC, Orfanos CE. Control of human sebo-
cyte proliferation in vitro by testosterone and 5-alpha-dihydrotes-tosterone is dependent on the localization of the sebaceousglands. J Investig Dermatol . 1992;99:509–511.171. Choudhry R, Hodgins MB, van der Kwast TH, Brinkmann AO,
171. Choudhry R, Hodgins MB, van der Kwast TH, Brinkmann AO,Boersma WJ. Localization of androgen receptors in human skin1972 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
by immunohistochemistry: implications for the hormonal regula-tion of hair growth, sebaceous glands and sweat glands. J Endo-crinol . 1992;133:467–475.172. Deplewski D, Rosenﬁeld RL. Role of hormones in pilosebaceousunit development. Endocr Rev . 2000;21:363–392.173. Hall DW, Van den Hoven WE, Noordzij K, Jaitly KD. Hormonalcontrol of hamster ear sebaceous gland lipogenesis. Arch Derma-tol Res . 1983;275:1–7.174. Hamilton JB. Male hormone substance: a prime factor in acne.J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1941:570.175. Imperato-McGinley J, Gautier T, Cai LQ, Yee B, Epstein J, Pochi P.The androgen control of sebum production. Studies of subjectswith dihydrotestosterone deﬁciency and complete androgen in-sensitivity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1993;76:524–528.176. Ito A, Sakiguchi T, Kitamura K, Akamatsu H, Horio T. Establish-ment of a tissue culture system for hamster sebaceous gland cells.Dermatology . 1998;197:238–244.
177. Luderschmidt C, Eiermann W, Jawny J. Steroid hormone recep-tors and their relevance for sebum production in the sebaceousgland ear model of the Syrian hamster. Arch Dermatol Res .1983;275:175–180.178. Luu-The V, Sugimoto Y, Puy L, et al. Characterization, expression,and immunohistochemical localization of 5 alpha-reductase inhuman skin. J Investig Dermatol . 1994;102:221–226.179. Miyake K, Ciletti N, Liao S, Rosenﬁeld RL. Androgen receptorexpression in the preputial gland and its sebocytes. J InvestigDermatol . 1994;103:721–725.180. Pochi PE. Acne: endocrinologic aspects. Cutis . 1982;30:212–214,216.181. Pochi PE, Strauss JS. Endocrinologic control of the developmentand activity of the human sebaceous gland. J Investig Dermatol .1974;62:191–201.182. Puy LA, Turgeon C, Gagne D, et al. Localization and regulation ofexpression of the FAR-17A gene in the hamster ﬂank organs.J Investig Dermatol . 1996;107:44–50.
183. Rony HR. Effect of androgen on the sebaceous glands of humanskin. Arch Dermatol Syphilol . 1943:601–604.184. Rosignoli C, Nicolas JC, Jomard A, Michel S. Involvement of theSREBP pathway in the mode of action of androgens in sebaceousglands in vivo. Exp Dermatol . 2003;12:480–489.185. Stewart ME, Downing DT, Cook JS, Hansen JR, Strauss JS. Seba-ceous gland activity and serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfatelevels in boys and girls. Arch Dermatol . 1992;128:1345–1348.186. Strauss JS, Pochi PE. The human sebaceous gland: its regulationby steroidal hormones and its use as an end organ for assayingandrogenicity in vivo. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1963;19:385–444.187. Zouboulis CC, Akamatsu H, Stephanek K, Orfanos CE. Androgensaffect the activity of human sebocytes in culture in a mannerdependent on the localization of the sebaceous glands and theireffect is antagonized by spironolactone. Skin Pharmacol. 1994;7:33–40.
7:33–40.188. Zouboulis CC, Seltmann H, Neitzel H, Orfanos CE. Establishmentand characterization of an immortalized human sebaceous glandcell line (SZ95). J Investig Dermatol . 1999;113:1011–1020.189. Emanuel SV. Quantitative determinations of the sebaceousglands’ function, with particular mention of the method em-ployed. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh ). 1936:444–456.190. Schroder HG, Ziegler M, Nickisch K, Kaufmann J, el Etreby MF.Effects of topically applied antiandrogenic compounds on seba-ceous glands of hamster ears and ﬂank organs. J Investig Derma-tol. 1989;92:769–773.191. Smith JG. Hormonal effects on aged human sebaceous glands.Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh ). 1961:61–65.192. Wirth H, Gloor M, Kimmel W. Inﬂuence of cyproterone acetateand estradiol on cell kinetics in the sebaceous gland of the goldenhamster ear. Arch Dermatol Res . 1980;268:277–281.193. Bologna JL. Aging skin. Am J Med. 1995:98(suppl 1A)99S–102S.
194. Labrie F. Extragonadal synthesis of sex steroids: intracrinology.Ann Endocrinol (Paris ). 2003;64:95–107.195. Labrie F. Adrenal androgens and intracrinology. Semin Reprod
194. Labrie F. Extragonadal synthesis of sex steroids: intracrinology.Ann Endocrinol (Paris ). 2003;64:95–107.195. Labrie F. Adrenal androgens and intracrinology. Semin ReprodMed. 2004;22:299–309.196. Labrie F, Belanger A, Simard J, Van LT, Labrie C. DHEA andperipheral androgen and estrogen formation: intracinology. AnnN Y Acad Sci . 1995;774:16–28.197. Labrie F, Luu-The V, Belanger A, et al. Is dehydroepiandrosteronea hormone? J Endocrinol . 2005;187:169–196.198. Sawaya ME, Penneys NS. Immunohistochemical distribution ofaromatase and 3B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in human hairfollicle and sebaceous gland. J Cutan Pathol . 1992;19:309–314.199. Thiboutot D, Gilliland K, Light J, Lookingbill D. Androgen metab-olism in sebaceous glands from subjects with and without acne.Arch Dermatol . 1999;135:1041–1045.200. Thiboutot D, Harris G, Iles V, Cimis G, Gilliland K, Hagari S.Activity of the typ e 1 5 alpha-reductase exhibits regional differ-
ences in isolated sebaceous glands and whole skin. J InvestigDermatol . 1995;105:209–214.201. Sullivan DA. Sex hormones and Sjogren’s syndrome. J Rheuma-tol. 1997;24 Suppl 50:17–32.202. Thiboutot D, Martin P, Volikos L, Gilliland K. Oxidative activity ofthe type 2 isozyme of 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase(17beta-HSD) predominates in human sebaceous glands. J Inves-tig Dermatol . 1998;111:390–395.203. Thiboutot DM, Knaggs H, Gilliland K, Hagari S. Activity of type 15 alpha-reductase is greater in the follicular infrainfundibulumcompared with the epidermis. Br J Dermatol . 1997;136:166–171.204. Bain J. The many faces of testosterone. Clin Interv Aging . 2007;2:567–576.205. Cinci G, Pagani R, Pandolﬁ ML, Porcelli B, Pizzichini M, MarinelloE. Effects of testosterone on cholesterol levels and fatty acidcomposition in the rat. Life Sci . 1993;53:91–97.206. Gross SK, Lyerla TA, Evans JE, McCluer RH. Expression of glyco-
sphingolipids in serum-free primary cultures of mouse kidneycells: male-female differences and androgen sensitivity. Mol CellBiochem . 1994;137:25–31.207. Hall RE, Birrell SN, Tilley WD, Sutherland RL. MDA-MB-453, anandrogen-responsive human breast carcinoma cell line with highlevel androgen receptor expression. Eur J Cancer . 1994;30:484–490.208. Ideta R, Seki T, Adachi K. Sequence analysis and characterizationof FAR-17c, an androgen-dependent gene in the ﬂank organs ofhamsters. J Dermatol Sci . 1995;9:94–102.209. Marra CA, de Alaniz MJ. Regulatory effect of various steroidhormones on the incorporation and metabolism of [14C]stearatein rat hepatoma cells in culture. Mol Cell Biochem . 1995;145:1–9.210. Mayes JS, Watson GH. Direct effects of sex steroid hormones onadipose tissues and obesity. Obes Rev . 2004;5:197–216.211. Ojeda MS, Gomez N, Gimenez MS. Androgen regulation of lunglipids in the male rat. Lipids . 1997;32:57–62.
lipids in the male rat. Lipids . 1997;32:57–62.212. Saad F, Gooren L. The role of testosterone in the metabolicsyndrome: a review. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol . 2009;114:40–43.213. Seyama Y, Hida A, Hayashi S, Buzzell GR. Androgenic control of1-alkyl-2,3-diacylglycerol in the harderian gland of the goldenhamster, Mesocricetus auratus. J Biochem . 1996;119:799–804.214. Swinnen JV, Esquenet M, Goossens K, Heyns W, Verhoeven G.Androgens stimulate fatty acid synthase in the human prostatecancer cell line LNCaP. Cancer Res . 1997;57:1086–1090.215. Swinnen JV, Heemers H, Heyns W, Verhoeven G. Androgenregulation of lipogenesis. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:379–387.216. Swinnen JV, Ulrix W, Heyns W, Verhoeven G. Coordinate regu-lation of lipogenic gene expression by androgens: evidence for acascade mechanism involving sterol regulatory element bindingproteins. Proc Natl Acad Sc iUSA . 1997;94:12975–12980.217. Swinnen JV, Van Veldhoven PP, Esquenet M, Heyns W, Verho-
even G. Androgens markedly stimulate the accumulation ofneutral lipids in the human prostatic adenocarcinoma cell lineLNCaP. Endocrinology . 1996;137:4468–4474.
even G. Androgens markedly stimulate the accumulation ofneutral lipids in the human prostatic adenocarcinoma cell lineLNCaP. Endocrinology . 1996;137:4468–4474.218. Swinnen JV, Verhoeven G. Androgens and the control of lipidmetabolism in human prostate cancer cells. J Steroid BiochemMol Biol . 1998;65:191–198.219. Yamamoto A, Ito M. Sebaceous gland activity and urinary andro-gen levels in children. J Dermatol Sci . 1992;4:98–104.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1973Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
220. Heemers H, Vanderhoydonc F, Roskams T, et al. Androgensstimulate coordinated lipogenic gene expression in normal targettissues in vivo. Mol Cell Endocrinol . 2003;205:21–31.221. Heemers HV, Verhoeven G, Swinnen JV. Androgen activation ofthe sterol regulatory element-binding protein pathway: currentinsights. Mol Endocrinol. 2006;20:2265–2277.222. Steagall RJ, Yamagami H, Wickham LA, Sullivan DA. Androgencontrol of gene expression in the rabbit meibomian gland. AdvExp Med Biol . 2002;506:465–476.223. Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Ullman MD, et al. Androgen inﬂuenceon the meibomian gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2000;41:3732–3742.224. Yamagami H, Richards SM, Sullivan BD, Liu M, Steagall RJ, Sulli-van DA. Gender-associated differences in gene expression of themeibomian gland. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:459–463.225. Yamagami H, Schirra F, Liu M, Richards SM, Sullivan BD, Sullivan
DA. Androgen inﬂuence on gene expression in the meibomiangland. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:477–481.226. Clark JH. Mechanisms of action of steroid hormones. In: WilsonJD, ed. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology Philadelphia: WBSaunders;1992:35–90.227. Lee HJ, Chang C. Recent advances in androgen receptor action.Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003;60:1613–1622.228. Smithson G, Couse JF, Lubahn DB, Korach KS, Kincade PW. Therole of estrogen receptors and androgen receptors in sex steroidregulation of B lymphopoiesis. J Immunol . 1998;161:27–34.229. Rocha EM, Wickham LA, da Silveira LA, et al. Identiﬁcation ofandrogen receptor protein and 5alpha-reductase mRNA in humanocular tissues. Br J Ophthalmol . 2000;84:76–84.230. Wickham LA, Gao J, Toda I, Rocha EM, Ono M, Sullivan DA.Identiﬁcation of androgen, estrogen and progesterone receptormRNAs in the eye. Acta Ophthalmol Scand . 2000;78:146–153.231. Liu S, Khandelwal P, Hatton M, Sullivan DA. Culture, immortal-
ization and characterization of human meibomian gland epithelialcells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2010;51:3993–4005.232. Voet DV. Biochemistry . 2 ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.;1995.233. Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics: Universal Protein ResourceKnowledgebase, http://www.expasy.uniprot.org/index.shtml.2002. Accessed July 14, 2010.234. Herrmann T, Buchkremer F, Gosch I, Hall AM, Bernlohr DA,Stremmel W. Mouse fatty acid transport protein 4 (FATP4): char-acterization of the gene and functional assessment as a very longchain acyl-CoA synthetase. Gene . 2001;270:31–40.235. Tvrdik P, Westerberg R, Silve S, et al. Role of a new mammaliangene family in the biosynthesis of very long chain fatty acids andsphingolipids. J Cell Biol. 2000;149:707–718.236. Karlsson M, Reue K, Xia YR, et al. Exon-intron organization andchromosomal localization of the mouse monoglyceride lipasegene. Gene. 2001;272:11–18.237. Lawn RM, Wade DP, Garvin MR, et al. The Tangier disease gene
product ABC1 controls the cellular apolipoprotein-mediated lipidremoval pathway. J Clin Invest. 1999;104:R25–R31.238. Santamarina-Fojo S, Remaley AT, Neufeld EB, Brewer HB Jr. Reg-ulation and intracellular trafﬁcking of the ABCA1 transporter. JLipid Res . 2001;42:1339–1345.239. Wang N, Silver DL, Thiele C, Tall AR. ATP-binding cassette trans-porter A1 (ABCA1) functions as a cholesterol efﬂux regulatoryprotein. J Biol Chem . 2001;276:23742–23747.240. Hettema EH, Tabak HF. Transport of fatty acids and metabolitesacross the peroxisomal membrane. Biochim Biophys Acta . 2000;1486:18–27.241. Sakakura Y, Shimano H, Sone H, et al. Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins induce an entire pathway of cholesterol synthe-sis.Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001;286:176–183.242. Shimano H, Horton JD, Shimomura I, Hammer RE, Brown MS,
Goldstein JL. Isoform 1c of sterol regulatory element bindingprotein is less active than isoform 1a in livers of transgenic miceand in cultured cells. J Clin Invest. 1997;99:846–854.243. Shimano H, Yahagi N, Amemiya-Kudo M, et al. Sterol regulatory
243. Shimano H, Yahagi N, Amemiya-Kudo M, et al. Sterol regulatoryelement-binding protein-1 as a key transcription factor for nutri-tional induction of lipogenic enzyme genes. J Biol Chem . 1999;274:35832–35839.244. Shimano H. Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs):transcriptional regulators of lipid synthetic genes. Prog Lipid Res.2001;40:439–452.245. Labrie F, Luu-The V, Lin SX, et al. Intracrinology: role of the familyof 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases in human physiologyand disease. J Mol Endocrinol. 2000;25:1–16.246. Asano K, Maruyama S, Usui T, Fujimoto N. Regulation of estrogenreceptor alpha and beta expression by testosterone in the ratprostate gland. Endocr J. 2003;50:281–287.247. Lindberg MK. Estrogen receptor (ER)-beta reduces ERalpha-regu-lated gene transcription, supporting a “ying yang” relationshipbetween ERalpha and ERbeta in mice. Mol Endocrinol. 2003;17:203–208.248. Stoeckelhuber M, Messmer EM, Schmidt C, Xiao F, Schubert C,
Klug J. Immunohistochemical analysis of secretoglobin SCGB 2A1expression in human ocular glands and tissues. Histochem CellBiol. 2006;126:103–109.249. Beato M, Klug J. Steroid hormone receptors: an update. HumReprod Update . 2000;6:225–236.250. Kampa M, Pelekanou V, Castanas E. Membrane-initiated steroidaction in breast and prostate cancer. Steroids . 2008;73:953–960.251. Labrie F, Belanger A, Cusan L, Gomez JL, Candas B. Markeddecline in serum concentrations of adrenal C19 sex steroid pre-cursors and conjugated androgen metabolites during aging. J ClinEndocrinol Metab . 1997;82:2396–2402.252. Lahita RG. The connective tissue diseases and the overall inﬂu-ence of gender. Int J Fertil Menopausal Stud. 1996;41:156–165.253. Sullivan DA, Belanger A, Cermak JM, et al. Are women withSjogren’s syndrome androgen-deﬁcient? J Rheumatol. 2003;30:2413–2419.254. Loy CJ, Yong EL. Sex, infertility and the molecular biology of the
androgen receptor. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2001;13:315–321.255. Brinkmann AO. Molecular basis of androgen insensitivity. MolCell Endocrinol. 2001;179:105–109.256. Anderson J, Abrahamsson PA, Crawford D, Miller K, Tombal B.Management of advanced prostate cancer: can we improve onandrogen deprivation therapy? BJU Int. 2008;101:1497–1501.257. Cermak JM, Krenzer KL, Sullivan RM, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Iscomplete androgen insensitivity syndrome associated with alter-ations in the meibomian gland and ocular surface? Cornea. 2003;22:516–521.258. Krenzer KL, Dana MR, Ullman MD, et al. Effect of androgendeﬁciency on the human meibomian gland and ocular surface.J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000;85:4874–4882.259. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Cermak JM, Krenzer KL, Dana MR, SullivanDA. Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: effect on humanmeibomian gland secretions. Arch Ophthalmo l. 2002;120:1689–1699.260. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Krenzer KL, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Impact
of antiandrogen treatment on the fatty acid proﬁle of neutrallipids in human meibomian gland secretions. J Clin EndocrinolMetab . 2000;85:4866–4873.261. Pﬂugfelder SC, Tseng SC, Sanabria O, et al. Evaluation of subjec-tive assessments and objective diagnostic tests for diagnosingtear-ﬁlm disorders known to cause ocular irritation . Cornea.1998;17:38–56.262. Physicians’ Desk Reference. 53rd ed. Montvale, NJ: Medical Eco-nomics Co.; 1999.263. Schaumberg DA, Dana R, Buring JE, Sullivan DA. Prevalence ofdry eye disease among US men: estimates from the Physicians’Health Studies. Arch Ophthalmo l. 2009;127:763–768.264. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Impact of androgendeﬁciency on the lipid proﬁles in human meibomian gland secre-tions. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:449–458.265. Tamer C, Oksuz H, Sogut S. Androgen status of the nonautoim-mune dry eye subtypes. Ophthalmic Res. 2006;38:280–286.266. Zeligs MA, Gordon K. Dehydroepiandrosterone Therapy for the
Treatment of Dry Eye Disorders. International Patent ApplicationWOL 94/04144, March, 1994.
266. Zeligs MA, Gordon K. Dehydroepiandrosterone Therapy for theTreatment of Dry Eye Disorders. International Patent ApplicationWOL 94/04144, March, 1994.267. Mamilis N. Dry eyes and testosterone deﬁciency in women. In:Abstracts of the Centennial Annual Meeting of the AmericanAcademy of Ophthalmology Chicago, IL: American Academy ofOphthalmology; 1996:132.1974 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
268. Belanger A. Determination of non-conjugated and conjugatedsteroids in human plasma. Proceedings of the Fifth Symposiumon the Analysis of Steroids, Szombathely, Hungary, May 3–5,1993. Budapest: Akademia Kiado: 1994;99–110.269. Labrie F. Intracrinology. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1991;78:C113–C118.270. Labrie F, Diamond P, Cusan L, Gomez JL, Belanger A, Candas B.Effect of 12-month dehydroepiandrosterone replacement therapyon bone, vagina, and endometrium in postmenopausal women.J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1997;82:3498–3505.271. Labrie F, Belanger A, Cusan L, Candas B. Physiological changes indehydroepiandrosterone are not reﬂected by serum levels ofactive androgens and estrogens but of their metabolites: intracri-nology. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1997;82:2403–2409.272. Appelmans M. La Kerato-conjonctivite seche de Gougerot-Sjogren. Arch Ophtalmol. 1948;81:577–588.273. Bizzarro A, Valentini G, Di Martino G, DaPonte A, De Bellis A,
Iacono G. Inﬂuence of testosterone therapy on clinical and im-munological features of autoimmune diseases associated withKlinefelter’s syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1987;64:32–36.274. Bru ¨ckner R. U ¨ber einen erfolgreich mit Perandren behandeltenFall von Sjo ¨grenïschem Symptomenkomplex. Ophthalmologica.1945;110:37–42.275. Lagresa MNS. Inducers of tears: androgens and human gam-maglobulin. Rev Cubana Oftalmol . 2000:35–43.276. Radnot M, Nemeth B. [The effect of testosterone preparations onthe lacrimal glands.]. Orv Hetil. 1954;95:580–581.277. Radnot M, Nemeth B. Effect of testosterone preparation on thelacrymal glands (In: German). Ophthalmologica. 1955;129:376–380.278. Worda C, Nepp J, Huber JC, Sator MO. Treatment of keratocon-junctivitis sicca with topical androgen. Maturitas. 2001;37:209–212.279. Schafer G, Krause W. The effect of estradiol on the sebaceousgland of the hamster ear and its antagonism by tamoxifen. ArchDermatol Res . 1985;277:230–234.
Dermatol Res . 1985;277:230–234.280. Sweeney TM, Szarnicki RJ, Strauss JS, Pochi PE. The effect ofestrogen and androgen on the sebaceous gland turnover time.J Investig Dermatol . 1969;53:8–10.281. Strauss JS, Kligman AM, Pochi PE. The effect of androgens andestrogens on human sebaceous glands. J Investig Dermatol .1962;39:139–155.282. Sansone-Bazzano G, Reisner RM, Bazzano G. A possible mecha-nism of action of estrogen at the cellular level in a model seba-ceous gland. J Investig Dermatol . 1972;59:299–304.283. Azzi L, El Alfy M, Labrie F. Gender differences and effects of sexsteroids and dehydroepiandrosterone on androgen and oestrogenalpha receptors in mouse sebaceous glands. Br J Dermatol .2006;154:21–27.284. Saihan EM, Burton JL. Sebaceous gland suppression in femaleacne patients by combined glucocorticoid-oestrogen therapy.Br J Dermatol . 1980;103:139–142.285. Pochi PE, Strauss JS. Sebaceous gland inhibition from combined
glucocorticoid-estrogen treatment. Arch Dermatol . 1976;112:1108–1109.286. Smith ES. Direct photomicroscopic evidence for rapid nuclearpenetration of lysosomal products in steroid targets after estro-gen in vivo. Endocrinology. 1971;88:A151.287. Wiren KM. Androgens and bone growth: it’s location, location,location. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2005;5:626–632.288. Esmaeli B, Harvey JT, Hewlett B. Immunohistochemical evidencefor estrogen receptors in meibomian glands. Ophthalmology .2000;107:180–184.289. Auw-Haedrich C, Feltgen N. Estrogen receptor expression inmeibomian glands and its correlation with age and dry-eye pa-rameters. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol . 2003;241:705–709.290. Suzuki T, Sullivan BD, Liu M, et al. Estrogen and progesteroneeffects on the morphology of the mouse meibomian gland. AdvExp Med Biol . 2002;506:483–488.291. Suzuki T, Schirra F, Richards SM, Jensen RV, Sullivan DA. Estro-
gen and progesterone control of gene expression in the mousemeibomian gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2008;49:1797–1808.292. Nokelainen P, Peltoketo H, Vihko R, Vihko P. Expression cloning
gen and progesterone control of gene expression in the mousemeibomian gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2008;49:1797–1808.292. Nokelainen P, Peltoketo H, Vihko R, Vihko P. Expression cloningof a novel estrogenic mouse 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-nase/17-ketosteroid reductase (m17HSD7), previously describedas a prolactin receptor-associated protein (PRAP) in rat. MolEndocrinol. 1998;12:1048–1059.293. Baez JM, Barbour SE, Cohen DE. Phosphatidylcholine transferprotein promotes apolipoprotein A-I-mediated lipid efﬂux in Chi-nese hamster ovary cells. J Biol Chem . 2002;277:6198–6206.294. Soni KG, Lehner R, Metalnikov P, et al. Carboxylesterase 3 (EC3.1.1.1) is a major adipocyte lipase. J Biol Chem . 2004;279:40683–40689.295. Furuyama N, Fujisawa Y. Regulation of collagenolytic cysteineprotease synthesis by estrogen in osteoclasts. Steroids. 2000;65:371–378.296. Schaumberg DA, Buring JE, Sullivan DA, Dana MR. Hormone
replacement therapy and dry eye syndrome. JAMA. 2001;286:2114–2119.297. PharMetrics. Prevalence and treatment of dry eye in a managedcare population. Atlanta, GA: NDC Health Information Services;2000.298. Gurwood AS, Gurwood I, Gubman DT, Brzezicki LJ. Idiosyncraticocular symptoms associated with the estradiol transdermal estro-gen replacement patch system. Optom Vis Sci. 1995;72:29–33.299. Verbeck B. Ocular and metabolic ﬁndings in patients on oralcontraceptives (in German). Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 1973;162:612–621.300. Cabeza M, Miranda R. Stimulatory effect of progesterone and 5beta-progesterone on lipid synthesis in hamster ﬂank organs.Steroids . 1997;62:782–788.301. Foreman MI, Devitt H, Clanachan I. Inhibition of dihydrotestos-terone-mediated hamster sebaceous gland hypertrophy by pro-gesterone. Br J Dermatol . 1984;110:185–186.302. Girard J, Barbier A, Laﬁlle C. Inhibition of testosterone metabo-
lism and lipogenesis in animal sebaceous glands by progesterone.Arch Dermatol Res . 1980;269:281–290.303. Matias JR, Malloy VL, Orentreich N. Synergistic antiandrogeniceffects of topical combinations of 5 alpha-reductase and andro-gen receptor inhibitors in the hamster sebaceous glands. J Inves-tig Dermatol . 1988;91:429–433.304. Nuck BA, Fogelson SL, Lucky AW. Topical minoxidil does not actas an antiandrogen in the ﬂank organ of the golden Syrian ham-ster. Arch Dermatol . 1987;123:59–61.305. Hinks WM, Thody AJ, Shuster S. Proceedings: Effect of proges-terone on sebaceous gland activity in the rat. J Endocrinol .1975;64:48P–49P.306. Pal P, Bhattacharyya SP. Inﬂuence of progesterone on the activityof sebaceous gland in rat. Indian J Dermatol. 1985;30:11–19.307. van der Lely MA. The nature of the action of progesterone on thesebaceous gland of the rat. Dermatologica . 1966;133:452–455.308. Zheng Y, Prouty SM, Harmon A, Sundberg JP, Stenn KS, Parimoo
S. Scd3: a novel gene of the stearoyl-CoA desaturase family withrestricted expression in skin. Genomics . 2001;71:182–191.309. Chia EM, Mitchell P, Rochtchina E, Lee AJ, Maroun R, Wang JJ.Prevalence and associations of dry eye syndrome in an olderpopulation: the Blue Mountains Eye Study. Clin Exp Ophthalmol.2003;31:229–232.310. Den S, Shimizu K, Ikeda T, Tsubota K, Shimmura S, Shimazaki J.Association between meibomian gland changes and aging, sex, ortear function . Cornea. 2006;25:651–655.311. Lin PY, Tsai SY, Cheng CY, Liu JH, Chou P, Hsu WM. Prevalenceof dry eye among an elderly Chinese population in Taiwan: theShihpai Eye Study. Ophthalmology. 2003;110:1096–1101.312. Schaumberg DA, Sullivan DA, Buring JE, Dana MR. Prevalence ofdry eye syndrome among US women. Am J Ophthalmol . 2003;136:318–326.313. Soong HK, Martin NF, Wagoner MD, et al. Topical retinoid ther-
apy for squamous metaplasia of various ocular surface disorders.A multicenter, placebo-controlled double-masked study. Ophthal-mology . 1988;95:1442–1446.314. Egger SF, Huber-Spitzy V, Bohler K, Scholda C. Isotretinoin ad-
mology . 1988;95:1442–1446.314. Egger SF, Huber-Spitzy V, Bohler K, Scholda C. Isotretinoin ad-ministration in treatment of acne vulgaris. A prospective study ofIOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1975Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
the kind and extent of ocular complications (in German). Oph-thalmologe . 1995;92:17–20.315. Guy R, Ridden C, Kealey T. The improved organ maintenance ofthe human sebaceous gland: modeling in vitro the effects ofepidermal growth factor, androgens, estrogens, 13-cis retinoicacid, and phenol red. J Investig Dermatol . 1996;106:454–460.316. Orfanos CE, Zouboulis CC. Oral retinoids in the treatment ofseborrhoea and acne. Dermatology . 1998;196:140–147.317. Sato T, Imai N, Akimoto N, Sakiguchi T, Kitamura K, Ito A.Epidermal growth factor and 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 sup-press lipogenesis in hamster sebaceous gland cells in vitro. J In-vestig Dermatol . 2001;117:965–970.318. Zouboulis CC, Korge B, Akamatsu H, et al. Effects of 13-cis-retinoic acid, all-trans-retinoic acid, and acitretin on the prolifer-ation, lipid synthesis and keratin expression of cultured humansebocytes in vitro. J Investig Dermatol . 1991;96:792–797.
319. Tsukada M, Schroder M, Roos TC, et al. 13-cis retinoic acid exertsits speciﬁc activity on human sebocytes through selective intra-cellular isomerization to all-trans retinoic acid and binding toretinoid acid receptors. J Investig Dermatol . 2000;115:321–327.320. Lambert RW, Smith RE. Pathogenesis of blepharoconjunctivitiscomplicating 13-cis-retinoic acid (isotretinoin) therapy in a labo-ratory model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1988;29:1559–1564.321. Lambert RW, Smith RE. Effects of 13-cis-retinoic acid on thehamster meibomian gland. J Investig Dermatol . 1989;92:321–325.322. Kremer I, Gaton DD, David M, Gaton E, Shapiro A. Toxic effectsof systemic retinoids on meibomian glands. Ophthalmic Res.1994;26:124–128.323. Zouboulis CC. Isotretinoin revisited: pluripotent effects on hu-man sebaceous gland cells. J Investig Dermatol . 2006;126:2154–2156.324. Caffery BE, Josephson JE. Ocular side effects of isotretinoin ther-apy. J Am Optom Assoc. 1988;59:221–224.
apy. J Am Optom Assoc. 1988;59:221–224.325. Egger SF, Huber-Spitzy V, Bohler K, et al. Ocular side effectsassociated with 13-cis-retinoic acid therapy for acne vulgaris:clinical features, alterations of tearﬁlm and conjunctival ﬂora.Acta Ophthalmol Scand . 1995;73:355–357.326. Fraunfelder FT, LaBraico JM, Meyer SM. Adverse ocular reactionspossibly associated with isotretinoin. Am J Ophthalmol . 1985;100:534–537.327. Fraunfelder FT, Fraunfelder FW, Edwards R. Ocular side effectspossibly associated with isotretinoin usage. Am J Ophthalmol .2001;132:299–305.328. Gross EG, Helfgott MA. Retinoids and the eye. Dermatol Clin.1992;10:521–531.329. Jaanus SD. Ocular side effects of selected systemic drugs. OptomClin. 1992;2:73–96.330. Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV.Meibomian gland morphology and tear osmolarity: changes withAccutane therapy . Cornea. 1991;10:286–290.331. Perry MD, McEvoy GK. Isotretinoin: new therapy for severe acne.
Clin Pharm . 1983;2:12–19.332. Bozkurt B, Irkec MT, Atakan N, Orhan M, Geyik PO. Lacrimalfunction and ocular complications in patients treated with sys-temic isotretinoin. Eur J Ophthalmol . 2002;12:173–176.333. Denis P, Nordmann JP, Saiag P, Liotet S, Laroche L, Saraux H.Chronic blepharoconjunctivitis during a treatment with acitretin(Soriatane) (in French). J Fr Ophtalmol . 1993;16:191–194.334. Ubels JL, Veenstra E, Ditlev J, Ingersoll K. Interactions of testos-terone and all-trans retinoic acid in regulation of androgen recep-tor expression in rat lacrimal gland. Exp Eye Res . 2003;77:741–748.335. Ubels JL, Wertz JT, Ingersoll KE, Jackson RS, Aupperlee MD.Down-regulation of androgen receptor expression and inhibitionof lacrimal gland cell proliferation by retinoic acid. Exp Eye Res .2002;75:561–571.336. Karlsson T, Vahlquist A, Kedishvili N, Torma H. 13-cis-retinoic
acid competitively inhibits 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid oxidation byretinol dehydrogenase RoDH-4: a mechanism for its anti-andro-genic effects in sebaceous glands? Biochem Biophys Res Com-
acid competitively inhibits 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid oxidation byretinol dehydrogenase RoDH-4: a mechanism for its anti-andro-genic effects in sebaceous glands? Biochem Biophys Res Com-mun. 2003;303:273–278.337. Maskin SL, Tseng SC. Clonal growth and differentiation of rabbitmeibomian gland epithelium in serum-free culture: differentialmodulation by EGF and FGF. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1992;33:205–217.338. Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Kiss-Palvolgyi I, Smith RE. Meibomiangland dysfunction, II: The role of keratinization in a rabbit modelof MGD. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1989;30:936–945.339. Cermak JM, Papas AS, Sullivan RM, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Nutri-ent intake in women with primary and secondary Sjogren’s syn-drome. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2003;57:328–334.340. Shimazaki J, Goto E, Ono M, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Meibomiangland dysfunction in patients with Sjogren syndrome. Ophthal-mology . 1998;105:1485–1488.341. Kenouch S, Lombes M, Delahaye F, Eugene E, Bonvalet JP,
Farman N. Human skin as target for aldosterone: coexpression ofmineralocorticoid receptors and 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydro-genase. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 1994;79:1334–1341.342. Millar TJ, Pearson ML. The effects of dietary and pharmacologicalmanipulation on lipid production in the meibomian and hard-erian glands of the rabbit. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:431–440.343. Mohammadpour M, Javadi MA, Karimian F. Limbal stem celldeﬁciency in the context of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy.Eur J Ophthalmol. 2006;16:870–872.344. Bohm M, Luger TA. The pilosebaceous unit is part of the skinimmune system. Dermatology . 1998;196:75–79.345. De Andrade AD, Birnbaum J, Magalon C, et al. Fel d I levels in catanal glands. Clin Exp Allergy. 1996;26:178–180.346. Hornemann SS. Interleukin 1 alpha mRNA and protein are ex-pressed in cultures of human sebocytes at steady-state and theirlevels are barely inﬂuenced by lipopolysaccharides. J InvestigDermatol . 1997;108:382.
Dermatol . 1997;108:382.347. Metze D, Jurecka W, Gebhart W, Schmidt J, Mainitz M, NiebauerG. Immunohistochemical demonstration of immunoglobulin A inhuman sebaceous and sweat glands. J Investig Dermatol . 1989;92:13–17.348. Hykin PG, Bron AJ. Age-related morphological changes in lidmargin and meibomian gland anatomy . Cornea. 1992;11:334–342.349. Schaumberg DA, Sullivan DA, Dana MR. Epidemiology of dry eyesyndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:989–998.350. Kohno T, Ohnishi Y. Histopathology of chronic meibomian glandabnormalities in experimental PCB-poisoned monkeys (in Japa-nese). Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi. 1987;78:254–258.351. Ohnishi Y, Kohno T, Ishibashi T, Shinoda Y. Macroscopic obser-vation of the meibomian gland of the monkeys with experimentalPCB intoxication (in Japanese). Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi. 1983;74:240–245.352. Dougherty JM, McCulley JP. Analysis of the free fatty acid com-ponent of meibomian secretions in chronic blepharitis. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1986;27:52–56.353. McCulley JP, Dougherty JM. Bacterial aspects of chronic blepha-ritis. Trans Ophthalmol Soc UK. 1986;105:314–318.354. Jester JV, Rife L, Nii D, Luttrull JK, Wilson L, Smith RE. In vivobiomicroscopy and photography of meibomian glands in a rabbitmodel of meibomian gland dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci. 1982;22:660–667.355. Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Kuchiba A, Yamaguchi T, Amano S.Contact lens wear is associated with decrease of meibomianglands. Ophthalmology. 2009;116:379–384.356. Henriquez AS, Korb DR. Meibomian glands and contact lenswear. Br J Ophthalmol . 1981;65:108–111.357. Gutgesell VJ, Stern GA, Hood CI. Histopathology of meibomiangland dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol . 1982;94:383–387.358. Obata H, Horiuchi H, Miyata K, Tsuru T, Machinami R. Histo-pathological study of the meibomian glands in 72 autopsy cases(in Japanese). Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1994;98:765–771.
359. Ong BL. Relation between contact lens wear and Meibomiangland dysfunction. Optom Vis Sci . 1996;73:208–210.
359. Ong BL. Relation between contact lens wear and Meibomiangland dysfunction. Optom Vis Sci . 1996;73:208–210.360. Hom MM, Martinson JR, Knapp LL, Paugh JR. Prevalence ofMeibomian gland dysfunction. Optom Vis Sci . 1990;67:710–712.361. Goto E, Endo K, Suzuki A, Fujikura Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K.Tear evaporation dynamics in normal subjects and subjects with1976 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Invest OphthalmolVis Sci . 2003;44:533–539.362. Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV.Meibomian gland dysfunction in chronic blepharitis . Cornea.1991;10:277–285.363. Lambert R, Smith RE. Hyperkeratinization in a rabbit model ofmeibomian gland dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol . 1988;105:703–705.364. Nicolaides N, Santos EC, Smith RE, Jester JV. Meibomian glanddysfunction, III: meibomian gland lipids. Invest Ophthalmol VisSci. 1989;30:946–951.365. Ohnishi Y, Kohno T. Polychlorinated biphenyls poisoning inmonkey eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1979;18:981–984.366. Yagyu H, Kitamine T, Osuga J, et al. Absence of ACAT-1 attenu-ates atherosclerosis but causes dry eye and cutaneous xanthoma-tosis in mice with congenital hyperlipidemia. J Biol Chem . 2000;275:21324–21330.367. Cui CY, Smith JA, Schlessinger D, Chan CC. X-linked anhidroticectodermal dysplasia disruption yields a mouse model for ocular
surface disease and resultant blindness. Am J Pathol . 2005;167:89–95.368. Thiboutot D, Sivarajah A, Gilliland K, Cong Z, Clawson G. Themelanocortin 5 receptor is expressed in human sebaceous glandsand rat preputial cells. J Investig Dermatol . 2000;115:614–619.369. Kiguchi K, Bol D, Carbajal S, et al. Constitutive expression oferbB2 in epidermis of transgenic mice results in epidermal hy-perproliferation and spontaneous skin tumor development. On-cogene. 2000;19:4243–4254.370. Zouboulis CC, Boschnakow A. Chronological ageing and photo-ageing of the human sebaceous gland. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2001;26:600–607.371. Park YG, Hayasaka S, Takagishi Y, Inouye M, Okumoto M, Oda S.Histological characteristics of the pelage skin of rough fur mice(C3H/HeJ- ruf/ruf). Exp Anim . 2001;50:179–182.372. Naito A, Yoshida H, Nishioka E, et al. TRAF6-deﬁcient micedisplay hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA . 2002;99:8766–8771.
USA . 2002;99:8766–8771.373. Miyazaki M, Man WC, Ntambi JM. Targeted disruption of stearoyl-CoA desaturase1 gene in mice causes atrophy of sebaceous andmeibomian glands and depletion of wax esters in the eyelid. TheJournal of Nutrition. 2001;131:2260–2268.374. Jong MC, Gijbels MJ, Dahlmans VE, et al. Hyperlipidemia andcutaneous abnormalities in transgenic mice overexpressing hu-man apolipoprotein C1. J Clin Invest. 1998;101:145–152.375. Hayashi Y, Liu CY, Jester JJ, et al. Excess biglycan causes eyelidmalformation by perturbing muscle development and TGF-alphasignaling. Dev Biol. 2005;277:222–234.376. Majumder K, Shawlot W, Schuster G, Harrison W, Elder FF,Overbeek PA. YAC rescue of downless locus mutations in mice.Mamm Genome. 1998;9:863–868.377. Jester JV, Rajagopalan S, Rodrigues M. Meibomian gland changesin the rhino (hrrhhrrh) mouse. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1988;29:1190–1194.378. Chan CC, Gery I, Kohn LD, Nussenblatt RB, Mozes E, Singer DS.
Periocular inﬂammation in mice with experimental systemic lu-pus erythematosus: a new experimental blepharitis and its mod-ulation. J Immunol. 1995;154:4830–4835.379. Cui CY, Durmowicz M, Ottolenghi C, et al. Inducible mEDA-A1transgene mediates sebaceous gland hyperplasia and differentialformation of two types of mouse hair follicles. Hum Mol Genet.2003;12:2931–2940.380. Plikus M, Wang WP, Liu J, Wang X, Jiang TX, Chuong CM.Morpho-regulation of ectodermal organs: integument pathologyand phenotypic variations in K14-Noggin engineered micethrough modulation of bone morphogenic protein pathway.Am J Pathol . 2004;164:1099–1114.381. Cascallana JL, Bravo A, Donet E, et al. Ectoderm-targeted overex-pression of the glucocorticoid receptor induces hypohidroticectodermal dysplasia. Endocrinology . 2005;146:2629–2638.382. Huang J, Dattilo LK, Rajagopal R, et al. FGF-regulated BMP signal-
ing is required for eyelid closure and to specify conjunctivalepithelial cell fate. Development . 2009;136:1741–1750.383. Yeh S, De Paiva CS, Hwang CS, et al. Spontaneous T cell mediated
ing is required for eyelid closure and to specify conjunctivalepithelial cell fate. Development . 2009;136:1741–1750.383. Yeh S, De Paiva CS, Hwang CS, et al. Spontaneous T cell mediatedkeratoconjunctivitis in Aire-deﬁcient mice. Br J Ophthalmol .2009;93:1260–1264.384. Chang SH, Jobling S, Brennan K, Headon DJ. Enhanced Edarsignalling has pleiotropic effects on craniofacial and cutaneousglands. PLoS One. 2009;4:e7591.385. Ong BL, Hodson SA, Wigham T, Miller F, Larke JR. Evidence forkeratin proteins in normal and abnormal human meibomian ﬂu-ids.Curr Eye Res . 1991;10:1113–1119.386. Kellum RE. Acne vulgaris: studies in pathogenesis—relative irri-tancy of free fatty acids from C2 to C16. Arch Dermatol . 1968;97:722–726.387. Obata H. Anatomy and histopathology of human Meibomiangland . Cornea. 2002;21(Suppl. 2):S70–S74.388. Mathers WD, Billborough M. Meibomian gland function and giantpapillary conjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol . 1992;114:188–192.
389. Knop E, Knop N. Meibomian glands. Part IV: Functional interac-tions in the pathogenesis of meibomian gland Dysfunction(MGD)] Meibom-Dru ¨sen Teil IV: Funktionelle Interaktionen inder Pathogenese der Dysfunktion (MGD) (in German). Ophthal-mologe . 2009;106:980–987.390. Obata H, Yamamoto S, Horiuchi H, Machinami R. Histopathologicstudy of human lacrimal gland. Statistical analysis with specialreference to aging. Ophthalmology. 1995;102:678–686.391. Proctor GB, Carpenter GH. Regulation of salivary gland functionby autonomic nerves. Auton Neurosci . 2007;133:3–18.392. Teymoortash A, Sommer F, Mandic R, et al. Intraglandular appli-cation of botulinum toxin leads to structural and functionalchanges in rat acinar cells. Br J Pharmacol. 2007;152:161–167.393. Osailan SM, Proctor GB, McGurk M, Paterson KL. Intraoral ductligation without inclusion of the parasympathetic nerve supplyinduces rat submandibular gland atrophy. Int J Exp Pathol. 2006;87:41–48.
87:41–48.394. McCulley JP, Dougherty JM, Deneau DG. Classiﬁcation of chronicblepharitis. Ophthalmology. 1982;89:1173–1180.395. Messmer EM, Torres SE, Mackert MI, Zapp DM, Kampik A. In vivoconfocal microscopy in blepharitis (in German). Klin MonatsblAugenheilkd . 2005;222:894–900.396. Matsumoto Y, Shigeno Y, Sato E, et al. The evaluation of thetreatment response in obstructive meibomian gland disease by invivo laser confocal microscopy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthal-mol. 2009;247:821–829.397. Luo L, Li DQ, Doshi A, Farley W, Corrales RM, Pﬂugfelder SC.Experimental dry eye stimulates production of inﬂammatory cy-tokines and MMP-9 and activates MAPK signaling pathways onthe ocular surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2004;45:4293–4301.398. Jackson WB. Blepharitis: current strategies for diagnosis and man-agement. Can J Ophthalmol. 2008;43:170–179.399. Aronowicz JD, Shine WE, Oral D, Vargas JM, McCulley JP. Short
term oral minocycline treatment of meibomianitis. Br J Ophthal-mol. 2006;90:856–860.400. Souchier M, Joffre C, Gregoire S, et al. Changes in meibomianfatty acids and clinical signs in patients with meibomian glanddysfunction after minocycline treatment. Br J Ophthalmol . 2008;92:819–822.401. English FP, Nutting WB. Demodicosis of ophthalmic concern.Am J Ophthalmol . 1981;91:362–372.402. Coston TO. Demodex folliculorum blepharitis. Trans Am Oph-thalmol Soc. 1967;65:361–392.403. Czepita D, Kuzna-Grygiel W, Czepita M, Grobelny A. Demodexfolliculorum and Demodex brevis as a cause of chronic marginalblepharitis. Ann Acad Med Stetin. 2007;53:63–67.404. McCulley JP, Sciallis GF. Meibomian keratoconjunctivitis. Am JOphthalmol . 1977;84:788–793.405. Heiligenhaus A, Koch JM, Kruse FE, Schwarz C, Waubke TN.Diagnosis and differentiation of dry eye disorders (in German).Ophthalmologe . 1995;92:6–11.406. Sullivan DA, Yamagami H, Liu M, et al. Sex steroids, the meibo-
mian gland and evaporative dry eye. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;
406. Sullivan DA, Yamagami H, Liu M, et al. Sex steroids, the meibo-mian gland and evaporative dry eye. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2002;506:389–399.IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4 Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathophysiology 1977Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
407. McCulley JP, Shine WE. The lipid layer of tears: dependent onmeibomian gland function. Exp Eye Res . 2004;78:361–365.408. McCulley JP, Shine WE. Meibomian gland function and the tearlipid layer. Ocul Surf . 2003;1:97–106.409. Gilbard JP, Gray KL, Rossi SR. A proposed mechanism for in-creased tear-ﬁlm osmolarity in contact lens wearers. Am J Oph-thalmol . 1986;102:505–507.410. Gilbard JP, Farris RL. Tear osmolarity and ocular surface disease inkeratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arch Ophthalmo l. 1979;97:1642–1646.411. Luo L, Li DQ, Corrales RM, Pﬂugfelder SC. Hyperosmolar saline isa proinﬂammatory stress on the mouse ocular surface. Eye Con-tact Lens. 2005;31:186–193.412. Li DQ, Luo L, Chen Z, Kim HS, Song XJ, Pﬂugfelder SC. JNK andERK MAP kinases mediate induction of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha andIL-8 following hyperosmolar stress in human limbal epithelialcells. Exp Eye Res . 2006;82:588–596.413. Mathers WD, Lane JA. Meibomian gland lipids, evaporation, and
tear ﬁlm stability. Adv Exp Med Biol . 1998;438:349–360.414. Mathers W. Evaporation from the ocular surface. Exp Eye Res .2004;78:389–394.415. Pﬂugfelder SC. Tear ﬂuid inﬂuence on the ocular surface. AdvExp Med Biol . 1998;438:611–617.416. Stern ME, Pﬂugfelder SC. Inﬂammation in dry eye. Ocul Surf .2004;2:124–130.417. Dana MR, Hamrah P. Role of immunity and inﬂammation incorneal and ocular surface disease associated with dry eye. AdvExp Med Biol . 2002;506:729–738.418. Knop E, Knop N. Inﬂuence of the eye-associated lymphoid tissue(EALT) on inﬂammatory ocular surface disease. Ocul Surf . 2005;3:S180–S186.419. Goto E, Yagi Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K. Impaired functionalvisual acuity of dry eye patients. Am J Ophthalmol . 2002;133:181–186.420. Brewitt H, Kaercher T, Ru ¨fer F. [Dry eye and blepharitis.]Trockenes Auge und Blepharitis. Klin Monatsbl Augenheilkd .2008;225:R15–R36.421. Gilbard JP, Rossi SR, Gray KL. A new rabbit model for keratocon-
junctivitis sicca. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1987;28:225–228.422. McCann LC, Tomlinson A, Pearce EI, Diaper C. Tear and meibo-mian gland function in blepharitis and normals. Eye Contact Lens.2009;35:203–208.423. Afonso AA, Monroy D, Stern ME, Feuer WJ, Tseng SC, Pﬂugfelder SC.Correlation of tear ﬂuorescein clearance and Schirmer test scoreswith ocular irritation symptoms. Ophthalmology. 1999;106:803–810.424. Robin JB, Jester JV, Nobe J, Nicolaides N, Smith RE. In vivo transil-lumination biomicroscopy and photography of meibomian glanddysfunction. a clinical study. Ophthalmology . 1985;92:1423–1426.425. Yokoi N, Komuro A, Yamada H, Maruyama K, Kinoshita S. Anewly developed video-meibography system featuring a newlydesigned probe. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2007;51:53–56.426. Nichols JJ, Berntsen DA, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK. An assessment ofgrading scales for meibography images . Cornea. 2005;24:382–388.427. Knop E, Korb DR, Blackie CA, Knop N. The lid margin is an
underestimated structure for preservation of ocular surface healthand development of dry eye disease. In: Brewitt H, ed. ResearchProjects in Dry Eye. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 2010:108–122.428. Dana MR, Qian Y, Hamrah P. Twenty-ﬁve-year panorama of cor-neal immunology: emerging concepts in the immunopathogen-esis of microbial keratitis, peripheral ulcerative keratitis, andcorneal transplant rejection . Cornea. 2000;19:625–643.429. Knop E, Knop N. Conjunctiva immune surveillance. In: Dartt DA,Edelhauser HF, ed. Encyclopedia of the Eye. Oxford, UK:Elsevier; 2010.430. Auw-Haedrich C, Reinhard T. Chronische Blepharitis. Pathogen-ese, klinischer Verlauf und therapeutische Ansa ¨tze. Ophthalmo-loge. 2007;104:817–828.431. Knop E, Knop N. Are the Meibomian glands “hair follicles with-out a hair shaft”? Acta Ophthalmol . 2010;88:246.432. Choo PH. Distichiasis, trichiasis, and entropion: advances in man-agement. Int Ophthalmol Clin . 2002;42:75–87.
agement. Int Ophthalmol Clin . 2002;42:75–87.433. Shammas HJ, Tabbara KF, Der K, V. Distichiasis of the lids and
432. Choo PH. Distichiasis, trichiasis, and entropion: advances in man-agement. Int Ophthalmol Clin . 2002;42:75–87.433. Shammas HJ, Tabbara KF, Der K, V. Distichiasis of the lids andlymphedema of the lower extremities: a report of ten cases.J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 1979;16:129–132.434. Fuchs E. The tortoise and the hair: slow-cycling cells in the stemcell race . Cell. 2009;137:811–819.435. Gupta S, Silliman CG, Trump DL. Docetaxel-induced Meibomianduct inﬂammation and blockage leading to chalazion formation.Prostate Cancer Prostat Dis . 2007;10:396–397.436. Paugh JR, Knapp LL, Martinson JR, Hom MM. Meibomian therapy inproblematic contact lens wear. Optom Vis Sci. 1990;67:803–806.437. Kaercher T. Blepharitis. In: Brewitt H, Zierhut M, eds. TrockenesAuge. Heidelberg: Kaden Verlag; 2001:113–126.438. Shine WE, McCulley JP. Association of meibum oleic acid withmeibomian seborrhea . Cornea. 2000;19:72–74.
meibomian seborrhea . Cornea. 2000;19:72–74.439. McCulley JP, Shine W. A compositional based model for the tearﬁlm lipid layer. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1997;95:79–88.440. Gupta AK, Bluhm R. Seborrheic dermatitis. J Eur Acad DermatolVenereol. 2004;18:13–26.441. Shine WE, McCulley JP. Meibomian gland triglyceride fatty aciddifferences in chronic blepharitis patients . Cornea. 1996;15:340–346.442. Voss JG. Acne vulgaris and free fatty acids: a review and criticism.Arch Dermatol . 1974;109:894–898.443. Toyoda M, Morohashi M. Pathogenesis of acne. Med ElectronMicrosc. 2001;34:29–40.444. Shine WE, McCulley JP. Role of wax ester fatty alcohols in chronicblepharitis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1993;34:3515–3521.445. Dougherty JM, Osgood JK, McCulley JP. The role of wax andsterol ester fatty acids in chronic blepharitis. Invest OphthalmolVis Sci . 1991;32:1932–1937.446. Shine WE, McCulley JP. Polar lipids in human meibomian glandsecretions. Curr Eye Res . 2003;26:89–94.
secretions. Curr Eye Res . 2003;26:89–94.447. Kaercher T, Brewitt H. Blepharitis Ophthalmologe . 2004;101:1135–1147.448. Suzuki T, Sano Y, Sasaki O, Kinoshita S. Ocular surface inﬂammationinduced by Propionibacterium acnes . Cornea. 2002;21:812–817.449. Anttila HS, Reitamo S, Saurat JH. Interleukin 1 immunoreactivityin sebaceous glands. Br J Dermatol . 1992;127:585–588.450. Boehm KD, Yun JK, Strohl KP, Elmets CA. Messenger RNAs for themultifunctional cytokines interleukin-1 alpha, interleukin-1 beta andtumor necrosis factor-alpha are present in adnexal tissues and indermis of normal human skin. Exp Dermatol. 1995;4:335–341.451. Guy R, Green MR, Kealey T. Modeling acne in vitro. J InvestigDermatol . 1996;106:176–182.452. Nagy I, Pivarcsi A, Kis K, et al. Propionibacterium acnes andlipopolysaccharide induce the expression of antimicrobial pep-tides and proinﬂammatory cytokines/chemokines in human sebo-cytes. Microbes Infect. 2006;8:2195–2205.
453. Freedberg IM, Tomic-Canic M, Komine M, Blumenberg M. Kera-tins and the Keratinocyte Activation Cycle. J Investig Dermatol .2001;116:633–640.454. Marren SE. Contact lens wear, use of eye cosmetics, and Meibo-mian gland dysfunction. Optom Vis Sci. 1994;71:60–62.455. Molinari JF, Stanek S. Meibomian gland status and prevalence ofgiant papillary conjunctivitis in contact lens wearers. Optometry .2000;71:459–461.456. Robin JB, Nobe JR, Suarez E, Jester JV, Smith RE. Meibomiangland evaluation in patients with extended wear soft contact lensdeposits. CLAO J . 1986;12:95–98.457. Molinari JF. Meibomian stenosis and soft contact lenses (letter).Am J Optom Physiol Opt . 1981;58:690.458. Ong BL, Larke JR. Meibomian gland dysfunction: some clinical,biochemical and physical observations. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt.1990;10:144–148.1978 Knop et al. IOVS, Special Issue 2011, Vol. 52, No. 4Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 09/26/2024
