Journal of PathologyJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251Published online in Wiley InterScience(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/path.2098Review ArticleSkin ageing and its treatmentL Baumann*Department of Dermatology, Univer sity of Miami, Miami Beach, FL, USA*Correspondence to:L Baumann, Department ofDermatology, University ofMiami, 4701 N. MeridianAvenue, Suite 7450, MiamiBeach, FL 33140, USA.E-mail: lsb@derm.netNo conﬂicts of interest weredeclared.AbstractThe effects of chronic sun exposure on skin a re readily apparent when skin not typicallyexposed to the sun and skin regularly exposed to the sun are compared. While the sun isnot the only aetiological factor in the dyna mic process of skin ageing, it is the primaryexogenous cause among several internal and env ironmental elements. Thus, photo-ageing,the main focus of this article, is a subset of extrinsic skin ageing. The inﬂuence of the
sun in extrinsic skin ageing, as well as its role i n potentially altering the normal course ofintrinsic (also known as natural or cellular) age ing, is discussed. Telomeres, the specializedstructures found at the ends of chromosomes, are believed to be integral to cellular ageingas well as in the development of cancer. The age ing process, both intrinsic and extrinsic,is also believed to be inﬂuenced by the formation of free radicals, also known as reactiveoxygen species. The loss of collagen is considere d the characteristic histological ﬁnding inaged skin. Wrinkling and pigmentary changes a re directly associated with photo-ageing andare considered its most salient cutaneous manif estations. Such photodamage represents thecutaneous signs of premature ageing. In addition, deleterious consequences of chronic sunexposure, speciﬁcally various forms of photo -induced skin cancer, are also linked to acute
and chronic sun exposure. The only known stra tegies aimed at preventing photo-ageinginclude sun avoidance, using sunscreens to blo ck or reduce skin exposure to UV radiation,using retinoids to inhibit collagenase synt hesis and to promote collagen production, andusing anti-oxidants, particularly in combin ation, to reduce and neutralize free radicals.Copyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd.Keywords: photo-ageing; extrinsic ageing; in trinsic ageing; telomeres; free radicals;collagenIntroductionThe contribution or facilitating role of sunlight towardpremature skin ageing has been discussed and debatedby dermatologists since the end of the 1800s [1],but convincing the public regarding the risks of sunexposure remains an uphill battle, despite success inthe use of the skin protection factor (SPF) systemin topical products. Still, an inordinate number of
patients visiting dermatologists complain about, andseek treatment for, the most salient manifestations ofsolar exposure — wrinkling and unwanted pigmenta-tion, the tell-tale symptoms of photo-ageing.While the sun is not the only aetiological factorin skin ageing, it is the primary exogenous causeamong several internal and environmental elements.This chapter will focus chieﬂy on photo-ageing, or theextrinsic skin ageing due to the inﬂuence of the sun,but also on the role of the sun in potentially alteringthe normal course of intrinsic, or natural, ageing. Inaddition, how both kinds of ageing affect the skin willbe discussed, along with strategies aimed at preventingphoto-ageing.Cutaneous ageingAs implied above, there are two primary skin ageingprocesses, intrinsic and extrinsic. Variations in individ-ual genetic background are thought to govern intrinsicageing, which results as time passes. By deﬁnition,
this form of ageing is inevitable and, thus, apparentlynot subject to manipulation through changes in humanbehaviour. Conversely, extrinsic ageing is engenderedby factors originating externally that are introducedto the human body, such as smoking, excessive alco-
behaviour. Conversely, extrinsic ageing is engenderedby factors originating externally that are introducedto the human body, such as smoking, excessive alco-hol consumption, poor nutrition, and chronic exposureto the sun. Exposure to such elements, which fallswithin the voluntary realm, although it may sometimesoccur under duress, is not inevitable and thus repre-sents premature skin ageing. Of these external factors,sun exposure is considered to be far and away themost signiﬁcantly deleterious to the skin. Indeed, 80%of facial ageing is believed to be due to chronic sunexposure [2].Skin that ages intrinsically is smooth and unblem-ished, and characterized by normal geometric pat-terns, with some exaggerated expression lines. His-tologically, such skin manifests epidermal and dermalCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.www.pathsoc.org.uk
242 L. Baumannatrophy, ﬂattening of the epidermal rete ridges, as wellas reduced numbers of ﬁbroblasts and mast cells [3,4].In addition, increases are seen in the number of col-lagen ﬁbrils as well as the ratio of collagen III tocollagen I [5].Exposed areas of the skin, typically the face, chestand extensor surfaces of the arms, display the major-ity of extrinsically aged skin, which results from thecumulative effects of life-long ultraviolet radiation(UVR) exposure. Rhytides, pigmented lesions (such asephelides, lentigines, and patchy hyperpigmentation)and depigmented lesions (eg guttate hypomelanosis)comprise the clinical presentation of photo-aged skin.Losses in tone and elasticity are also observed inphoto-aged skin, along with increased skin fragility,areas of purpura due to blood vessel weakness, andbenign lesions (eg acrochordons, keratoses, and telang-iectases). On the Glogau Photo-ageing Scale, whichclassiﬁes the extent of c linical photodamage, patients
with a signiﬁcant history o f sun exposure would likelyreceive a score that is higher than expected for theirage, just as patients with a history of minimal sunexposure would likely score lower than expected fortheir age.The histopathological identiﬁcation of photo-agedskin is made easily, as it is characterized by elastosis.Epidermal atrophy and distinct alterations in collagenand elastic ﬁbres are also associated with photo-aged skin. In particular, skin that is marked byextreme or severe photo-ageing exhibits fragmented,thickened and more soluble collagen ﬁbres [6]. Elasticﬁbres also experience fragmentation and may exhibitprogressive cross-linkage and calciﬁcation [7]. Suchmarked deterioration in the condition of collagen andelastic ﬁbres has been demonstrated to progress withcontinued exposure to UV radiation. Overall, ageingskin is marked by increased inelasticity, fragmentationand collagen bundle fragility [8].Intrinsic ageing
Intrinsic ageingTelomeres, the specialized structures found at the endsof eukaryotic chromosomes, have come under increas-ing scrutiny and are now believed to play an essen-tial role in the intrinsic ageing process at a cellu-lar level. Intact telomeres are integral in extendingthe lifespan of cells [9]. With age, telomere lengthshortens. This telomeric erosion has come to be seenas a gauge by which to measure ageing, a verita-ble internal ageing clock, and the basis for one ofthe presently favoured theories on ageing [10]. Oneimplication of this theory places ageing and canceron opposite sides of the same coin. That is, telom-
erase, the cellular reverse transcriptase enzyme thatstabilizes or lengthens telomeres, is expressed in about85–90% of all human tumours but absent in manysomatic tissues [11,12]. Consequently, most cancercells, unlike healthy ones, are not programmed forapoptosis, or cell death. In other words, the pres-ence of telomerase is associated with telomere sta-bility and tumourigenesis, its absence with telomereshortening and somatic tissue ageing. It is impor-tant to note that the epidermis is one of the fewregenerative tissues to express telomerase [13]. Fur-ther, in a recent investigation of progressive telomereshortening, in 52 specimens of normal human epi-dermis and 48 specimens of lingual epithelium col-lected at autopsy from subj ects who died between 0
and 101 years of age, researchers determined that thetelomere shortening associated with ageing is charac-terized by tissue-speciﬁc loss rates [14]. Indeed, thenatural, progressive shortening of telomeres may beone of the primary mechanisms of cellular ageing inskin [15]. Telomeres and other cellular constituentsalso sustain low-grade oxidative damage as a result
also sustain low-grade oxidative damage as a resultof aerobic cellular metabolism, which contributes tointrinsic ageing [16]. Currently, there are no avail-able topical skin care products, systemic drugs or othertreatment options that target telomerase because cur-rent data do not adequately demonstrate that extendingtelomere length can be safely performed. One argu-ment for eventual telomerase-based therapies is thebelief that inhibiting telomerase may also have anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inducing effects not relatedto the role this ribonucleoprot ein plays in shorteningtelomeres during cell division [17].Werner syndrome (WS) is an autosomal recessivedisorder in which the causative gene, WRN , encodesa member of the RecQ -like subfamily of DNA heli-cases [18]. The Werner protein (Wrn), a multifunc-tional nuclear protein exhibiting 3′–5′exonuclease andATP-dependent helicase activities, is known to playa role in numerous DNA metabolic pathways and to
a role in numerous DNA metabolic pathways and tobe available in WS patients at reduced levels [19].Patients with WS exhibit signs of accelerated age-ing and the premature onset of various age-relateddisorders; among these, the incidence of sarcomasand other tumours of mesenchymal origin is higherthan in the population at large [20]. In one study,mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts derived from homozygousWS embryos exhibited premature loss of prolifera-tive capacity [21]. In a more recent mouse modelstudy, investigators found that exhaustion of telomerereserves elicited WS and telomere dysfunction pro-voked various Werner-like s ymptoms, including hairgreying, alopecia, cataracts, osteoporosis, type II dia-betes and premature death [22]. In addition, accel-erated replicative senescence, chromosomal instabil-ity, especially non-epithelial tumours often associatedwith WS, were exhibited in this model, with telom-
ere shortening implicated as the primary cause. Giventhe association of WS and telomere shortening and theroles of telomeres and telomerase in cellular ageing,further research into these interconnected phenomenawill likely have an impact on further elucidating ourunderstanding of the ageing process, as well as poten-tial therapeutic approaches.Extrinsic ageingExtrinsic ageing is largely preventable, by nature andby deﬁnition. Factors with clearly exogenous origins,J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 243including smoking, poor nutrition and especially solarexposure, are the main causes of extrinsic, premature,cutaneous ageing. Moreover, sun exposure, as statedpreviously, is believed to account for 80% of facialageing [23]. Skin damage results from ultravioletexposure through several mechanisms, including theformation of sunburn cells as well as thymine andpyrimidine dimers, collagenase production, and theinduction of an inﬂammatory response. Sunburn cells,or UV-induced apoptotic cells, have long been usedas markers by which to evaluate skin damage causedby sun exposure. UV-induced apoptosis is mediatedby caspase-3, high levels of which are thought to begood indicators of the presence of cellular apoptosis[24]. Activation of apoptosis occurs in a pathway thatinvolves caspase-7 [25]. Mast cells and macrophagesare found in greater numbers in photo-aged skinand are also thought to be involved in its causativemechanism [26].
mechanism [26].Signalling through p53 after telomere disruption isalso linked to ageing in addition to photodamage, inassociation with UVB more so than UV A [27,28].Histological examination has demonstrated that moreinﬁltrating mononuclear cells are found in skin chron-ically exposed to the sun in comparison to protectedskin [29]. While much more remains to be understoodregarding the mechanisms through which a cascade ofadverse health effects are induced by UV exposure,it is well known that photo-ageing, photocarcinogene-sis and photo-immunosuppression are sequelae of UVexposure, particularly the UV A range (320–400 nm)[30].Interestingly, telomeres do not appear to play acentral role in extrinsic ageing. In a recent study, inwhich telomere length was measured in 76 specimensof epidermis from sun-protected sites, 24 specimens of
epidermis from sun-exposed sites and 60 specimensof dermis, comparisons showed telomere length tobe shorter in the epidermis. Intrinsic senescence wasevidenced by reduction in telomere length in theepidermis and dermis with age. Telomere shorteningwas not associated with photo-ageing in this study,as telomere length was not shown to be signiﬁcantlydifferent between sun-exposed and sun-protected sites[31].Currently, sun avoidance and the use of sunscreensare the only defence against sunburn cell formation;they can also protect against thymine dimer forma-tion. Theoretically, the fewer sunburn cells present,the lower the skin damage level due to UV expo-sure.Characteristics of ageing skinThe key difference between intrinsic and extrinsicageing is that the latter falls within the volitionalcontrol of the individual. N evertheless, there aresalient features exhibited by aged skin, regardless of
the cause(s) of skin ageing. The changes undergone byskin as it ages occur throughout the epidermis, dermisand subcutaneous tissue and can manifest in discreteand broad alterations in skin topography.EpidermisWhen considering the visually obvious nature of skin,it seems counter-intuitive to suggest that the age-related changes in the dermis are more pronouncedthan those in the epidermis, but this is nonethelessthe case. That said, the epidermis does manifest someimportant changes related to ageing. While some stud-ies indicate that aged skin is characterized by a thinnerepidermis [32], other studies do not point to such aﬁnding [33]. There is general agreement, however, thatthe thickness of the stratum corneum does not changewith age. In a study comparing the effects of intrin-sic and extrinsic ageing, hi stopathological examinationof 83 biopsies from sun-exposed and protrected skinin healthy volunteers aged 6–84 years revealed epi-
dermal thickness to be constant across the decades inboth sun-exposed and -protected skin, with the thick-ness found to be greater in sun-exposed skin [34].In a different study, the spinous layer of a wrinklewas shown to be thinner at the base than at the ﬂanks
ness found to be greater in sun-exposed skin [34].In a different study, the spinous layer of a wrinklewas shown to be thinner at the base than at the ﬂanks[35]; in addition, according to this study, fewer kera-tohyaline granules are present in the wrinkle base ascompared to the ﬂanks.In aged skin, the intersection of the epidermisand dermis, known as the dermal–epidermal junction(DEJ), is known to be altered, ie aged epidermismanifests a ﬂattened DEJ with a correspondinglydiminished connecting surface area. In a study ofabdominal skin, DEJ surface area was shown to bereduced from 2 .64 mm2in subjects aged 21–40 yearsto 1.90 mm2in subjects aged 61–80 [36]. It is thoughtthat such a loss of DEJ surface area may contribute tothe increased fragility of the skin associated with ageand may also lead to reduced nutrient transfer betweenthe dermal and epidermal layers.Decreased cell turnover
Decreased cell turnoverOther important age-related changes occur in theepidermal layer. Between the third and eighth decadesof life, the epidermal turnover rate slows from 30% to50% [37]. Stratum corneum transit time was shown byKligman to be 20 days in young adults and 30 or moredays in older adults [38]. Such a cell cycle lengtheningin older adults coincides with a protracted stratumcorneum replacement rate, epidermal atrophy, slowerwound healing and often less effective desquamation.Indeed, older patients have been demonstrated torequire double the time to re-epithelialize followingdermabrasion resurfacing procedures in comparison toyounger patients [39]. The cascade of changes relatedto decelerated cell turnover results, in older skin, in thedevelopment of heaps of corneocytes that render theskin surface rough and dull in appearance. In responseto these phenomena, many cosmetic dermatologistsJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/path
J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
244 L. Baumannuse products (eg hydroxy acids, retinoids) to acceleratethe cell cycle, in the belief that a faster turnover ratewill yield improvements in skin appearance and speedwound healing following cosmetic procedures.DermisApproximately 20% of dermal thickness disappears aspeople become elderly [40]. Aged dermis has beenshown through structural examination to be relativelyacellular and avascular [41]. Changes in collagenproduction and the development of fragmented elasticﬁbres also characterize normal aged dermis. Dermisthat is also photo-aged exhibits disorganized collagenﬁbrils and the accumulation of abnormal elastin-containing material [42,43]. As the three primarystructural components of the dermis, collagen, elastinand glycosaminoglycans have been the subjects of themajority of anti-ageing research pertaining to the skin.CollagenThe primary structural component of the dermis andthe most abundant protein found in humans, collagen
is responsible for conferring strength and support tohuman skin. Over time, the structural proteins andmain components of the skin deteriorate, resulting inthe cutaneous signs of ageing. Intrinsically aged skin ischaracterized by epidermal and dermal atrophy as wellas ﬂattening of the rete ridges [44]. Knowledge of therole of collagen in the ageing process over 30 yearsago helped to establish the use of bovine collagen as aﬁlling agent to temporarily replace collagen lost withage in soft tissue augmentation procedures. Injectablehuman-derived products, such as Zyderm and Zyplast,have also emerged during the last decade for thesepurposes. Other products that contain ingredients suchas vitamin C and glycolic acid, and labelled as ‘anti-wrinkle creams’, are promoted in some cases fortheir claimed capacity to enhance collagen synthesis.Such products are not harmful, but cannot yet trulymatch the desired effects. In fact, little is known
even about the pathogenesis of wrinkles [45]. Thefact that neither an animal nor an in vitro model ofwrinkling has yet been established may help to explainthis gap in knowledge. It is well known, however,that alterations in collagen play an integral role inthe ageing process. This, in turn, partly explains thepopularity of collagen-containing products intendedfor ‘anti-ageing’ purposes.Of the dry skin mass, 70% is comprised of colla-gen [46]. In aged skin, collagen is characterized bythickened ﬁbrils, organized in rope-like bundles, thatappear to be in disarray in comparison to the patternobserved in younger skin [47]. In addition, lower lev-els of collagen are synthesized, in vivo andin vitro ,by aged ﬁbroblasts. The ratio of collagen types foundin human skin also changes with age. In young skin,collagen I comprises 80% and collagen III comprisesabout 15% of total skin collagen; in older skin, theratio of Type III to Type I collagen has been shown to
increase, due, signiﬁcantly, to an appreciable loss ofcollagen I [48]. In addition, the overall collagen con-tent per unit area of skin surface is known to declineapproximately 1%/year [49]. In irradiated skin, colla-gen I levels have been shown to be reduced by 59%[50]; this reduction was found to be linked to the extentof photodamage [51]. Although collagen I is the mostabundant and signiﬁcant collagen type found in theskin, the effects of ageing are seen in other types ofcollagen in human dermis.An integral constituent of the DEJ, collagen IVimparts a structural framework for other molecules andplays a key role in maintaining mechanical stability.No signiﬁcant differences have been found in collagenIV levels in sun-exposed skin compared to unexposedskin, but signiﬁcantly lower levels of collagen IV havebeen identiﬁed at the base of wrinkles in comparisonto the ﬂanks of the same wrinkles. The mechanicalstability of the DEJ may be adversely affected by this
loss of collagen IV, thereby contributing to wrinkleformation [52].
to the ﬂanks of the same wrinkles. The mechanicalstability of the DEJ may be adversely affected by thisloss of collagen IV, thereby contributing to wrinkleformation [52].Collagen VII is the primary constituent in anchoringﬁbrils that attach the basement membrane zone tothe underlying papillary dermis. In one study, asigniﬁcantly lower number of anchoring ﬁbrils wereidentiﬁed in patients with chronically sun-exposed skinin comparison to normal controls. It was theorized bythe researchers that wrinkles may form as a result ofa weakened bond between the dermis and epidermis,due to anchoring ﬁbril degradation [53]. A more recentstudy showed such a loss of collagen VII to be moremarked in the base of the wrinkle (as seen withcollagen IV in the same study) [54].In the last 15 years, the pathogenesis of UVR-induced collagen damage has been well understoodand characterized. For instance, it is known that UVRexposure signiﬁcantly up-regulates the synthesis of
several types of collagen-degrading enzymes knownas matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). First, UV expo-sure leads to an increase in the amount of the transcrip-tion factor c-jun; c-fos, the other transcription factorinvolved in this mechanistic chain, is already abun-dant without UV exposure. Activator protein-1 (AP-1)is then formed by the combination of c-jun and c-fos. In turn, AP-1 activates the MMP genes, whichstimulate the production of collagenase, gelatinase andstromelysin. Collagen degradation is mediated by AP-1 activation and by inhibition of transforming growthfactor (TGF) βsignalling [55]. Research in humans hasshown that within hours of UVB exposure, MMPs,speciﬁcally collagenase and gelatinase, are produced[56]. Multiple exposures to UVB engender a sus-tained induction of MMPs [57]. Given that collagenaseattacks and degrades collagen, long-term elevations inthe levels of collagenase and other MMPs likely yieldthe disorganized and clumped collagen identiﬁed in
photo-aged skin. Notably, these MMPs may repre-sent the mechanism through which collagen I levelsdecline in response to UV exposure. By characterizingJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 245the wide-ranging effects of UV in activating cell sur-face growth factor and cytokine receptors, researchershave been able to ascertain that skin ageing (extrin-sic and intrinsic) is marked by elevated AP-1 activityand MMP expression, inhibited TGF βsignalling, aswell as reduced collagen synthesis and greater colla-gen degradation [58]. These changes are likely to beexacerbated by photo-ageing.ElastinAlterations in elastic ﬁbres are so strongly associatedwith photo-aged skin that ‘elastosis’, an accumulationof amorphous elastin material, is considered pathog-nomonic of photo-aged skin. Indeed, UV exposureinduces a thickening and coiling of elastic ﬁbres inthe papillary dermis. These changes also occur in thereticular dermis as a result of chronic UV exposure[59]. Examination by electron microscopy of elasticﬁbres in UV-exposed skin has revealed a reduction in
the number of microﬁbrils and increases in interﬁbril-lar areas, the complexity of the shape and arrangementof the ﬁbres and the number of electron-dense inclu-sions [60]. In addition, small amounts of sugar andlipids and an abnormally high level of polar aminoacids have been found in elastin extracted from theskin of elderly patients [61]. The underlying aetiologyof age-related changes in elastin is not as well under-stood as such changes in collagen; however, matrixmetalloproteinases are thought to play a role becauseMMP-2 has been demonstrated to degrade elastin [62].The initial response of elastic ﬁbres to photodam-age is understood, however, to be hyperplastic, result-ing in a greater amount of elastic tissue. The levelof sun exposure determines the magnitude of thehyperplastic response. In aged elastic ﬁbres, a sec-ondary response to photodamage occurs but is degen-erative, with decreases observed in skin elasticity and
resiliency [63,64]. Older skin that has experienced thisdegenerative reaction is characterized by changes inthe normal pattern of immature elastic ﬁbres, calledoxytalan, that are located in the papillary dermis.These ﬁbres form a network in young skin that ascendsperpendicularly from the uppermost section of the pap-illary dermis to just beneath the basement membrane.This network gradually disappears with age, however[65]. Consequently, skin elasticity is also graduallylost with age [66]. The phenomenon of sagging skinoften observed in the elderly may, in fact, be due inlarge part to this loss of elasticity.Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)GAGs, along with collagen and elastin, are among theprimary constituents of dermal skin and are responsi-ble for conferring the outward appearance of the skin.These polysaccharide chains, with repeating disaccha-ride units attached to a core protein, are also importantmolecules because they exhibit the capacity to bind
water up to 1000 times their volume. There are numer-ous members in the GAG family, including hyaluronicacid (HA), dermatan sulphate (both of which are twoof the most prevalent GAGs) and chondroitin sulphate.These compounds render normal skin plump, soft andhydrated, and are believed to assist in maintainingproper salt and water balance. Several studies sug-gest that GAGs, particularly HA, have been found tobe reduced in amount in photo-aged skin [67]. Somestudies offer conﬂicting reports, however, suggestingno changes in the level of GAGs in aged skin [68].The fact that HA is synthesized in the epidermis aswell as the dermis likely accounts for this discrepancyin ﬁndings. In skin that ages intrinsically, the total HAlevel in the dermis remains stable; however, epidermalHA diminishes almost completely [69].Hyaluronic acidPhotoaged skin has been shown to be characterizedby reduced levels of hyaluronic acid (HA) and ele-vated levels of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans
[70]. Such patterns, intriguingly, are also observedin scars. HA is found in young skin at the periph-
vated levels of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans[70]. Such patterns, intriguingly, are also observedin scars. HA is found in young skin at the periph-ery of collagen and elastin ﬁbres and where thesetypes of ﬁbres intersect. In aged skin, such connec-tions with HA disappear [71]. It is possible that thedecreases in HA levels, which contribute to its disas-sociation with collagen and elastin as well as reducedwater binding, may be involved in the changes notedin aged skin, including wrinkling, altered elasticity,reduced turgidity and diminished capacity to supportthe microvasculature of the skin.As one of the primary GAGs, HA can bind 1000times its weight in water, and may help the skinretain and maintain water. It is found in all connectivetissue and is produced mainly by ﬁbroblasts andkeratinocytes in the skin [72]. HA is localized not onlyin the dermis but also in the epidermal intercellularspaces, especially the middle spinous layer, but not
in the stratum corneum (SC) or stratum granulosum[73]. Aged skin, which is less plump than youthfulskin, is characterized by decreased levels of HA. Therole of HA in skin hydration is not clear and HAdoes not penetrate the skin upon topical application[74]; however, this has not stopped many companiesfrom putting HA in topical skin care products andclaiming efﬁcacy. HA is used successfully, however,as a temporary dermal ﬁlling agent in soft tissueaugmentation procedures.MelanocytesWith age, there is a reduction in the number ofmelanocytes in the range 8–20%/decade. Clinically,this decrease is observed as a reduction in the numberof melanocytic nevi in older patients [75]. The skinof older patients is less able to protect itself from thesun because melanin, which is reduced in the elderly,absorbs carcinogenic UV radiation. Therefore, olderpeople are more susceptible to developing sun-induced
cancers. For this reason, sun protection remains impor-tant even for elderly patients, despite the fact thatJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
246 L. Baumannthe majority of an individual’s harmful sun exposureoccurs during the ﬁrst two decades of life. It is not‘too late’ for healthy elderly people to begin adding asunscreen to their skin care regimens.VasculatureAged skin has been shown through numerous stud-ies to be relatively avascular. In one study a 35%reduction in the venous cross-sectional area in agedskin was demonstrated in comparison to young skin[76]. Such a loss in the vascular network is especiallynoticeable in the papillary dermis, with the disappear-ance of the vertical capillary loops. Reduced bloodﬂow, depleted nutrient exchange, inhibited thermoreg-ulation, decreased skin surface temperature and skinpallor are associated with the reduction of vascularity.Subcutaneous tissueSite-speciﬁc changes, including gains and losses, areknown to occur in subcutaneous tissues that alsoinﬂuence the appearance of the elderly and their skin.Subcutaneous fat diminishes in the face, dorsal aspects
of the hands and the shins. Fat amasses with ageing,though, in other regions, particularly the waist inwomen and the abdomen in men [77].The role of free radicals in photo-ageingThe ageing process is believed to be at least partiallydue to the formation and activity of free radicals, alsoknown as reactive oxygen species (ROS). Free radicalsare composed of oxygen molecules with an unpairedelectron and are engendered by several exogenous andendogenous factors, including UV exposure, pollution,stress, smoking and normal metabolic processes. Fur-ther, some evidence suggests that free radicals inducealterations in gene expression pathways, which in turncontribute to the degradation of collagen and the accu-mulation of elastin emblematic of photo-aged skin[78]. Anti-oxidants neutralize free radicals by supply-ing another electron, delivering an electron pair to anoxygen molecule and stabilizing it in the process.Changes in skin appearanceDry skin
Changes in skin appearanceDry skinDry, scaly skin is frequently seen in the elderly.The degradation or loss of skin barrier function withincreasing age is partly accountable for this manifes-tation. The recovery of damaged barrier function hasbeen demonstrated to be slower in aged skin, resultingin greater susceptibility to developing dryness. Thisis a multifactorial process due, in part, to lower lipidlevels in lamellar bodies [79] and a decrease in epi-dermal ﬁlaggrin [80]. Increased trans-epidermal waterloss (TEWL) is also exhibited by aged skin, leavingthe stratum corneum more susceptible to becoming dryin low-humidity environments. In addition to dryness,aged skin is often characterized by roughness, wrin-kling, skin pallor, hyper- or hypopigmentations, laxity,fragility, easy bruising and benign neoplasms.Benign neoplasms in ageing skinWith age, the appearance and surface texture of skincan change dramatically, as represented by the devel-
opment of acrochordons (skin tags), cherry angiomas,seborrheic keratoses, lentigos (sun spots) and seba-ceous hyperplasias, among other lesions and cuta-neous alterations. Patients of dermatologists and plas-tic surgeons often request removal of these benignneoplasms. Various destructive treatment modalitiesare available, including hyfrecation and sundry laseroptions.TreatmentPhotoaged skin is treated with various in-ofﬁce pro-cedures and numerous topical agents, most of whichare intended to ‘resurface’ the epidermis. Essentially,this translates to removing the damaged epidermisand, in some cases, dermis, and replacing the tissuewith remodelled skin layers. Several anti-oxidants areincorporated into topical sk in care products, includingvitamins C and E, co-enzyme Q10, ferulic acid, greentea, idebenone, pycnogenol and silymarin. Resurfac-ing procedures have been shown to sometimes spur
ing procedures have been shown to sometimes spurthe formation of new collagen with a normal stainingpattern, as opposed to the basophilic elastotic massesof collagen characteristic of photo-aged skin [81]. It is
the formation of new collagen with a normal stainingpattern, as opposed to the basophilic elastotic massesof collagen characteristic of photo-aged skin [81]. It ispossible that the potential of growth factors, cytokinesand telomerase will eventually be harnessed via tech-nological advancement and innovation in the burgeon-ing ﬁelds of tissue engineering and gene therapy [82].Although there are several treatments available foraged skin, prevention of extrinsic ageing remainsthe best approach and should be encouraged to allpatients. Of course, this entails avoiding exposureto the sun, using sunscreen when sun avoidance isimpossible, avoiding cigarette smoke and pollution,eating a diet high in fruits and vegetables, and takingoral anti-oxidant supplements or topical anti-oxidantformulations. The regular use of prescription retinoidscan also help prevent or treat wrinkles.PreventionThe formation of rhytides is considered the most
The formation of rhytides is considered the mostconspicuous and common manifestation, and nearly asine qua non feature, of skin ageing. Wrinkles appearas a result of changes in the lower, dermal layers of theskin. It might come as a surprise to many consumers,given the ubiquity of advertising that touts the newesttopical formulations to e liminate wrinkles and therelated expenditure of millions of dollars by consumersJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 247on these ‘anti-ageing’ products, that few skin careproduct ingredients have the capacity to penetrate farenough into the dermis to ameliorate deep wrinkles.Prevention of wrinkle development, therefore, hasassumed a fundamental status in anti-ageing skin care[83]. To prevent the formation of wrinkles, it isnecessary to halt the degradation of the skin’s threeprimary structural constituents, collagen, elastin andHA, since all three components are known to declinewith age. Consequently, most anti-ageing proceduresand products are designed or formulated with theintention of salvaging at least one of these basiccutaneous substances. Because the technology requiredto suitably deliver these compounds into the skin hasnot yet been developed, topical products containingcollagen, elastin or HA are unable to serve as adequatereplacements for what is lost from the skin throughageing. Although no products replenish these key skin
components, some products do promote the naturalsynthesis of these substances. For example, collagenproduction has been shown to be stimulated by the useof retinoids [84], vitamin C [85] and copper peptide.Collagen synthesis may also be brought about throughthe use of oral vitamin C [86]. In animal models,retinoids have been shown to increase production ofHA [87] and elastin [88]. HA levels are also thought tobe augmented with glucosamine supplementation [89].There are no products yet approved for increasing theproduction of, or enhancing, elastin.Because inﬂammation is a known contributor tothe degradation of collagen, elastin and HA, reducinginﬂammation is another integral approach to prevent-ing wrinkle formation. Anti-oxidants, all of which dis-play various distinguishing characteristics and activ-ities, are believed to be an important focus in thisendeavour, as these free radical scavengers protect
the skin via several mechanisms that are just begin-ning to be elucidated. Skin inﬂammation is a knownsequela of free radicals directly acting on cytokineand growth factor receptors in dermal cells and ker-atinocytes. Cytokines and growth factors are known toplay a role in skin ageing, but the exact nature of theirsigniﬁcance has not yet been clariﬁed. Presently, thesecompounds are understood to function synergisticallyin a complex cascade of events requiring the inclusionof several types of cytokines and growth factors [90].The process is thought to be induced by UV expo-sure, which affects growth factor and cytokine recep-tors in keratinocytes and dermal cells, contributing todownstream signal transduction by spurring mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways (speciﬁ-cally, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-jun N-terminal protein kinase, and p38), which collect incell nuclei and form cFos–cJun complexes of tran-
cell nuclei and form cFos–cJun complexes of tran-scription factor AP-1 and trigger the MMPs col-lagenase, 92 kDa gelatinase and stromelysin, whichattack collagen and other connective tissue of the skin[91,92].The direct effects of free radicals on the ageingprocess and cutaneous ageing are understood withgreater clarity and certainty, however. For example,free radical activation of the MAP kinase pathwayshas been shown to stimulate collagenase production,which leads to the breakdown of collagen [93]. Specif-ically, Kang et al showed that pretreating human skinwith the anti-oxidants genistein and N-acetyl cysteineinhibited the UV induction of the cJun-driven enzymecollagenase. The use of anti-oxidants to hinder thesepathways is thought to inhibit photo-ageing by pre-venting collagenase production and its resulting detri-mental inﬂuence on collagen. Interestingly, this studyshowed that, although geni stein and N-acetyl cys-
teine exhibit anti-oxidant activity, these anti-oxidantsexerted no effect on UV-induced erythema. Previouswork has also pointed to the likelihood that using
teine exhibit anti-oxidant activity, these anti-oxidantsexerted no effect on UV-induced erythema. Previouswork has also pointed to the likelihood that usinganti-oxidants in combination confers synergistic ben-eﬁts. In a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group,placebo-controlled study of the effects of an oral com-bination of vitamins C and E, carotenoids, seleniumand proanthocyanidins, participants who took the anti-oxidant combination before exposure to UVB exhib-ited a difference in MMP-1 production in compar-ison to the placebo group ( p<0.05) [94]. Similarto the study by Kang, there were no signiﬁcant dif-ferences between the oral anti-oxidant group and theplacebo group regarding minimal erythema dose of theskin.In yet another recent study of the effects of com-bined anti-oxidants, one group of subjects was treateddaily with a base cream containing 0.05% ubiquinone(co-enzyme Q10), 0.1% vitamin E and 1% squa-lene, and 50 mg co-enzyme Q10, 50 mgD-RRR- α-
D-RRR- α-tocopheryl acetate and 50 µg selenium were orallyadministered, while the second group was treatedwith base cream only [95]. Patients treated withthe topical anti-oxidant cream alone exhibited sig-niﬁcant increases in the concentration of co-enzymeQ10, D-RRR- α-tocopherol and squalene in the sebum(although not in the stratum corneum or plasma). Thegroup treated both topically and orally also demon-strated higher levels of vitamin E and co-enzyme Q10in the stratum corneum.In terms of preventing the effects of photo-ageing,it is not yet known which anti-oxidants are the mosteffective. Using topical and oral anti-oxidants in com-bination will likely be the favoured recommendationin the near future. Anti-oxidants should also be used incombination with sunscreens and retinoids to enhancetheir protective effects. Indeed, it is worth remem-bering that not all sunscreens have an anti-oxidanteffect and not all anti-oxidants have a sunscreen effect.
However, a recent Duke University study has demon-strated that vitamins C and E combined with ferulicacid impart both a sunscreen effect and an anti-oxidanteffect [96].Some notable anti-oxidantsConceivably, volumes could be written on the plethoraof natural compounds found in recent years to exhibitJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
248 L. Baumannanti-oxidant activity. That is to say, an exhaustivesurvey of green tea, tea tree oil, grape seed extract,vitamins C and E, ferulic acid, etc. would far exceedthe limits of this chapter. A few of the anti-oxidantingredients that have recently gained favour and atten-tion are brieﬂy discussed here.Coenzyme Q10 or ubiquinone is a fat-soluble anti-oxidant found in all cells as part of the electrontransportation chain responsible for energy production,and has been shown to exhibit antiapoptotic activity[97]. It also naturally occurs in ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, spinachand nuts. Like the key constituents of the skin, co-enzyme Q10 has been shown to diminish with age inanimals and humans [98]. While UV light is known toremove vitamins C and E, glutathione and co-enzymeQ10 from the epidermal and dermal layers of the skin,co-enzyme Q10 is consistently the ﬁrst anti-oxidant tobe depleted in the skin.Derived from tropical fern, Polypodium leucoto-
Derived from tropical fern, Polypodium leucoto-mos (PL) extract has exhibited potent anti-oxidantactivity. The incidence of phototoxicity was demon-strated to decrease after oral PL administration insubjects receiving psoralen–UV A (PUV A) treatment[99], as well as in normal healthy subjects [100].In another study, PL-treated keratinocytes and ﬁbro-blasts exposed to UV displayed signiﬁcantly amelio-rated membrane integrity, mitigated lipid peroxida-tion, increased elastin expression and inhibited MMP-1 expression [101].Silymarin, a naturally occurring polyphenolic ﬂavo-noid or ﬂavonolignans compound derived from theseeds of the milk thistle plant Silybum marianu ,has been shown in several animal studies to exhibitanti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory and immunomodula-tory properties that may contribute to preventing skincancer as well as photo-ageing [102]. The beneﬁcialinﬂuence of silymarin is primarily ascribed to sily-bin, which has been demonstrated to be bioavailable
in skin and other tissues after systemic administra-tion [103]. In addition, topical application of silybinbefore or directly after UV exposure has been foundto confer potent protection against UV-induced epi-dermal damage, by depleting thymine dimer-positivecells [104].Pycnogenol, a plant-derived substance found inmany plant extracts, such as pine bark, grapes andapples, is rich in the potent free radical-scavenginggroup of compounds known as procyanidins (alsocalled proanthocyanidins). Procyanidins are also con-tained in several other plants or parts thereof knownfor conferring anti-oxidant activity, including grapeseed, grape skin, bilberry, cranberry, blackcurrant,green tea, black tea, blueberry, blackberry, straw-berry, black cherry, red wine and red cabbage. Inone study, Skh : hr hairless mice pretreated with pyc-nogenol concentrations of 0.05–0.2% demonstrated adose-dependent reduction of the inﬂammatory sun-
dose-dependent reduction of the inﬂammatory sun-burn reaction (oedema) following minimally inﬂam-matory daily exposures to solar-simulated UV radi-ation [105]. In another study, oral supplementationwith pycnogenol appeared to ease the effects ofUV radiation on the skin, speciﬁcally reducing ery-thema, in 21 volunteers [106]. The UV radiationlevel necessary to reach one minimal erythema dose(MED) was signiﬁcantly elevated during supplemen-tation. In addition to its anti-oxidant activity, pyc-nogenol is known to impart anti-inﬂammatory effects,which are believed to result, at least in part, fromits inhibition of IFN γ-induced expression of ICAM-1[107].Of course, sun avoidance and sunscreen use arewell established to be the primary components inanti-ageing regimens, although still underappreciatedby many segments of the public. A recent studyin the Journal of the American Medical Association
well established to be the primary components inanti-ageing regimens, although still underappreciatedby many segments of the public. A recent studyin the Journal of the American Medical Associationspeciﬁcally reinforces the utility of sunscreen; inthis study, children with the proclivity to freckledeveloped 30–40% fewer freckles when daily treatedwith an SPF 30 sunscreen, as compared to children nottreated with a sunscreen [108]. This study buttressesdermatologists’ recommendations for sun protectionin preventing the development of these pigmented
in preventing the development of these pigmentedlesions, which not only make the skin appear olderbut are associated with an increased risk of melanoma.Clearly, sun avoidance is not easy to manage and isoften impossible, as well as being an unpopular orpoorly received suggestion among many patients. Thatsaid, practitioners should gauge the receptivity of theirpatients and recommend as stringent a sun-avoidanceregimen as will likely be accepted. At the very least,patients should be discouraged from any exposure totanning beds or engaging in unnecessary sun exposure,particularly between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Using aWood’s light to show patients the sun damage thatthey have already incurred can be a useful approachtoward persuading them to curb their sun exposure andstrive for feasible sun avoidance. This demonstrationcan also convince patients to incorporate protectivemeasures, such as use of sunscreens, anti-oxidants andretinoids, particularly si nce many patients mistakenly
believe, before being convinced otherwise, that theirsun exposure is minimal and that any behaviouralmodiﬁcation is unwarranted. Indeed, sunscreen shouldbe recommended for daily use, even when the patientintends to remain indoors. Along these lines, patientsshould be reminded that UV A rays have the capacityto penetrate glass, so they should also limit theirrisk at home and at work by not lingering near sun-splashed windows. UV A shields placed on windowscan provide some protection, however. Finally, sun-protective clothing, such as a broad-brimmed hat andSPF 45 clothing, should be encouraged for patientsas general advice for when sun avoidance is notpractical and for those who anticipate prolongedexposure.ConclusionSkin ageing is a dynamic, multifactorial process,best characterized and understood in dichotomousJ Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 249expressions: intrinsic or natural ageing is cellularlydetermined as a function of heredity, is inevitableand results in cutaneous alterations; extrinsic ageing,which also manifests in cutaneous changes, originatesfrom exogenous sources and is avoidable. In otherwords, intrinsic ageing is a natural result of the passageof time, and not subject to the realm or whims ofhuman control or behaviour. Extrinsic ageing resultsfrom various factors, but exposure to the sun is theprimary source. Therefore, photo-ageing is roughlysynonymous with, although technically a subset of,extrinsic ageing.The American Academy of Dermatology, practisingdermatologists and other clinicians have been preach-ing the mantra that ‘there is no such thing as a healthytan’, with some portion of the populace absorbingthis message. Citing the attendant wrinkling and pig-
mentary changes associated with photo-ageing and thepotentially more serious consequences of chronic sunexposure can be effective approaches for doctors, asthis method appeals to an individual’s strong concernabout appearance. The clinical appearance of photo-ageing is characterized by rough, dry skin, mottledpigmentation and wrinkling. Such cutaneous manifes-tations, particularly when extensive or severe, can beharbingers of skin cancer. It is important for physiciansto impress upon patients that photodamage representsthe cutaneous signs of premature ageing. A summaryof the role of telomeres in cellular ageing and cancerand/or a brief discussion of the differences betweenintrinsic and extrinsic ageing might prove useful inaltering the behaviour of patients and stemming thetide of photodamage, photo-ageing, and photo-inducedskin cancers.The only known defences against photo-ageingbeyond sun avoidance are using sunscreens to block
or reduce the amount of UV reaching the skin,using retinoids to inhibit collagenase synthesis and topromote collagen production, and using anti-oxidants,particularly in combination, to reduce and neutralizefree radicals.References1. Unna PG. Histopathologie der Hautkrankheiten . A. Herschwald:Berlin, 1894.2. Uitto J. Understanding premature skin aging. N Engl J Med1997; 337(20):1463–1465.3. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.4. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen.2001; 98(10):1091–1095.5. Lovell CR, Smolenski KA, Duance VC, Light ND, Young S,Dyson M. Type I and III collagen content and ﬁbre distributionin normal human skin during ageing. Br J Dermatol1987; 117(4):419–428.6. Lavker RM. Structural alterations in exposed and unexposed agedskin. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):59–66.7. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Aging of skin. In Fitzpatrick’s
Dermatology in General Medicine Vo l 2 , 5thedn. McGraw-Hill:New York, 1999; 1700.8. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.9. Geserick C, Blasco MA. Novel roles for telomerase in aging.Mech Ageing Dev 2006; 127(6):579–583 [Epub 3 March 2006].10. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss. ClinExp Dermatol 2001; 26(7):562–565.11. Boukamp P. Ageing mechanisms: the role of telomere loss. ClinExp Dermatol. 2001; 26(7):562–565.12. Pendino F, Tarkanyi I, Dudognon C, Hillion J, Lanotte M,Aradi J, et al. Telomeres and telomerase: pharmacological targetsfor new anticancer strategies? Curr Cancer Drug Targets2006; 6(2):147–180.13. Boukamp P. Skin aging: a role for telomerase and telomeredynamics? Curr Mol Med. 2005; 5(2):171–177.14. Nakamura K, Izumiyama-Shimomura N, Sawabe M, Arai T,Aoyagi Y, Fujiwara M, et al. Comparative analysis of telomere
lengths and erosion with age in human epidermis and lingualepithelium. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 119(5):1014–1019.15. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.16. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skin
15. Roupe G. Skin of the aging human being. Lakartidningen2001; 98(10):1091–1095.16. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skinaging/photoaging. Micron 2004; 35(3):155–159.17. Pendino F, Tarkanyi I, Dudognon C, Hillion J, Lanotte M,Aradi J, et al. Telomeres and telomerase: pharmacological targetsfor new anticancer strategies? Curr Cancer Drug Targets2006; 6(2):147–180.18. Lebel M, Leder P. A deletion within the murine Werner syn-drome helicase induces sensitivity to inhibitors of topoisomeraseand loss of cellular pro liferative capacity. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA 1998; 95(22):13097–13102.19. Ahn B, Harrigan JA, Indig FE, Wilson DM III, Bohr V A.Regulation of WRN helicase activity in human base excisionrepair. JB i o lC h e m 2004; 279(51):53465–53474 [Epub 22September 2004].20. Poot M, Gollahon KA, Emond MJ, Silber JR, Rabinovitch PS.Werner syndrome diploid ﬁbroblasts are sensitive to 4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide and 8-methoxypsoralen: implications for
the disease phenotype. FA SE B J 2002; 16(7):757–758 [Epub 12Mar 2002].21. Lebel M, Leder P. A deletion within the murine Werner syn-drome helicase induces sensitivity to inhibitors of topoisomeraseand loss of cellular pro liferative capacity. Proc Natl Acad SciUSA 1998; 95(22):13097–13102.22. Chang S, Multani AS, Cabrera NG, Naylor ML, Laud P, Lom-bard D, et al. Essential role of limiting telomeres in the pathogen-esis of Werner syndrome. Nat Genet 2004; 36(8):877–882 [Epub4 July 2004].23. Uitto J. Understanding premature skin aging. N Engl J Med1997; 337(20):1463–1465.24. Yao W, Malaviya R, Magliocco M, Gottlieb A. Topical treatmentof UVB-irradiated human subjects with EGCG, a green teapolyphenol, increases caspase-3 activity in keratinocytes. JA mAcad Dermatol 2005; 52(3, pt 2):150.25. Pinnell S, Lin F-Y, Grichnik J. A topical anti-oxidant solutioncontaining vitamin C, vitamin E, and ferulic acid prevents
ultraviolet radiation induced caspase-3 induction in skin. JA mAcad Dermatol 2005; 52(3, pt 2):158.26. Bosset S, Bonnet-Duquennoy M, Barre P, Chalon A, Kurfurst R,Bonte F, et al. Photo-ageing shows histological features ofchronic skin inﬂammation without clinical and molecularabnormalities. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149(4):826–835.27. Kosmadaki MG, Gilchrest BA. The role of telomeres in skinaging/photoaging. Micron 2004; 35(3):155–159.28. Kappes UP, Luo D, Potter M, Schulmeister K, Runger TM.Short- and long-wave UV light (UVB and UV A) inducesimilar mutations in human skin cells. J Invest Dermatol2006; 126(3):667–675.29. Bosset S, Bonnet-Duquennoy M, Barre P, Chalon A, Kurfurst R,Bonte F, et al. Photo-ageing shows histological features ofchronic skin inﬂammation without clinical and molecularabnormalities. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149(4):826–835.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright
Copyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
250 L. Baumann30. Marrot L, Bela ¨ıdi JP, Meunier JR. Importance of UV A photopro-tection as shown by genotoxic related endpoints: DNA damageand p53 status. Mutat Res 2005; 571(1–2):175–184.31. Sugimoto M, Yamashita R, Ueda M. Telomere length of theskin in association with chronological aging and photoaging.J Dermatol Sci 2006; 43(1):43–47 [Epub 9 March 2006].32. Lavker RM. Structural alterations in exposed and unexposed agedskin. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):59–66.33. Whitton JT, Everall JD. The thickness of the epidermis. Br JDermatol 1973; 89(5):467–476.34. El-Domyati M, Attia S, Saleh F, Brown D, Birk DE, Gasparro F,et al. Intrinsic aging vs. photoaging: a comparative histopatholog-ical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin. ExpDermatol 2002; 11(5):398–405.35. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-
protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.36. Katzberg AA. The area of the dermo–epidermal junction inhuman skin. Anat Rec 1958; 131:717.37. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Aging of skin. In Fitzpatrick’sDermatology in General Medicine Vo l 2 , 5thedn. McGraw-Hill:New York, 1999; 1697–1706.38. Kligman AM. Perspectives and problems in cutaneous gerontol-ogy. J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):39–46.39. Orentreich N, Selmanowitz VJ. Levels of biological functionswith aging. Trans NY Acad Sci 1969; 31:992.40. Ibid.41. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.42. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.43. El-Domyati M, Attia S, Saleh F, Brown D, Birk DE, Gasparro F,et al. Intrinsic aging vs. photoaging: a comparative histopatholog-
ical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin. ExpDermatol 2002; 11(5):398–405.44. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.45. Kligman AM, Zheng P, Lavker RM. The anatomy and pathogen-esis of wrinkles. Br J Dermatol 1985; 113(1):37–42.46. Gniadecka M, Nielsen OF, Wessel S, Heidenheim M, Chris-tensen DH, Wulf HC. Water and protein structure in photoagedand chronically aged skin. J Invest Dermatol1998; 111(6):1129–1133.47. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.48. Oikarinen A. The aging of ski n: chronoaging versus photoaging.Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 1990; 7(1):3–4.49. Shuster S, Black MM, McVitie E. The inﬂuence of age and sexon skin thickness, skin collagen and density. Br J Dermatol1975; 93(6):639–643.50. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.
Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.51. Grifﬁths CE, Russman AN, Majmudar G, Singer RS, Hamil-ton TA, V oorhees JJ. Restoration of collagen formation in photo-damaged human skin by tretinoin (retinoic acid). N Engl J Med1993; 329(8):530–535.52. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.53. Craven NM, Watson RE, Jones CJ, Shuttleworth CA, Kielty CM,Grifﬁths CE. Clinical features of photodamaged human skin areassociated with a reduction in collagen VII. Br J Dermatol1997; 137(3):344–350.54. Contet-Audonneau JL, Jeanmaire C, Pauly G. A histologicalstudy of human wrinkle structures: comparison between sun-exposed areas of the face, with or without wrinkles, and sun-protected areas. Br J Dermatol 1999; 140(6):1038–1047.
55. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skin
55. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skinaging. Ageing Res Rev 2002; 1(4):705–720.56. Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, Wang ZQ, Varani J, Kang S,et al. Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing andretinoid antagonism. Nature 1996; 379(6563):335–339.57. Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, V oorhees JJ.Pathophysiology of premature skin aging induced by ultravioletlight. N Engl J Med 1997; 337(20):1419–1428.58. Rittie L, Fisher GJ. UV-light-induced signal cascades and skinaging. Ageing Res Rev 2002; 1(4):705–720.59. Mitchel RE. Chronic solar dermatosis: a light and elec-tron microscopic study of the dermis. J Invest Dermatol1967; 48(3):203–220.60. Tsuji T, Hamada T. Age-related changes in human dermal elasticﬁbres. Br J Dermatol 1981; 105(1):57–63.61. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.
1):571–585.62. Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, Herrmann G,Ma W, Kuhr L, et al. Photoaging of the skin from phenotypeto mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.63. Matsuoka L, Uitto J. Alterations in the elastic ﬁbers in cutaneousaging and solar elastosis. In Aging and the Skin , Balin A,Kligman AM (eds). Raven: New York, 1989; 141–151.64. Lavker RM. Cutaneous aging: ch ronologic versus photoaging. InPhotodamage (1st edn), Gilchrest BA (ed.). Blackwell Science:Cambridge, MA, 1995; 128.65. Montagna W, Carlisle K. Structural changes in aging human skin.J Invest Dermatol 1979; 73(1):47–53.66. Escofﬁer C, de Rigal J, Rochefort A, Vasselet R, Leveque JL,Agache PG. Age-related mechani cal properties of human skin:anin vivo study. J Invest Dermatol 1989; 93(3):353–357.67. Ghersetich I, Lotti T, Campanile G, Grappone C, Dini G.Hyaluronic acid in cutaneous intrinsic aging. Int J Dermatol1994; 33(2):119–122.
1994; 33(2):119–122.68. Pearce RH, Grimmer BJ. Age and the chemical constitution ofnormal human dermis. J Invest Dermatol 1972; 58(6):347–361.69. Elsner P, Maibach HI. Cosmeceuticals and Active Cosmetics:Drugs versus Cosmetics (2nd edn). Marcel Dekker: New York,2005.70. Bernstein EF, Underhill CB, Hahn PJ, Brown DB, Uitto J.Chronic sun exposure alters both the content and dis-tribution of dermal glycosaminoglycans. Br J Dermatol1996; 135(2):255–262.71. Ghersetich I, Lotti T, Campanile G, Grappone C, Dini G.Hyaluronic acid in cutaneous intrinsic aging. Int J Dermatol1994; 33(2):119–122.72. Tammi R, S ¨a¨am¨anen AM, Maibach HI, Tammi M. Degradationof newly synthesized high molecular mass hyaluronan in theepidermal and dermal compar tments of human skin in organculture. J Invest Dermatol 1991; 97(1):126–130.73. Sakai S, Yasuda R, Sayo T, Ishikawa O, Inoue S. Hyaluronanexists in the normal stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol2000; 114(6):1184–1187.
2000; 114(6):1184–1187.74. Rieger M. Hyaluronic acid in cosmetics. Cosm Toil1998; 113(3):35–42.75. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.76. Gilchrest BA, Stoff JS, Soter NA. Chronologic aging alters theresponse to ultraviolet-induced inﬂammation in human skin.J Invest Dermatol 1982; 79(1):11–15.77. Fenske NA, Lober CW. Structural and functional changesof normal aging skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15(4, pt1):571–585.78. Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, Herrmann G,Ma W, Kuhr L, et al. Photoaging of the skin from phenotypeto mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
to mechanisms. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35(3):307–316.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Skin ageing and its treatment 25179. Ghadially R, Brown BE, Sequeira-Martin SM, Feingold KR,Elias PM. The aged epidermal pe rmeability barrier. Structural,functional, and lipid biochemi cal abnormalities in humans and asenescent murine model. J Clin Invest 1995; 95(5):2281–2290.80. Tezuka T, Qing J, Saheki M, Kusuda S, Takahashi M. Terminaldifferentiation of facial epidermis of the aged: immunohistochem-ical studies. Dermatology 1994; 188(1):21–24.81. Nelson BR, Majmudar G, Grifﬁths CE, Gillard MO, Dixon AE,Tavakkol A, et al. Clinical improvement following dermabrasionof photoaged skin correlates w ith synthesis of collagen I. ArchDermatol 1994; 130(9):1136–1142.82. Ostler EL, Wallis CV, Aboalchamat B, Faragher RG. Telomeraseand the cellular lifespan: implications of the aging process.J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2000; 13(suppl 6):1467–1476.83. Baumann L. How to prevent photoaging? J Invest Dermatol2005; 125(4):xii–xiii.
2005; 125(4):xii–xiii.84. Varani J, Warner RL, Ghar aee-Kermani M, Phan SH, Kang S,Chung JH, et al. Vitamin A antagonizes decreased cell growthand elevated collagen-degradin g matrix metalloproteinases andstimulates collagen accumulatio n in naturally aged human skin.J Invest Dermatol 2000; 114(3):480–486.85. Nusgens BV, Humbert P, Rougier A, Colige AC, Haftek M,Lambert CA, et al. Topically applied vitamin C enhances themRNA level of collagens I and III, their processing enzymesand tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in the humandermis. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116(6):853–859.86. Kockaert M, Neumann M. Systemic and topical drugs for agingskin. J Drugs Dermatol 2003; 2(4):435–441.87. Margelin D, Medaisko C, Lombard D, Picard J, Fourtanier A.Hyaluronic acid and dermatan sulfate are selectively stimulatedby retinoic acid in irradiated and nonirradiated hairless mouseskin. J Invest Dermatol 1996; 106(3):505–509.
88. Tajima S, Hayashi A, Suzuki T. Elastin expression is up-regulated by retinoic acid but not by retinol in chick embryonicskin ﬁbroblasts. J Dermatol Sci 1997; 15(3):166–172.89. Matheson AJ, Perry CM. Glucosamine: a review of itsuse in the management of osteoarthritis. Drugs Aging2003; 20(14):1041–1060.90. Fitzpatrick RE. E ndogenous growth factor s as cosmeceuticals.Dermatol Surg 2005; 31(7, pt 2):827–831; discussion, 831.91. Fisher GJ, V oorhees JJ. Molecular mechanisms of photoagingand its prevention by retinoic aci d: ultraviolet irradiation inducesMAP kinase signal transduction cascades that induce Ap-1-regulated matrix metalloproteinases that degrade human skinin vivo .J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1998; 3(1):61–68.92. Kang S, Chung JH, Lee JH, Fisher GJ, Wan YS, Duell EA, et al.Topical N-acetyl cysteine and genis tein prevent ultraviolet-light-induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.
J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.93. Kang S, Chung JH, Lee JH, Fisher GJ, Wan YS, Duell EA, et al.Topical N-acetyl cysteine and genis tein prevent ultraviolet-light-induced signaling that leads to photoaging in human skin in vivo .J Invest Dermatol 2003; 120(5):835–841.94. Greul AK, Grundmann JU, Heinrich F, Pﬁtzner I, Bernhardt J,Ambach A, et al. Photoprotection of UV-irradiated human skin:an antioxidative combination of vitamins E and C, carotenoids,selenium and proanthocyanidins. Skin Pharm Appl Skin Physiol2002; 15(5):307–315.95. Passi S, De Pita O, Grandinetti M, Simotti C, Littaru GP. Thecombined use of oral and topical lipophilic anti-oxidants increasestheir levels both in sebum and stratum corneum. Biofactors2003; 18(1–4):289–297.96. Lin FH, Lin JY, Gupta RD, Tournas JA, Burch JA, Selim MA,et al. Ferulic acid stabilizes a solution of vitamins C and Eand doubles its photoprotection of skin. J Invest Dermatol2005; 125(4):826–832.
2005; 125(4):826–832.97. Papucci L, Schiavone N, Witort E, Donnini M, Lapucci A, Tem-pestini A, et al. Coenzyme q10 prevents apoptosis by inhibiting
2005; 125(4):826–832.97. Papucci L, Schiavone N, Witort E, Donnini M, Lapucci A, Tem-pestini A, et al. Coenzyme q10 prevents apoptosis by inhibitingmitochondrial depolarization independently of its free radicalscavenging property. JB i o lC h e m 2003; 278(30):28220–28228.98. Beyer RE, Ernster L. The anti-oxidant role of coenzyme Q. InHighlights in Ubiquinone Research , Lenaz G, et al (eds). Taylorand Francis: London, 1990; 191–213.99. Middlekamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Garcia-CaballeroT, Rius-Diaz F, Fitzpatrick TB, et al. Orally administeredPolypodium leucotomos extract decreases psoralen–UV A-induced phototoxicity, pigmentation, and damage of human skin.J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 50(1):41–49.100. Middlekamp-Hup MA, Pathak MA, Parrado C, Goukassian D,Rius-Diaz F, Mihm MC, et al.O r a l Polypodium leucotomosextract decreases ultr aviolet-induced damage of human skin. JA mAcad Dermatol 2004; 51(6):910–918.
Acad Dermatol 2004; 51(6):910–918.101. Philips N, Smith J, Keller T, Gonzalez S. Predominant effects ofPolypodium leucotomos on membrane integrity, lipid peroxida-tion, and expression of elastin and matrixmetalloproteinase-1 inultraviolet radiation exposed ﬁbroblasts, and keratinocytes. JD e r -matol Sci 2003; 32(1):1–9.102. Katiyar SK. Silymarin and skin cancer prevention: anti-inﬂammatory, anti-oxidant and immunomodulatory effects(review). Int J Oncol 2005; 26(1):169–176.103. Zhao J, Agarwal R. Tissue distribution of silibinin, the majoractive constituent of silymarin, in mice and its associationwith enhancement of phase II enzymes: implications in cancerchemoprevention. Carcinogenesis 1999; 20(11):2101–2108.104. Dhanalakshmi S, Mallikarjuna GU, Singh RP, Agarwal R. Silib-inin prevents ultraviolet radia tion-caused skin damages in SKH-1hairless mice via a decrease in thymine dimer positive cells andan up-regulation of p53-p21/Cip1 in epidermis. Carcinogenesis
2004; 25(8):1459–1465.105. Sime S, Reeve VE. Protection from inﬂammation, immunosup-pression and carcinogenesis induced by UV radiation in mice bytopical pycnogenol. Photochem Photobiol 2004; 79(2):193–198.106. Saliou C, Rimbach G, Moini H, McLaughlin L, Hosseini S,Lee J, et al. Solar ultraviolet-induced erythema in humanskin and nuclear factor-kappa-B -dependent gene expression inkeratinocytes are modulated by a French maritime pine barkextract. Free Radic Biol Med 2001; 30(2):154–160.107. Bito T, Roy S, Sen CK, Packer L. Pine bark extract pycnogenoldownregulates IFN-gamma-induced adhesion of T cells to humankeratinocytes by inhibiting i nducible ICAM-1 expression. FreeRadic Biol Med 2000; 28(2):219–227.108. Gallagher RP, Rivers JK, Lee TK, Bajdik CD, McLean DI,Coldman AJ. Broad-spectrum sunscreen use and the developmentof new nevi in white children: a randomized controlled trial. JA mMed Assoc 2000; 283(22):2955–2960.J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/path
J Pathol 2007; 211: 241–251 DOI: 10.1002/pathCopyright2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 10969896, 2007, 2, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2098 by Cochrane Japan, Wiley Online Library on [15/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5.2 3.4Neurocosmetics in Skincare—TheFascinating World of Skin–BrainConnection: A Review to ExploreIngredients, Commercial Productsfor Skin Aging, and CosmeticRegulationVito Rizzi, Jennifer Gubitosa, Paola Fini and Pinalysa Co smaReviewhttps://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics8030066
cosmeticsReviewNeurocosmetics in Skincare—The Fascinating World ofSkin–Brain Connection: A Review to Explore Ingredients,Commercial Products for Skin Aging, and Cosmetic RegulationVito Rizzi1,*, Jennifer Gubitosa1, Paola Fini2and Pinalysa Cosma1,*/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Rizzi, V .; Gubitosa, J.; Fini,P .; Cosma, P . Neurocosmetics inSkincare—The Fascinating World ofSkin–Brain Connection: A Review toExplore Ingredients, CommercialProducts for Skin Aging, andCosmetic Regulation. Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66. https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics8030066Academic Editor: Leonhard ZastrowReceived: 9 June 2021Accepted: 12 July 2021Published: 16 July 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional afﬁl-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1Dipartimento di Chimica, Universit àdegli Studi “Aldo Moro” di Bari, Via Orabona, 4-70126 Bari, Italy;jennifer.gubitosa@uniba.it2Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche CNR-IPCF, UOS Bari, Via Orabona, 4-70126 Bari, Italy; p.ﬁni@ba.ipcf.cnr.it*Correspondence: vito.rizzi@uniba.it (V .R.); pinalysa.cosma@uniba.it (P .C.)Abstract: The “modern” cosmetology industry is focusing on research devoted to discovering novelneurocosmetic functional ingredients that could improve the interactions between the skin andthe nervous system. Many cosmetic companies have started to formulate neurocosmetic productsthat exhibit their activity on the cutaneous nervous system by affecting the skin’s neuromediators
through different mechanisms of action. This review aims to clarify the deﬁnition of neurocosmetics,and to describe the features of some functional ingredients and products available on the market,with a look at the regulatory aspect. The attention is devoted to neurocosmetic ingredients forcombating skin stress, explaining the stress pathways, which are also correlated with skin aging.“Neuro-relaxing” anti-aging ingredients derived from plant extracts and neurocosmetic strategies tocombat inﬂammatory responses related to skin stress are presented. Afterwards, the molecular basisof sensitive skin and the suitable neurocosmetic ingredients to improve this problem are discussed.With the aim of presenting the major application of Botox-like ingredients as the ﬁrst neurocosmeticson the market, skin aging is also introduced, and its theory is presented. To conﬁrm the efﬁcacy ofthe cosmetic products on the market, the concept of cosmetic claims is discussed.
Keywords: neurocosmetics; neurocosmetic ingredients; skin care cosmetics; skin aging; skin stress;anti-wrinkle; cosmetics; sensitive skin; Botox-like ingredients1. IntroductionSkin and Brain: A Psychobiological ConceptThe skin, a wonderful and complex organ, manages the relationships between us andthe outside world. It provides information that allows us to analyze, examine, and monitorits status—to understand and know it. The skin can appear as a canvas on which a largepart of our interior world is painted: it is a dynamic structure, in continuous transformation,that expresses subjective psychological contents through which emotions take shape [ 1].The French writer and poet Paul Val éry, in a literary dialogue that binds the deep to thesurface being reported: “ What is most deep in man is the skin .” [2,3]. So, the concept of skin ismore complex than we can expect and, if at ﬁrst glance the skin’s surface can be considered
to be a passive barrier, on the contrary, it is more than just what the eye can see, and it is far
more complex than we can expect and, if at ﬁrst glance the skin’s surface can be consideredto be a passive barrier, on the contrary, it is more than just what the eye can see, and it is farfrom this concept [ 4,5]. Indeed, the skin is directly connected to the central nervous system,and it can be considered a living sensory receptor organ [ 6,7]. The Italian dermatologistEmiliano Panconesi reported the interesting and complex concept of a “ reuniﬁcation of thetwo ectodermal brothers, brain and skin ”, to indicate the whole sensations that arise from thecontact between one’s own skin and that of others [ 1]. As well described by Andrea Bovero,in his Dermocosmetology manual, the skin and the nervous system’s common origin deeplyinﬂuences the relationship that we have with ourselves and others. Touch is the senselinked to the skin, and requires constant contact between the touching body and element
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66. https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics8030066 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cosmetics
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 2 of 80touched: this contact generates deep sensations that translate into emotions that, in turn,can be perceived and communicated to others. Thus, hands represent the virtual extensionsof one’s interiority [ 1]. The French psychoanalyst Didier Anzieu, in his works The SkinEgo,A Skin for Thought , and Psychic Envelopes , developed a theory of the unconsciousconnection between the human skin’s protective and the coordinative ego functions. Withthis approach, Anzieu reported the surface of the body—the skin—as a key constituent ofthe mental structures and functions [ 8].Starting from these physiological functions (containing/retaining, separating/comm-unicating), Bovero reported Anzieu’s concept, and The Skin Ego acquires the dual possibil-ity to establish barriers and ﬁlter exchanges with the outside [ 1]. Just as the cell membranesdelimit the cells, ensuring their individuality, similarly The Skin Ego guarantees the body’s
individuality, differentiating it from others, enhancing and safeguarding the self-identity. Itis easy to understand that, if the skin represents an extension of the central nervous system,some skin manifestations could result from psychological discomfort [ 1]. For example,during facial dermatoses, such as seborrheic dermatitis or rosacea, some neuromediatorscould play an important role, and since sensitive skin clinically results in vasodilationand pain, it is probably linked to neuronal hyperactivation. Moreover, Misery reportedthat the nervous system is involved in many dry skin problems and delayed healing [ 9].Furthermore, Bovero described this concept as more complex, and the origin of psycho-somatic skin disease could also be sought in early childhood [ 1]. On the basis of theseconsiderations, it clearly appears plausible that the healing of several skin diseases couldbe improved through the combination of speciﬁc psychotherapeutic treatments [ 10], and
this concept has its root in 1925, with the dermatologist Joseph Klauder. In other words, ifthe skin is a seismograph that reproduces the psychological self-condition, on the otherhand, the body can choose to respond somatically to the different situations of anxietyand stress. Sometimes, these are normal skin reactions that quickly pass—such as a hotﬂash that accompanies a moment of embarrassment—but dermatological manifestationsthat evolve into real pathologies are often observed. Therefore, the most common skindiseases can also have psychosomatic origins and—for example—dermatitis, psoriasis,and some dermal allergies can be taken into consideration. As a result, this psychobio-logical concept moved towards a self-consistent medical–scientiﬁc discipline identiﬁed aspsycho-neuro-endocrine-immunology (PNEI); as reported by Bovero (2011) and Françaet al. (2017), PNEI can be deﬁned as the study of the relationship between the psyche and
the nervous, endocrine, and immune systems [ 1,10].The studies performed in this “new” and fascinating ﬁeld are radically transformingthe human approach and research, moving progressively from a sectorial vision of thedifferent organs, considered as independent systems, to a global vision of the wide networkof hormones, cytokines, and neuropeptides that closely connect mind and body. Once again,as well described by Bovero, the skin, nervous system, and immune system are integratedinto a single network that is deﬁned as the neuro-immuno-cutaneous system (NICS). [ 1].This interesting relationship between the skin and the nervous system was for a longtime neglected, but today represents one of the most important ﬁelds investigated in skinbiology. The associations between nerve ﬁbers and skin are very close from an anatomicaland physiological point of view, and these can be observed at the cellular level [ 11,12].
The complex concept related to “skin identity” clearly arises from these considerations,
and physiological point of view, and these can be observed at the cellular level [ 11,12].The complex concept related to “skin identity” clearly arises from these considerations,evidencing the skin’s importance not only because it acts as a protective barrier againstexternal aggressors [ 8,13], but also for its connection with the brain. Furthermore, it isworth mentioning that undamaged and intact skin is more attractive from an aestheticpoint of view, and it confers a youthful aspect [ 14]. Since good health also considersthe improvement of the skin’s appearance, the use of safer and more effective cosmeticproducts as a strategy, especially for combating skin aging, has progressively increasedover the years [ 15]. Indeed, with the increasing longevity of the worldwide population,good health has become essential for a better quality of life, even in advanced age. Hence,the skin becomes the target of any cosmetic product; as reported in Article 2.1 (a) of the
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 3 of 80European Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009: “ any substance or mixture intended to be placed incontact with the external parts of the human body (epidermis, hair system, nails, lips..) with a viewexclusively or mainly to cleaning them, perfuming them, changing their appearance, protectingthem, keeping them in good condition or correcting body odors ”. [15]. Thanks to the aim ofpreserving wellbeing over time, a cosmetic product should be considered a powerfultool that breaks down the barrier between beauty and health; for this reason, cosmeticsare largely used not only by beauty experts, but also by regular people throughout theday [ 16]. There are different cosmetic forms on the market, each with its own function anddifferent ingredients, which are used in novel products, meeting ancient traditions andrecent innovations, with the purpose of restoring and improving skin blemishes. However,
as already discussed, since these imperfections—generated by an external and internaldiscomfort—are the consequence of some phenomena of a physio-pathological nature(which manifest themselves on the skin, and are reﬂected at the physical, psychological,and social levels) [ 1], the concept of “traditional” cosmetics has been overpassed in the lastyears, looking instead for skincare products able to affect skin–brain connections: theseare neurocosmetics. They generate many doubts when confused with the neurosciencesor the wellbeing and hedonistic feelings arising from the use of cosmetic products. Thus,this review aimed to clarify these ambiguous concepts, contextualizing the applicationsof neurocosmetics. The review is opened by brieﬂy describing the well-known cosmeticfunctions and uses that have been regulated for years, then landing in the neurocosmeticworld, presenting it carefully. With the aim of understanding some general concepts
about the functions of neurocosmetics, ingredients available on the market for a skincarebeauty routine will be examined. The connection between skin and brain will be thusexplored, along with a view on skin aging, offering an overview of what is known aboutthis fascinating neurocosmetic research ﬁeld, and what is still ambiguous. Finally, someaspects of cosmetic claims and efﬁcacy, safety assessment, and regulation of cosmeticproducts, in order to frame the regulation of neurocosmetics, will be further discussed.2. A Brief Overview: From Cosmetology and Cosmetic Functions to NeurocosmeticsIn agreement with the European Regulation (EC) 1223/2009, cosmetic products aredesigned for a speciﬁc use, and equipped with several features that they can exhibit throughdifferent mechanisms of action [ 16]. Cosmetology is the science that studies the cosmetics’mechanisms of action and their biological effects in humans, deﬁning how to use them.
In particular, the ﬁeld of functional cosmetics aims to formulate products for restoringthe normal skin balance, preventing or counteracting the onset of any blemishes. It is worthmentioning that the physiological balance is a dynamic condition; thus, it does not refer toa situation in which transformation processes do not take place (static balance), but to asystem in which transformation processes continuously occur under dynamic equilibrium.When the skin is examined, as for any other organ, it should be thought of as a system inwhich several biochemical reactions take place, ensuring the life of cells and tissues. Asa result, under normal physiological conditions, all of these reactions are in equilibriumwith one another. However, in particular situations, this equilibrium can be lacking, withdifferent consequences on the skin (for example, changes in pH, alterations in the watercontent, changes in the composition of the hydrolipidic ﬁlm, and so on) [ 1]. In general,
our organism is able to self-restore its normal “physiological” conditions but, in some
content, changes in the composition of the hydrolipidic ﬁlm, and so on) [ 1]. In general,our organism is able to self-restore its normal “physiological” conditions but, in somecases, the imbalances get worse, encouraging the onset of blemishes or real pathologies.Therefore, several cosmetic treatments represent useful tools for ameliorating some skinmanifestations, such as acne [ 1]. However, cosmetics must not claim therapeutic properties,but should protect the skin, keeping it in good condition and carrying out preventiveactivities [ 17–20].Although cosmetics are formulated with many ingredients with different functions, itis possible to distinguish them into three main classes, according to their prevalent function:skincare (protective/nourishing function), makeup (aesthetic/decorative function), andtoiletries (hygienic/cleansing function). In particular, the cosmetic functions allow us to
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 4 of 80classify different products according to their activity performed at the skin or mucosallevel.By focusing the attention on the skincare category, which represents the topic of thisreview, this class includes all products that aim to preserve, over time, the physiologicaland functional skin characteristics of the area where they are applied. However, sincemodern cosmetology is mainly oriented towards the formulation of products with “mixedfunctions”, referring to a broad spectrum of activities, it is clear that these differences areobsolete. Starting from these considerations, the boundary between the different cosmeticfunctions is narrowing; there is a tendency towards a general concept of cosmetics inwhich beauty and wellbeing become essential both for skin health maintenance and for theprevention of skin blemishes and diseases. Focalizing the attention on the action exhibitedby different cosmetic ingredients, it is possible to identify [ 1]:
• Anti-aging action: this refers to all ingredients that, via different pathways, combat theskin aging processes, preventing and ﬁghting the signs of aging, revitalizing senescentskin, promoting the elimination of toxins, improving microcirculation, and reducingthe number and the depth of wrinkles;• Antioxidant action: this includes ingredients that can capture and inactivate freeradicals at the skin level, reducing the “oxidative stress”;• Anti-wrinkle action: this concerns ingredients that counteract the onset of wrinkles;• Depigmenting action: this includes ingredients that lighten the skin color;• Eudermic action: this considers ingredients that invoke a feeling of wellbeing whenapplied on the skin;• Eutrophic action: this refers to substances that nourish the skin and improve itsappearance;• Soothing, anti-redness action: exhibited by ingredients able to soothe pain and reduceskin redness in cases of mild inﬂammation, counteracting irritation, and bringing
relief to stressed skin;• Regenerating action: this refers to ingredients with eutrophic properties, promotingcell regeneration, and providing the necessary elements for skin development andmaintenance over time;• Toning, “lifting” action: this concerns ingredients that restore skin tone and ﬁrmnessby acting at both the epidermis and dermis levels, encouraging the typical turgor ofyoung and healthy skin [ 1].Interestingly, recent research advances against skin aging have developed innovativeproducts [ 14,15]—the so-called neurocosmetics—that could revolutionize the cosmeticworld due to their fascinating properties. The ﬁrst deﬁnition of these very interestingproducts was attributed to Prof. Misery in 2000, referring to them as “not absorbedproducts applied on the skin, exhibiting activity on the cutaneous nervous system or ingeneral effects on the skin mediators” [ 9]. So, neurocosmetics are nontoxic, bioactive topical
products that contain ingredients designed to work at a neurological level [ 5], and notelsewhere [ 21,22].Furthermore, today, consumers are looking for “technological” skincare products thatcould prevent skin aging, protect skin from environmental damage, and provide cosmeticoptions for several skin problems. In particular, consumers’ preference is devoted to theresearch of natural, non-irritating, preservative-free, and green products. Hence, it shouldbe mentioned that the challenges of manufacturers are devoted to the development ofsafe, stable, and effective products that, at the same time, are eco-sustainable and meetconsumer demands [ 23].The most common ingredients are botanicals, marine extracts, peptides, and vitaminsas antioxidants [ 2].On these grounds, in the following paragraphs, a careful discussion is presented aboutneurocosmetics, offering to the readers an overview of their actions at the skin level and
the related important mechanisms that can be affected by their use.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 5 of 803. The Neurocosmetics3.1. Towards Neurocosmetics and How to Understand It: A More in-Depth Insight about SkinInnervation and NeurotransmittersSkin is constituted by the epidermis—the outer, waterproof, stratiﬁed, squamousepithelium layer of ectodermal origin—and dermis, the inner and thicker supporting layerof connective tissue of mesodermal origin (Figure 1) [24,25]. A dense innervation involvesthe outermost skin layers, except for the stratum corneum [ 9,25].Figure 1. Diagram of the skin.From the spinal cord, sensitive nervous or neuro-vegetative ﬁbers innerve the skin [ 9],modulating thermoregulation, sebaceous secretion, or melanogenesis [ 4], explicating onceagain the deﬁnition of Misery “ Les nerfs àﬂeur de peau ” [9]. Indeed, many emotions are felt atthe skin level: fear, stress, and happiness manifest themselves in paling (vasoconstriction),sweating, goosebumps, raised hairs, blushing (vasodilatation), or radiance [ 8].
The skin, as a system for the surveillance of environmental changes (heat, humidity,etc.) and perception of the environment (body limits, recognition of the non-self andobjects, touch, etc.), produces stimuli that, through mediators, are transmitted to thenervous system [ 12,24]. For example, among mediators, there are neurotransmitters [ 24,25];These are chemical messengers, naturally synthesized by nervous ﬁber endings, that arealso produced by skin cells (keratinocytes, melanocytes, ﬁbroblasts, etc.) and the immunesystem [ 11,12].The release of neuromediators can be induced by physical, chemical, or even emotionalstimuli [ 26]. Among the 200 neuromediators currently known, about 25 have been foundin the skin. Some examples include neuropeptides such as substance P , calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and bradykinins; neurohormones such as melanocyte-stimulatinghormone (MSH), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH); catecholamines; enkephalins;
endorphins; and acetylcholine [ 9,26]. However, the neuromediators’ level changes accord-ing to the person and their physiological or pathological circumstances [ 9,26]. Speciﬁcreceptors for these neuromediators, and enzymes for degrading them, are expressed bycutaneous and immune cells. The binding of neurotransmitters to receptors induces themodulation of cell properties and skin functions (immunity, cell differentiation, prolifera-tion, pigmentation, etc.). For example, substance P activates keratinocytes by increasing thesynthesis of interleukin 1 αandβ, interleukin 8, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF- α), as wellas intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression on the keratinocyte surface [ 9,26].Hence, keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, melanocytes, endothelial cells, ﬁbroblasts, andother skin or immune system cells are modulated and controlled by nerves. Reciprocally,the skin can modulate neuronal activity and growth. Nerve growth factors are slightly
involved for this purpose, controlling both the neuronal growth and the neurotransmitters’secretion [ 9,26].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 6 of 80The result is that the skin is the window that connects the nervous, immune, cutaneous,and endocrine functions; it is important for maintaining physiological homeostasis [ 27].As previously mentioned, the skin can interact with both endogenous and exogenousstimuli, and it is the target of nonmedical and medical treatments for healthy and diseasedstates.This interesting connection, where the skin transmits and receives information from in-ternal and external sources, induces the response of the neuroimmune-cutaneous-endocrine(NICE) system [ 5,9], and is useful for understanding neurocosmetics and the related brain–skin connection for skincare.3.2. Neurocosmetics, the Cosmetic of Neurotransmitters: The Brain and SkincareAfter the deﬁnition of Misery in 2000 [ 10], neurocosmetics only began to receive greatattention during the annual meeting of the New York Society of Cosmetic Chemists in
2007 [ 28]. To improve the skin’s appearance and imperfections, neurocosmetic research wasmainly focused on ingredients with structural analogies to endogenous neuromediators.Hence, when formulating neurocosmetics, considering that skin cells have receptors thatbind neurotransmitters to regulate their functions, the knowledge of the connection mecha-nisms between the skin and the brain should be useful in choosing functional ingredientsable to interact with both systems, obtaining speciﬁc results [ 2,9,29].For example, by targeting nerve clusters sensitive to heat, cold, pain, itching, and/orpressure, neurocosmetic products can affect the brain’s responses to topical treatments.More speciﬁcally, the involved receptors send signals to the spinal cord that are subse-quently transmitted to the cerebral cortex [ 2,12,28,30].Neurocosmetic ingredients can act by following the mechanisms reported below:
• Directly on the cutaneous nervous ﬁber endings [ 9], as modulators of the neurotrans-mitter release [ 14]. Examples are the botulinum-like peptides that encourage facialmusculature relaxation to obtain wrinkle-smoothing, and peptides that inhibit neu-rons, mainly used to make hypersensitive skin less reactive towards environmentalstimuli (temperature changes, air humidity, smog, etc.) [ 9];• They modulate non-nervous cells’ functions as agonist/antagonist molecules of theneuropeptide receptors or neurotransmitter effects modulators [ 9,14].To clarify the concept of a neurocosmetic functional ingredient, a simple example isrepresented by menthol and its derivatives, which can act on the skin as a physical coolantor a heat source, according to the used formulations, area of application, and amountused [ 31–34].However, over the years, a great number of functional ingredients—such as biomimetic
peptides [ 35] deriving from different origins [ 36], and several plant extracts [ 37], able toperform neuro-modulatory actions—have been developed [ 38–40].As a result, a new way to bring beneﬁts to the skin’s nervous system arises, whichresults in improved skin health, and the potential impact of this emerging ﬁeld on skincareis signiﬁcant [ 2]. Indeed, cosmetic manufacturers would treat the individual as a whole:the body and the mind.However, it should be mentioned that neurocosmetics are largely used in anti-agingproducts. Therefore, neurocosmetic activities, by targeting the interactions between theskin and the nervous system, can play a signiﬁcant role in skin balance [ 15,29].In particular, neurocosmetics can render the skin smoother, more radiant, healthier,and less wrinkled, decreasing the inﬂammatory response and conferring a soothing effect.For example, savvy brands try to overpass the traditional cosmetics limits, formulating
skin solutions to ﬁght stress and aging [ 2]. Thus, neurocosmetics seems to be the newcosmetic trend, but is everything really clear? Or are neurocosmetics manufacturersmisleading with the idea that the use of some products—especially referring to makeup
cosmetic trend, but is everything really clear? Or are neurocosmetics manufacturersmisleading with the idea that the use of some products—especially referring to makeupproducts—“induce” feelings of pleasantness and wellbeing?
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 7 of 803.2.1. Feelings of Pleasantness and Wellbeing vs. NeurocosmeticsIn most of the relevant online blogs, it is possible to read that the world of cosmeticsis increasingly oriented towards a holistic vision of beauty, confusing the feelings ofpleasantness and wellbeing derived from the application of a cosmetic product with apleasant texture that induces hedonistic sensations, with neurocosmetics. The same occursif a cosmetic is packaged in a particular way. A peculiar sensory experience, felt during theuse of personal care products, can reduce life stress and, at the same time, persuade theconsumers to buy a product from a speciﬁc brand. For example, when leave-on skincareproducts are taken into account, the sensory feel is an important aspect. Indeed, in thiscase, a sensory experience is offered to the consumers, which must not be confused withthe neurocosmetic effects [ 41,42].
the neurocosmetic effects [ 41,42].Moreover, cosmetic products described as euphoric or antidepressant are not un-common. Several cosmetic companies proposed “happiness cosmetics”, associating them,uncritically, with neurocosmetics, due to the presence of particular active ingredients intheir formulation [ 8,43]. Some examples are reported in the following: Kenzoki Face FelicityIlluminating Serum, proposed by KENZO, induces the brightening of the facial skin usingthe white lotus extract in its formulation [ 44–48]. DEBORAH GROUP LABORATORIESdeveloped the Gloss Euphoric Shine, a lipstick with a mix of components “that gives animmediate feeling of wellbeing” due to the presence of the nourishing and moisturizingblue poppy extract, omega-6 and -9, vitamins, and the innovative molecule EuphorylTMΩ3 [49]. This active ingredient is a mix of Sacha inchi oil—rich in omega-3 [ 50–52]—andSchinus terebinthifolia (pink pepper) extract [ 37,53]. Omega-3 fatty acids help to counteract
hypersensitivity, dryness, and inﬂammation, reﬁning skin appearance, and also have an-tioxidant properties, thereby helping keep women’s skin healthy and glowing. EuphorylTMencourages dopamine synthesis at the skin level, allowing the lightening of the complexion.Furthermore, subjective studies have shown that it improves skin hydration, freshness, andcomfort, which is signiﬁcantly perceived by consumers [ 54]. However, the claims reportedfor this product could be misunderstood by consumers, erroneously making it appear tobe a neurocosmetic.So, the concepts of neurocosmetics, “good mood” cosmetics, and neurosciences areoften discussed without drawing attention to their substantial differences, rendering theconcepts unclear for both consumers and cosmetic experts as a consequence [ 55].Although, for years, the fascinating and complex interconnection between the skinand the brain has drawn strong interest among cosmetic companies for its potential, the
topic is very intricate, and it is perceived as confusing and fragmented [ 5,26,56,57].Indeed, since the molecules synthesized at the brain level (brain, cerebellum, and brainstem) are the same as those used by the cutaneous nervous system for cell communication,an ability to regulate complex phenomena, such as mood, has been wrongly attributed toneurocosmetics.This tendency to confer neurocosmetic functions to non-neurocosmetic ingredientscould be called “neurocosmetics-ﬁction” [ 11]. This is so far from the correct deﬁnitionof neurocosmetics that it can be better clariﬁed considering the examples of Schinus tere-binthifolia extract and Sacha inchi oil (EuphorylTMO3) activity to explain the role of afunctional neurocosmetic ingredient. Firstly, it should be taken into account that manyneurotransmitters and neurohormones, typically produced and released by the nervoussystem (serotonin, dopamine, endorphins, etc.), can also be produced and released in loco
by speciﬁc skin cells, acting with different local functions. In this particular case, it has
system (serotonin, dopamine, endorphins, etc.), can also be produced and released in locoby speciﬁc skin cells, acting with different local functions. In this particular case, it hasbeen widely demonstrated that, when applied to the skin, the Schinus terebinthifolia andSacha inchi extracts can increase the release of dopamine by skin neurons, leading to twoeffects: the enhancement of skin blood supply and the skin barrier performance, and aglobal improvement of the complexion [ 58–60].However, it must be highlighted that these effects differ from those observed whendopamine is produced at the central nervous system level, where dopamine plays therole of a neurotransmitter involved in brain network complexes associated with pleasure,
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 8 of 80satisfaction, and good mood [ 61]. Thus, the aforementioned neurocosmetics must not beconsidered to be “products” able to act on mood and happiness; attributes such as “antide-pressant”, “happiness”, “euphoric”, and “exhilarating” have been mistakenly conferred toproducts containing these extracts, going towards the pharmacological (and psychiatric)spheres, different from neurocosmetics. Indeed, only if the release of cutaneous dopamineis massive should it penetrate the blood, reaching the brain, but this is a not a probablescientiﬁc hypothesis for a cosmetic product that, by deﬁnition, must not penetrate the skin,and should remain on the epidermis [ 11].Unfortunately, marketing uses these inaccurate concepts to attribute false claims tosome cosmetic products—particularly belonging to the makeup category; this type of claimhas led to poor market outcomes, inducing discomfort and fear in consumers [ 11].
In conclusion, neurocosmetics must not be confused with psychocosmetics or neuro-sciences, as better detailed in the following two paragraphs.PsychocosmeticsWith respect to neurocosmetics, the concept of psychocosmetics is intrinsically corre-lated with the concept of cosmetics itself. Indeed, cosmetic products help one to have apositive perception of oneself (self-esteem); therefore, cosmetics are promoters of wellbeing,enabling the relationships and conditions necessary to obtain gratiﬁcation [ 62].So, although cosmetics, by deﬁnition, are not considered to be drugs, they have afundamental role in promoting health due to their ability to improve the individual’smental and social wellbeing, mood, and quality of life [ 60,63].As a consequence, all cosmetics can be considered to be psychocosmetics, from de-odorants, skin moisturizers, makeup, detergents, etc., to oncological aesthetics, which
is deﬁned as the noble cosmetics branch that helps women to take care of their image,especially if altered by anticancer therapies [ 11].NeurosciencesNeurosciences, with respect to neurocosmetics, are devoted to the study of the nervoussystem. As reported by Lombardi et al. (2019), there are different branches of neuroscience,depending on the research studies, methods, and tools. Some examples are:• Cellular Neurosciences study the behavior of nervous cells in vitro ; these relatedexperiments are usually performed by manufacturing companies on neurocosmeticfunctional ingredients;• Behavioral Neurosciences study the cognitive (thoughts, memories, and other mentalprocesses) and affective (emotions, feelings, and mood) behavior of individuals [ 11].Neuroscience Applications in the Cosmetic FieldIn recent years, neuroscience and psychological research have become an importanttopic both for marketing strategies and for research linked to consumers [ 55,62].
Not surprisingly, experts in neurology, psychology, and neuroscience have demon-strated that emotions, and the unconscious connection between consumers and products,could strongly affect the consumers’ choices for purchasing cosmetics; hence, these studiescan provide additional information for innovative products [ 60].Niedziela reported that a cosmetic product seen on the shelf is an example of ap-plied consumer neuroscience: it creates an immediate and strong impression on the con-sumer [ 41] and, in this case, it is important to understand how the product labeling andpackaging affect the consumer’s perceptions. Emotions play a signiﬁcant role in thedecision-making process, mixing the unconscious and conscious aspects of the experience.As a result, the addition of emotional proﬁling to the traditional and sensory proﬁling hasadded a new dimension during product development [ 41].To create more appealing packaging designs, the psycho-behavioral approach and
the traditional market research, neuroscientiﬁc, and psychological methodologies could be
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 9 of 80combined for understanding not only consumer expectations (brand perceptions), but alsounconscious interactions with consumer products [ 41].For example, the action readiness (whether the product is used or purchased) andautonomic stimulation (which reﬂects the degree of motor preparation for a certain action)are typically evaluated with physiological measures of the autonomic nervous system(ANS), where different aspects of the products are evaluated, and each type of evaluationis associated with speciﬁc physiological, expressive, or motivational changes [ 41].Among methodologies, it is worth mentioning a range of techn ologies, from biometrics—such as heart rate variability (HR), galvanic skin response (GSR), facial electromyography(fEMG), etc.—to brain imaging, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).Biological, psychological, and ethological data can also be collected and analyzed byusing different methods:
using different methods:• Vital parameters such as heart activity recorded with ECG [ 64], respiratory activ-ity/frequency, salivary samples for monitoring cortisol release [ 65,66] (i.e., the de-crease in cortisol secretion in saliva after the use of a soothing cream should beobserved) [ 56,67], thermography related to cutaneous blood ﬂow (i.e., when blushing,etc.), the evolution of facial skin temperature under stress [ 64], and the electrical cur-rent perception threshold (CPT); the hyperexcitability of nerve endings (A β) increaseswith age, in which a threshold increase indicates a reduction of unpleasant excitability,(i.e., an improved state of wellness . . . ) [ 64];• Psychometric tests (perceived stress), such as the Ethological Coding System for In-terviews (ECSI) (non-verbal behavior) [ 68,69]. Furthermore, using questionnaires,the effects (the hedonic pleasure of products) and appraisal (good/bad or pleas-ant/unpleasant) can be evaluated.
ant/unpleasant) can be evaluated.For cosmetic products, texture is also strongly involved in customer loyalty, so theemotional effects of tactile stimulation could be one of the keys to creating successfulproducts. By means of neuroscientiﬁc instruments and methodologies, Lombardi et al.(2017) demonstrated in their study that three lip balms, containing the same ingredients—different for only one emollient—could trigger different emotional responses during theirapplication to the lips [ 70]. In detail, “lip balm 1” contained Octyldodecyl PCA, “lip balm2” contained octyldodecanol, and “lip balm 3” contained Lauryl PCA—all at the sameconcentration. Moreover, the products tested had the same appearance and aroma. Theresearch demonstrated that the ﬁnal results were associated only with the tactile propertiesof the stimulus. For this purpose, the Authors used simultaneous electroencephalography(EEG) and galvanic skin response (GSR) measurements throughout the whole experiment.
EEG is a non-expensive, noninvasive, and passive technique that, by using electrodesplaced on the scalp, records the electrical activity generated by neurons’ synchronizedactivity. GSR is one of the most sensitive methods for emotional arousal—the phenomenonby which the skin temporarily becomes a better conductor of electricity. When a positive ora negative stimulus is emotionally arousing, it activates the autonomic nervous system,which triggers an increase in sweating, especially in the palms of the hands and in theﬁngers, as well as the soles of the feet. Both positive and negative stimuli can result in anincrease in arousal, triggering GSR. GSR measurement cannot reveal emotional valence, buthas to be integrated with other data sources in order to paint the full picture of emotion [ 55].The obtained results showed that “lip balm 1” was the best appreciated product; conversely,“lip balm 3” was least preferred. Thus, the PCA esters used as emollients—Octyldodecyl
PCA adopted for “lip balm 1”, and Lauryl PCA for “lip balm 3”—showed highly signiﬁcant
“lip balm 3” was least preferred. Thus, the PCA esters used as emollients—OctyldodecylPCA adopted for “lip balm 1”, and Lauryl PCA for “lip balm 3”—showed highly signiﬁcantdifferences in their unconscious effects. The authors supposed that the different chemicalstructures—i.e., the length of the alcoholic part of the esters’ aliphatic chains—had adifferent impact on peripheral receptors, such as tactile receptors and nociceptors, amongothers [ 55].In this context, the recent work by Sgoifo et al. (2021) indicates how a cosmeticroutine can also be considered to be a way of helping stress resilience. In particular, thestudy suggests that a good strategy for ﬁghting stress, obtaining long-lasting physio-
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 10 of 80logical, neuroendocrine, and psychological effects, could be the self-administration of acosmetic product with a pleasant texture, rich in essential oils, and applied with a mindfulmassage [ 60].4. Neurocosmetic IngredientsNeurocosmetic functional ingredients can be formulated in different cosmetic formstargeted for every consumer’s skin type and age. Some of the marketed neurocosmeticingredients are thus discussed in the following section, focusing on anti-aging skincareingredients, and to better understand their mechanisms of action, a brief insight into theaffected biological pathways will also be presented.In detail, the functional neurocosmetic ingredients for ﬁghting skin aging will bepresented, starting from neurocosmetics indicated for use against skin stress manifesta-tions, followed by neurocosmetic ingredients speciﬁcally suitable for sensitive skin types.
Finally, Botox-like peptides or plant extracts are also explored. The principal functionalneurocosmetic ingredients used on the market are reported in Table 1, carefully detailingthe related features useful for their use.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 11 of 80Table 1. Neurocosmetic ingredients on the market1.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesNeurocosmetic ingredients for combating skin stressProvital Group Agascalm Skin protection.Propanediol (and) glycerin(and) Agastache mexicanaﬂower/leaf/stem extract.Inhibition and release ofchemokines (up to 104%in vitro). Reduction ofthe LKB proteindegradation preventingthe release of NF- κB,responsible for thetranscription ofproinﬂammatory agents;migration of thetranscription factorNF-κB to the nucleus (upto 70% in vitro).Skin rednessreduction ( −10%);vasodilationdecrease ( −30%);skin hydrationimprovement(+6%), TEWL(−13%).None 1–3%Liquid;water-soluble.Vascular tonicityimprovement;restoration of thebarrier functionfor moisturizedskin; skin radianceenhancement andskin toneimprovement.Suitable forsensitive skin.
improvement.Suitable forsensitive skin.Givaudan Betaphroline Body sculpting.Aqua/water (and)butylene glycol (and)Tephrosia purpurea seedextract (and)phenoxyethanol.Stimulation ofβ-endorphin release;adenylate cyclaseactivation; G3PDHinhibition; glycerolrelease.Pain relief andimprovement inthe wellbeing ofstomatodyniapatients (oralapplication) (10%,D30; panelists’evaluation.Phenoxyethanol 2–8%Liquid;water-soluble.Neurocosmeticand body shaping.MibelleBiochemistryHappybelle-PESkin conditioning;anti-aging;antioxidant.Happybelle-PE (standardversion): lecithin (and)Vitex agnus-castus extract(and) glycerin (and)ascorbyl tetraisopalmitate(and) tocopherol (and)olus oil/vegetable oil (and)cyclodextrin (and) alcohol(and) aqua/ water.Happybelle O (oil-solubleversion): Vitexagnus-castus extract (and)Helianthus annuus(sunﬂower) seed oil.Stimulation of cellactivity; increase in typeI and III collagen(in vitro).Increase in skinhydration andﬁrmness; decrease
hydration andﬁrmness; decreasein wrinkle depth.None 1–2%Liquid;water-soluble.Reduction of ﬁnewrinkles anddeeper lines;stimulation ofcollagenproduction;improvement inskin radiance;plumping andlifting effects.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 12 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesProvitalGroupHappy SkinAnti-aging;antioxidant.Glycerin (and) aqua/water,(and) Rhodiola rosea rootextract (and)phenoxyethanol (and)potassium sorbate.Liposoluble version:Helianthus annuus(sunﬂower) seed oil (and)Rhodiola rosea root extract(and) Rosmarinusofﬁcinalis (rosemary) leafextract.Protection fromfree-radical-induceddamage.Increase inendorphin levels;enhancement ofskin appearance.Phenoxyethanol(and) potassiumsorbate. Nopreservatives inthe liposolubleversion0.2–2.0%Liquid;water-soluble.Recommended toformulate facial,body, and haircare products.Givaudan Neurophroline Skin protection.Aqua/water (and)propanediol (and)Tephrosia purpurea seedextract.Inhibition of stresshormone cortisol release;stimulation ofβ-endorphin production;global activation ofantistress genes
global activation ofantistress genes(transcriptomic onkeratinocytes andﬁbroblasts); activation ofantistress proteins HMOX1and NQO1 (proteomic onkeratinocytes andﬁbroblasts); increase inHMOX1 and NQO1expression in theepidermis (ex vivo).Efﬁcacy onstressed (pollutedair) skin: skinluminosityimprovement;skin rednessreduction;improvement ofglobal skin color(when used at 2%);dark eye circlereduction.None 0.1–2%Liquid;water-soluble.Overall skin stresscontrol.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 13 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesSeppic Sepicalm S WPProtective agent;soothing agent;skin conditioningagent; skinmoisturizingagent; sensorialmodiﬁer.Sodium cocoyl aminoacids (and) sarcosine (and)potassium aspartate (and)magnesium aspartate.+48% production ofß-endorphins; Targets thekey inﬂammation pathway(NF-κB):−32% ofIL-6/-16% of IL-8; −78%of free radical induction(superoxide anion); −80%elastase inhibition; −100%hyaluronidase inhibition;−80% lipoxygenaseinhibition.Beneﬁts onvolunteers: skinwater content isincreased for up to5 h afterapplication(+15%);−7.4%redness aftermechanicalabrasion; −25%redness after solarerythema; −46%stinging sensationin 10 s.None 3%Liquid;water-soluble.Increased skincomfort forsensitive skin;suitable forsensitive skin.SeppicSepicalm VGWPSkin lighteningagent; soothing
WPSkin lighteningagent; soothingcare agent.Sodium palmitoyl proline(and) Nymphaea albaﬂower extract.Double skin lighteningaction: inhibition ofinﬂammatorypigmentation induced bycutaneous stress, andmodulation of geneexpression in the basalpigmentation (MIC1, MITF,tyrosinase) after 16 h.Beneﬁts onvolunteers: 90%lighter skin; 91%more radiant; 94%lighter spots; 73%smaller spots.None 3%Liquid;amphiphilic.Suitable forsensitive skin.Neurocosmetic ingredients for sensitive skinRahn Defensil SOFTAnti-aging;anti-inﬂammation;anti-redness;antistress;couperose;soothing.Propanediol (and)Albatrellus ovinus extract(and) citric acid.Afﬁnity to TRPV1(in vitro); Functionallyblocks the TRPV1 receptor(in vitro); Neuron-driveninﬂammation (in vitro)counteraction.Reduction of skindiscomfort andirritation;protection fromheat stress andsoothing ofhyperalgesic skin;prevention ofIR-induced barrierdamage (in vivo).None 1–3%Liquid;water-soluble.Processing:
water-soluble.Processing:incorporation attemperatures <50◦C.Increase in theoverall toleranceof the skin toirritants;prevention of thesensitization ofTRPV1 receptorsby blockingserotoninreceptors;prevention ofIR-aging byprotecting fromIR-induced heatstress.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 14 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesGivaudan Mariliance Skin protection.Aqua/water (and)propanediol (and)Rhodosorus marinusextract.Reduction of TRPV1expression; inhibition ofthe expression of IL-1 α,NRG, and NGF R, andreduction of NGFproduction; reduction ofIL-1αsynthesis;penetration of Mariliancein emulsion and validationof the results observedin vitro on IL-1 αproduction (ex vivo).Reduction of skinsensitivity (3%).None 1–3%Liquid;water-soluble.Processing:incorporation atthe end of theformulation understirring orhomogenization;can be heated for ashort time < 80◦C.pH usage range:2.0–10.0.Neuro-soother;calming,anti-tightening.Lucas MeyerCosmeticsNeutrazen Soothing agent.Water (and) butyleneglycol (and) dextran (and)palmitoyl tripeptide-8.Biomimetic ofneuromediator (POMC):reduction of theconsequences of substance
:reduction of theconsequences of substanceP release; inhibition of therelease of IL-1-inducedIL-8 production (in vitro).Reduction ofsensitive skinsymptoms relatedto cutaneousneurogenicinﬂammation.None0.3–2.5%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless;pH usage range:5.2–7.2.Designed toprevent andreverse signs ofneurogenicinﬂammation(redness andswelling); calmsand soothesirritated skincaused by UV ,immune reactions,and mechanicalstress; helps tomaintain andrestore a normalskin sensitivitythreshold; suitablefor sensitive andintolerant skin.Givaudan Ocaline PF Skin protection.Maris aqua (and)aqua/water (and)Cucurbita pepo seedextract (and) potassiumsorbate (and)phenoxyethanol (and)citric Acid.Inhibition of the mast cellsdegranulation (ex vivo)and histamine releaseinduced by substance P .Preventive effecton sensitiveskin/stinging test(5%); soothing ofirritated skin (10%,60 min, 180 min,24 h).Potassium sorbate(and)phenoxyethanol3–10%Liquid;
(and)phenoxyethanol3–10%Liquid;water-soluble.Prevention ofsensitive skin by aneurocosmeticapproach.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 15 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesGivaudan Ocaline XP Skin protection.Maris aqua (and)aqua/water (and)Cucurbita pepo seedextract (and) citric acid(and) benzylalcohol (and) potassiumsorbate.Inhibition of the mast cells’degranulation (ex vivo).Preventive effecton sensitiveskin/stinging test(5%); soothing ofirritated skin (10%,60 min, 180 min,24 h).Benzyl alcohol(and) potassiumsorbate3–10%Liquid;water-soluble.Prevention ofsensitive skin by aneurocosmeticapproach; soothesaway neurogenicinﬂammation.MibelleBiochemistryPinoluminAntioxidant;energizing;radiance;anti-redness;whitening.Standard version: Pinuscembra wood extract (and)alcohol (and) pentyleneglycol (and) aqua/ water;Alcohol-free powderversion, twofoldconcentrated: Pinuscembra wood extract (and)maltodextrin (and)aqua/water.Inhibition ofneuroinﬂammation
aqua/water.Inhibition ofneuroinﬂammation(in vitro); inhibition of thefunction of TRPV1(in vitro);anti-inﬂammatory activity:inhibition of the release ofproinﬂammatorymediators (CGRP , IL-8,and PGE2) (in vitro);protection of collagen byinhibiting theUVA-induced MMP-1production (in vitro).Visibleanti-redness effect;reduction of colorirregularities;overallimprovement ofskin toneevenness.None 2%Liquid;water-soluble.Incorporation: Forcold processes,dissolvePinolumin into theaqueous phase. Inhot/coldprocesses, addduring the coolingphase below 40◦C.Thermostability:temperatures ofup to 40◦C for ashort time will notaffect the stabilityof Pinolumin.Calms sensitiveand irritated skin;visibly reducesredness and agespots; protectsfrom the effects ofenvironmentalstress;suitable forsensitive skin.MibelleBiochemistrySensAmone P5 Skin conditioning.Pentapeptide-59 (and)hydrogenated lecithin(and) Butyrospermumparkii (shea) butter (and)
(and) Butyrospermumparkii (shea) butter (and)phenethyl alcohol (and)ethylhexylglycerin (and)maltodextrin (and)aqua/water.Inhibition of TRPV1receptor activation(in vitro).Instant reductionof skin reactivityfollowing a singleapplication;reduction of skinsensitivity.None 1–2%Liquid;water-soluble.Calmsover-reactive skin;minimizes skin’sresponse to stress;reduces theitching sensationof sensitive skin;suitable forsensitive skin.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 16 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesGivaudan Sensityl Skin protection.Water (and)Phaeodactylumtricornutum extract (and)pentylene glycol.Epigenetic control ofinﬂammation throughexosomal communication;genetic control of skinsoothing and calming(downregulation of acomplete set of genesinvolved inanti-inﬂammatory andsoothing activities); controlof the acute phase ofinﬂammation (reduction ofimmune cell recruitment);inhibition of immune cellrecruitment (signiﬁcantreduction of dendriticcells) (ex vivo 3%);reduction ofproinﬂammatory signalthrough IL-8 inhibition (exvivo 3%); reduction of painsensation through TRPV1expression reduction (exvivo 3%); control ofmicrobial proliferation (exvivo 3%).Protection of skinmicrobiota againstsensitive skinconditions (3% vs.placebo),restoration andprotection ofsensitive skin (3%);
protection ofsensitive skin (3%);improvement ofcutaneousreactivity (3%).Sodium benzoate(and) benzoic acid1–3%Liquid;water-soluble.Soothing; calming;neuro-soothing;skin microﬂorarebalancing.BASFSkinasensyl LS9749Soothing agent.Liquid synthetictetrapeptide: water (and)glycerin (and)coco-glucoside (and) acetyltetrapeptide-15.Binding on the µ-opioidreceptor (in vitro);inhibition of the CGRPrelease by sensory neurons(in vitro).Increase of theskin’s tolerancethreshold.Sorbic acid 1–3%Liquid;water-soluble.Processing: it isincorporated intothe ﬁnishingprocess below 50◦C, or at roomtemperature forcold processing;colorless.Inhibits the releaseof the CGRPneuromediatorfrom sensoryneurons; increasesthe skin tolerancethreshold;speciﬁcallydesigned to soothesensitive skin.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 17 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesBASFSkinasensyl LS9852Soothing agent.Powder synthetictetrapeptide: mannitol(and) sodium citrate (and)acetyl tetrapeptide-15.Binding on the µ-opioidreceptor (in vitro);inhibition of CGRP releaseby sensory neurons(in vitro).Increase of theskin’s tolerancethreshold(capsaicin, heat)(in vivo).None0.3–1.0%Powder;water-soluble;colorless.Inhibits the releaseof theneuromediatorCGRP fromsensory neurons;increases the skintolerancethreshold;speciﬁcallydesigned to soothesensitive skin.Seppic Sepicalm S WPProtective agent;soothing agent;skin conditioningagent; skinmoisturizingagent; sensorialmodiﬁer.Sodium cocoyl aminoacids (and) sarcosine (and)potassium aspartate (and)magnesium aspartate.+48% production ofß-endorphins; Targets thekey inﬂammation pathway(NF-κB):−32% of
key inﬂammation pathway(NF-κB):−32% ofIL-6/−16% of IL-8; −78%of free radical induction(superoxide anion); −80%elastase inhibition; −100%hyaluronidase inhibition;−80% lipoxygenaseinhibition.Beneﬁts onvolunteers: skinwater content isincreased for up to5 h afterapplication(+15%);−7.4%redness aftermechanicalabrasion; −25%redness after solarerythema; −46%stinging sensationin 10 s.None 3%Liquid;water-soluble.Increase skincomfort forsensitive skin;suitable forsensitive skin.SeppicSepicalm VGWPSkin lighteningagent; soothingcare agent.Sodium palmitoyl proline(and) Nymphaea albaﬂower extractDouble skin lighteningaction: inhibition ofinﬂammatorypigmentation induced bycutaneous stress, andmodulation of geneexpression in the basalpigmentation (MIC1, MITF,tyrosinase) after 16 h.Beneﬁts onvolunteers: 90%lighter skin, 91%more radiant, 94%lighter spots, 73%smaller spots.None 3%Liquid;AmphiphilicSuitable forsensitive skin
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 18 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeatures“Coolant” neurocosmetic ingredients for sensitive skinGivaudanEvercoolSkinCooling.Menthyl PCA (and)Lactamide MEA (and)menthane carboxamideethylpyridine.Activation of coolingsensation receptor TRMP8.Long-lastingcooling effect (2%,30 min, 60 min,120 min).None 1–4%Water-soluble;soluble in alcohol;odorless.Patentedcombination ofGivaudan coolingactivities;improved,long-lastingfreshness.SalvonaHydroSalSalCoolCooling; deliverysystems/carriers.Propylene glycol (and)hydroxypropyl Cellulose(and) methyl diisopropylpropionamide (and)menthyl lactate (and) ethylmenthane carboxamide(and) phenethyl alcohol(and) caprylyl glycol (and)ethylhexylglycerin.The release kinetics of theingredients are optimizedand synchronized to resultin continuous, long-lasting,enhanced refreshment.In a consumer
enhanced refreshment.In a consumerperception test,the intensity of thesensation from anaftershave balmcontainingHydroSal™SalCool wascompared to anaftershavebalm containingfreementhol at 1%loading:HydroSal™SalCool lastedtwice as long asthe freementhol atthe same strength.None7.0–15.0%Water-soluble;compatible withhydro-alcoholicformulations;odorless.Processing:incorporation tothe water phaseduring production,or at the end of theprocess when thetemperature isbelow 30◦C.Suitable forsensitive skin; itcan beincorporated inskin, lip, scalp,and hair careformulations.Neurocosmetic ingredients for skin agingLucas MeyerCosmeticsAdipoﬁll’inAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle; skinconditioning;delivery systems/carriers.Aqua/water (and)propanediol (and)ornithine (and)phospholipids (and)glycolipids.Activation of HIF-1 α;increase in lipid storage inhuman adipocytes;decrease in fatty acidsreleasedfrom adipocytes.Lipoﬁlling-likeeffect; decrease in
effect; decrease innasogenian folddepth and skinroughness.None 0.5–2%Liquid;water-soluble;pH usage range:4.5–6.0. Incorpora-tion/processing:at the end of theformulation (< 40◦C).Skin smoother,ﬁrmer, less tired,plumperand lifted;reduction ofnasogenian folds.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 19 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo PreservativesUseLevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesBiosilTechnologiesGlistinAnti-aging;antioxidantGlutamylamidoethylindole (and) aqua/waterNeurotrophic effect(NGF-like);neuro-cutaneousmessenger; cutaneousneuroprotection:anti-apoptotic effect.«Antistress»(cutaneoussensitivity).None 1%Liquid;water-soluble;miscible withalcohols andglycols; colorless;pH usage range:7.0.Prevention of neu-rodegeneration.BiosilTechnologiesGlutrapeptideSlimming andﬁrming agent;anti-aging;antioxidant.Pyroglutamylamidoethylindole (and) butyleneglycol.Enhancement of neurons’ability to support lipolysis;synergy with caffeine forslimming effect;enhancement of ﬁbroblastcontractile ability togetherwith NGF.Skin appearance,ﬁrmness, density,and elasticityimprovement after28 days oftreatment;amelioration ofcelluliteappearance after28 days of
celluliteappearance after28 days oftreatment; overallslimming effect upto 4 cm for thearms, 6 cm for thewaist, 4 cm for theabdomen, and 3.5cm for the thighs.None 1–5%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless;pH usage range:6.0;miscible withalcohols andglycols.Neuroprotection;neuroslimming;body ﬁrming; celldetoxiﬁcation;prevention of neu-rodegeneration.CodifTechnologieNaturelleLakesisAnti-aging;ﬁrming.Caprylic/caprictriglyceride (and) Pistacialentiscus (mastic) gum.Activation of youthproteins KLOTHO andFOXO; reactivation ofcellular detoxiﬁcationprocesses; improvement ofcellular activity;improvement of type Icollagen synthesis by 47%;reactivation of ﬁbrillinsynthesis.Redensiﬁcation ofthe dermis;improvement offacial contours.None 0.2%Liquid;liposoluble.Processing: stableup to 80◦C.Lifting action onthe oval face.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 20 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesBASF NeurobioxAnti-wrinkle;anti-aging;brightening agent.Water (and) butyleneglycol (and) pentyleneglycol (and) Achilleamillefolium extract (and)xanthan gum.Improvement of theepidermal thickness (exvivo); stimulation ofepidermal differentiation(ex vivo); stimulation ofsynthesis: ﬁlaggrin,cytokeratin 10, MO-R1,and MC-2R receptors (exvivo); dose-effect on thegene expression of MC-2Rand MOR-1 receptors;effect on the proteinsynthesis of MC-2R andMOR-1; Stimulation ofinvolucrin gene expression(in vitro).Pore reﬁning; skinbrightening; skinsoftness;stimulation ofepidermalrenewal; wrinklesmoothening.None 0.5–2%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless; low-pHtolerant; high-pHtolerant; cationcompatible.Support of cellcommunication bystimulating theexpression ofPOMC-relatedreceptors;
expression ofPOMC-relatedreceptors;improvement ofepidermaldifferentiation;acceleration ofskin renewal;improvement ofskin softness,radiance, andvisible reductionof the appearanceof wrinkles andpores.CodifTechnologieNaturelleNeuroguardAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle.Glycerin (and)aqua/water (and)hydrolyzed alginIncrease in the productionof neuroprotector sAPP αby 87% (in vitro); protectsthe communicationbetween nerves andﬁbroblasts from thetoxicity of neuro-aging andpreserves ﬁbroblasts’activity (in vitro);protection of theextracellular matrix fromthe toxicity of neuro-aging(in vitro); protection of thesynthesis of collagen andelastin from neuro-agingtoxicity (in vitro).Reduce thevolume and areaof crow’s feetwrinkles.Neuroguard P:phenoxyethanol;Neuroguard G:preservative-free.NeuroguardP: 1.5%;NeuroguardG: 3%Liquid;Water-soluble;Processing:incorporation atless than 50◦C.Protection ofneurons fromneuro-aging;prevention fromﬁbro-aging;decrease in
prevention fromﬁbro-aging;decrease inwrinkle depth.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 21 of 80Table 1. Cont.Company/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI In Vitro/Ex vivo In Vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/ProcessingFeaturesCodifTechnologieNaturelleNeurolight.61G Skin lightening.Glycerin (and) water(and) Pancratiummaritimum extract.Inhibition of POMCexpression andintracellular melaninsynthesis (in vitro);reduction of themelanocyte dendricity andthe synthesis of receptorsfor substance P (in vitro);inhibition of the effects ofsubstance P on the exportof melanin (in vitro);inhibition of the synthesisand export of melanin(in vitro).Reduction of thesurface of thepigment spots;clariﬁcation of thepigmentation ofdark spotswithout lighteningthe pigmentationof the skin.None 1.5%Liquid;water-soluble.Neurocosmetictreatment of darkspots.Lucas MeyerCosmeticsProgeline Anti-aging.Glycerin (and) water(and) dextran (and)triﬂuoroacetyltripeptide-2.Reduction of progerinsynthesis; inhibition ofMMPs and elastase;
synthesis; inhibition ofMMPs and elastase;increase in syndecans.Improvement ofcutaneouselasticity up to93%;improvement ofcutaneousﬁrmness up to82%;improvement ofcutaneousviscoelasticity upto 42%.None 0.5–2%Liquid;Water-soluble;Odorless;Colorless;pH usage range:4–6;Processing:incorporation atthe end of theformulation at atemperature of <40◦C.Exhibition of aremodeling effectand reduction ofsigns of aging:sagging andwrinkles; liftingeffect on jawlines.1Abbreviations key: LKB = Serine/threonine-speciﬁc protein kinase; NF- κB = nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; G3PDH = glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HMOX1 =heme oxygenase (decycling) 1; NQO1 = quinone oxidoreductase; IL-6 = interleukin 6; IL-8 = interleukin 8; MIC-1 = macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1; MITF = microphthalmia-associated transcription factor;
TRPV 1 = transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1; IL-1 α= Interleukin 1 alpha; NRG = neuregulin; NGF = nerve growth factor; POMC = pro-opiomelanocortin; CGRP = calcitoningene-related peptide; PGE2 = prostaglandin E2; MMP-1 = matrix metalloproteinase-1; TRMP8 = transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 8; HIF-1 α= hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha;FOXO = forkhead box O3; MO-R1 = µ-opioid receptor; MC2R = melanocortin receptor 2; sAPP α= soluble amyloid precursor protein-alpha.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 22 of 804.1. Neurocosmetic Ingredients for Combating Skin StressThe cosmetic strategies to combat skin stress are different, and neurocosmetic ingredi-ents can be suitable for this purpose.4.1.1. Skin Stress and the Stress Pathway: The Role of CortisolIn modern life, stress is deﬁned as the body’s response to a whole range of externaland psychological factors that disrupt homeostasis [ 71–73].Pollution, UV radiation, blue light, insufﬁcient sleep, social media, relationships,work-related worries, and the high number of working hours are just some of the everydaymodern stressors [ 37].In 1946, the endocrinologist Hans Selye proposed the term “stress” to describe a set ofsignals that he noticed in his patients [ 72]. Indeed, as reported in the literature, there arepieces of evidence that psychological stress could encourage some skin diseases—such asacne, psoriasis, dermatitis, or rosacea—or, in other cases, promote hair loss [ 72,74–76].
Persons’ moods, emotions, and sensations occur in the brain; subsequently, the brainsends biochemical signals to the body, including the skin, producing physiological ef-fects [ 72,74,77].If the exposure to stress is prolonged, skin cells do not stop the production of cortisol,also known as the stress hormone; thus, its levels remain elevated, causing a cascade ofdamaging consequences [ 65,66,71,72]. In this regard, the breakdown of skin homeostasistakes place, inducing inﬂammation and a visibly tired look [ 56]. Only when a feedbackmechanism is established does the body return to normal physiological conditions: thestress hormones and the related consequences are eliminated, restoring homeostasis [ 56,78].This is the ﬁeld in which neurocosmetics could act.In particular, as previously asserted, the skin and the brain are in communication forcoordinating external and internal “danger” signals by cytokines, chemokines, neurotrans-mitters, and neurohormones.
mitters, and neurohormones.With particular regard to cortisol, its release is mediated by the brain through thehypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal gland axis. Since the origin of the skin and the brain isthe same, skin cells are also able to induce cortisol production if stimulated by externalstress factors [ 56,76,78,79].The enzyme 11 β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11 β-HSD1) converts inactivecortisone into biologically active cortisol and, as a result, under conditions of stress, thelevels of cortisol in the skin increase, driving collagen to atrophy and reducing cell growth.In aged and UV-exposed skin, cortisol production is more pronounced due to theupregulated 11 β-HSD1 levels. The more stress that people feel, the more their cortisollevels increase, initiating a possible cycle in which the visible stress signs on the skinencourage a physiological stress response inside the body (Figure 2).
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 23 of 80Figure 2. Diagram of the stress pathway.More speciﬁcally, some of the negative effects of cortisol can be summarized as follows:• Increased blood sugar levels, which promote “glycation” in the skin, damaging col-lagen and elastin. As a result, long-term aging and loss of the skin’s ability to fullybounce back are accelerated;• Due to the strong catabolic effect of cortisol, the degradation of dermal proteins occurs;• Skin dryness due to the reduction in the production of hyaluronic acid—a naturalmoisturizer for our skin, associated with an increase in transepidermal water loss(TEWL);• Increase in the appearance of ﬁne lines and wrinkles, thinning skin, reduced elasticity,and lower skin barrier functionality [ 72,80].Some studies also reported that psychological stress induces less effective skin barrierrepair [ 81,82]. Furthermore, elevated concentrations of cortisol can disrupt epidermalcohesion [ 82].
cohesion [ 82].It was also demonstrated that the increase in cortisol levels could affect the epidermalbarrier in a reconstructed human model; this was attributed to a decrease in forkheadbox O3 (FOXO3) mRNA expression. FOXO3 is a gene involved in longevity and senes-cence [ 83,84]. In detail, Meyrignac et al. (2019) performed experiments using a recon-structed epidermal model with signs of senescence by knocking down FOXO3 [ 85,86]. Thisknockdown of FOXO3 damaged the epidermal cohesion by reducing the expression levelof claudin-1 ( −27.4%) and e-cadherin ( −18.2%)—two essential proteins for the integrity ofthe epidermal barrier. The authors also studied the impact of the combined effects of UVBirradiation and FOXO3 knockdown [ 83–86].From these considerations, some of the damages induced by stress are evident. There-fore, awareness about the impact of stress on facial skin is a topic growing in importance. In
particular, young people recognize the link between the anxieties they feel and their appear-ance. According to an online study conducted by Lightspeed GMI/Mintel on 2000 users,58% of people aged between 9 and 21 years agree that stress affects facial appearance.Thus, new and inspiring stress-rebalancing skincare formulations should be consid-ered [ 72].In other words, the question is: is it possible that a cosmetic routine could help theskin to balance cortisol levels for reducing stress, with immediate and long-lasting effects?The answer is in the use of neurocosmetics for combating skin stress.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 24 of 80Neurocosmetic Ingredients for Rebalancing Cortisol Levels in the SkinFor years, the company DSM studied the link between cortisol, 11 β-HSD1 enzymeactivity, and skin homeostasis, contrasting one of the factors involved in visibly acceleratedskin aging. The result is Bel-Even®, a new DSM-patented molecule that reversibly inhibitsthe 11β-HSD1 enzyme [ 87,88]. It is formulated for skincare applications to rebalancecortisol levels in the skin, improving the skin barrier, elasticity, and density. As claimed onthe DSM webpage for Bel-Even®, and in the corresponding brochure [ 87], its effectivenesswas studied by using ex vivo studies on human skin cell cultures. For this purpose, the cellsamples were subjected to stress, measuring the cortisol levels in both the control sampleand the sample treated with Bel-Even®. The ﬁrst of these studies was related to the use of
samples stressed via UV irradiation, and the results showed that Bel-Even®, by inhibitingthe 11β-HSD1 enzyme, avoided the UV-induced type III collagen damage. The secondtest used cortisone as the stressor agent, revealing that, in unprotected skin, cortisone wasconverted to active cortisol; conversely, by adding the active ingredient Bel-Even®to cells,the transformation of cortisone to cortisol was inhibited.However, in both stress tests, the Bel-Even®mechanism of action rebalanced cortisollevels by inhibiting the enzyme 11 β-HSD1, and the results were particularly evidentin keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts [ 87,88]. With the aim of performing in vivo tests, facialmeasurements of skin elasticity, density, and skin barrier strength (TEWL) were alsoconsidered. Interestingly, the facial skin elasticity appeared to be improved by 15.7% after12 weeks of 1% Bel-Even®application when compared with the placebo. Furthermore, the
active ingredient signiﬁcantly increased the skin density after 4 and 12 weeks, thanks to theincreased protein content in the dermis, mainly referring to collagen production [ 87,88].4.1.2. “Neuro-Relaxing” Anti-Aging IngredientsThe β-Endorphins: A Strategy for Skin WellnessAs previously said, if stress situations can cause imbalance in skin homeostasis, onthe other hand, positive touch, such as massage or hugs, could induce the release ofneurotransmitters that cause feelings of comfort and protection [ 89].To better understand this condition, it should be remembered that the skin is a sourceof the opioid β-endorphins—neurotransmitter peptides produced at the central nervoussystem level that induce analgesia (absence of pain) [ 90,91]. In detail, by acting on thecentral and peripheral opioid receptors, β-endorphins inhibit the transmission signals vianervous cells from the source of the pain (nociceptor) to the spinal cord. Thus, endorphins,
due to their connections with the brain’s “pleasure centers”, generate euphoric feelingswhen binding to the opiate receptors. Moreover, β-endorphins also bind their receptorsto immune system cells; they seem to be involved in the ﬁne-tuning of the immuneresponse. β-Endorphin receptors are expressed in skin cells. In this particular case, it isdemonstrated that β-endorphins can accelerate skin regeneration and wound healing. Inhuman keratinocytes, it has been conﬁrmed that the presence of a β-endorphin/ µ-opiatereceptor system is related to keratinocyte differentiation, the wound healing process, andmigration [ 89–93].As a result, this complex β-endorphin/ µ-opiate qualitatively improves the skin’sappearance [ 7].Bigliardi et al. (2002) showed the involvement of the skin’s β-endorphins in communi-cation with peripheral nerve endings [ 94]. The authors reported that keratinocytes positive
forβ-endorphin staining are clustered around the terminal ends of afferent C-ﬁbers, whichsignal the sensations of warmth, cold, or pain to the central nervous system. Moreover,the authors described the µ-opiate receptor as being expressed in the dermis and epider-
signal the sensations of warmth, cold, or pain to the central nervous system. Moreover,the authors described the µ-opiate receptor as being expressed in the dermis and epider-mis nerve ﬁbers. It has been supposed that keratinocytes can communicate directly withthe nervous system due to the opiate receptor system; hence, this should open potentialtherapies for skin diseases—for example, atopic dermatitis and psoriasis [ 94].Another interesting aspect regarding β-endorphin synthesis is POMC processing.As discussed before, endogenous opioids—a group of peptide hormones that include
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 25 of 80β-endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins—are produced by our body. They share theN-terminal amino acid sequence Tyr–Gly–Gly–Phe–X (X = Met or Leu), necessary to bindto the opioid receptor [ 95]. The proopiomelanocortin (POMC)—a protein that contains267 amino acid residues—is a precursor of these peptide hormones, and β-endorphin isone of them, originating from its cleavage [ 95–98]. Among other peptide hormones derivedfrom POMC, it is worth mentioning the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)—also knownas corticotropin, which stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete the anti-inﬂammatory andanti-allergic hormone cortisol—and the melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), whichis involved in skin pigmentation [ 99,100]. Generally, the POMC and the related cleavageproducts are produced mainly in the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland’s anterior lobe,but the in situ production of POMC and its products (ACTH, MSH, β-endorphins, and
their corresponding receptors) has also been revealed in skin cells [ 97,99,101]. Indeed, it hasbeen proposed that the cutaneous POMC system acts in an autocrine manner in responseto external or internal stresses, evidencing the effect of opioids on skincare and presentingthe necessity of “neuro-relaxing” cosmetic ingredients derived from plant extracts, suitablefor the formulation of anti-aging products [ 102–106].Discovering Neurocosmetic Ingredients from Plant ExtractsTo ensure skin regeneration and vitality, MIBELLE BIOCHEMISTRY developedHappybelle-PE, a Vitex agnus-castus extract encapsulated in a double delivery systemdesigned to control the release of phyto-endorphins along with their bioavailability inorder to obtain anti-aging beneﬁts and radiant skin [ 107–110].The chaste tree ( Vitex agnus-castus ), also known as monk’s pepper, is a medicinalplant from the Mediterranean area and Asia that produces aromatic berries rich in phyto-
endorphins. These compounds bind to the µ-opiate receptor, stimulating the in vivoproduction of β-endorphins, thus offering beneﬁts for skincare [ 111–115].These dried monk’s pepper berries are treated in ethanol, glycerin, and β-cyclodextrin.The ﬁnal ingredients consist of monk’s pepper berry extract, lecithin, tocopherol (vitaminE), ascorbyl tetraisopalmitate (vitamin C-ester), and β-cyclodextrin. The combined use of β-cyclodextrin and lecithin leads to a double vector system: the hydrophobic monk’s pepperberries are hosted in the β-cyclodextrin cavity, and these complexes are enclosed in thelecithin liposomes; the lipophilic vitamins are encapsulated in a nanoemulsion, stabilizedwith lecithin [ 107,109,112,116]. The in vitro studies showed that the complex stimulated thecell activity and increased the production of type I and III collagens [ 109]. Another in vitrostudy performed on human keratinocyte cells has shown that Happybelle-PE favors cell
proliferation [ 109], while, in vivo tests demonstrated the increase in skin hydration (up to28% within 28 days), skin ﬁrmness (up to 20%), and the decrease in the wrinkle depth ofcrow’s feet (by more than 20%) [ 89,107,109–111].The phyto-endorphin complex extracted from the berries of the Vitex agnus-castusshrub also characterizes the JOYDERM cosmetic line. In this case, the phyto-endorphin com-plex acts topically to improve skin hydration, cell vitality, skin regeneration, and melano-genesis regulation—essential for skin wellbeing and preventing skin aging [ 114,117,118].With Happy Skin, PROVITAL discovers Rhodiola rosea root extract’s beneﬁts tostimulate the production of β-endorphins in the skin, granting it a more glowing appear-ance [ 119–121].NUXE cosmetic company dedicated part of its studies to the formulation of the cos-metic line Nirvanesque, which shows the “neuro-relaxing” properties of Paeonia suffruticosa
extract. Interestingly, NUXE performed its researches by adopting a “reverse pharmacog-
metic line Nirvanesque, which shows the “neuro-relaxing” properties of Paeonia suffruticosaextract. Interestingly, NUXE performed its researches by adopting a “reverse pharmacog-nosy” approach. By considering that the skin releases enkephalins through nerve ﬁbers,NUXE Laboratories established that enkephalins are the molecules of skin relaxation [ 5],being able to reduce stress messages. Starting from these considerations, the aim was toﬁght the appearance of the “stress”-related expression of microcontractions and wrinkles.Unfortunately, enkephalins exhibit a very short lifetime (about 20 seconds), because theenkephalinase enzymes rapidly destroy them [ 122]. Thus, intending to extend the lifetime
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 26 of 80of enkephalins, NUXE performed a screening of 165,000 plants, identifying those containinga sufﬁcient amount of pentagalloyl glucose (PGG)—the molecule able to inhibit the activityof enkephalinases [ 123–125]. This approach allowed them to ﬁnd Paeonia suffruticosa (treepeony), a perennial plant with large blooming ﬂowers that originally comes from Tibet,but it is also found in Europe, and has been used in traditional Chinese pharmacopeia formore than a millennium. Its root is collected in the fall, dried under the sun, and used rawor roasted [ 123,126,127]. Thus, NUXE began to produce the tree peony root concentratedextract (with patent pending), in blend with blue lotus seed, poppy seed, and althea root,resulting in Nirvanesque, which exhibited a double neurocosmetic action: a “Botox-like”booster for reducing skin’s micro-tensions (wrinkles), and an enkephalinase inhibitor [ 128].
LANC ÔME has created the exclusive NeuroCalm ™, a complex rich in Peonia suffruti-cosa ( Paeonia Suffruticosa extract/ Paeonia Suffruticosa root extract), French rose ( Rosa gallicaextract/ Rosa gallica ﬂower extract), Crithmum maritimum extract, and Moringa ( Moringapterygosperma seed extract) extract introduced in the Hydra Zen cream, formulated to neu-tralize the effects of environmental stress on the skin. The Hydra Zen “Antistress” soothingday cream moisturizes, nourishes, and protects facial skin from external aggressions suchas wind and air conditioning, which can promote its dehydration. Thanks to its soft texture,suitable for all skin types (very dry, dry, normal, mixed, oily, impure, mature, or sensi-tive), the cream is rapidly absorbed, leaving a soft, smooth, and radiant skin face [ 129].GIVAUDAN performed a speciﬁc extraction process for obtaining a concentrated extractenriched in speciﬁc sugars, including stachyose and ciceritol, from the seeds of Tephrosia
purpurea [89,130,131], creating Neurophroline ™[78]; it is designed to combat the multiplestress source effects present daily [ 56,130,132]. In detail, Neurophroline ™works to reducethe production of cortisol by skin cells ( −70% within 2 h, in vitro ) and to stimulate the re-lease ofβ-endorphins (+163% within 24 h, in vitro ). Moreover, when human keratinocytesand ﬁbroblasts were incubated with Neurophroline ™at 1%, a signiﬁcant stimulation inthe gene expression involved in the skin cells’ homeostasis was observed. Speciﬁcally,Neurophroline ™(1%), in both keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts cells, if incubated for 24 or48 h ( in vitro ), promoted the expression of the major marker proteins involved in cellularstress response and oxidative stress, i.e., the heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) (up to 3000%),and the NADPH quinone dehydrogenase (NQO1) (200%). In ex vivo tests, the actionof Neurophroline ™on the production of the HMOX1 and NQO1 proteins was studied
using reconstructed human epidermis (RHE). RHE was topically treated for 2 days withNeurophroline ™at 1% in a placebo formula, or with positive controls. To quantify theexpressed amounts of HMOX1 and NQO1, the RHE was then analyzed by immunoﬂuo-rescence assay [ 78]. As a result, an improvement of the epidermal matrix, the reductionof inﬂammation and redness (by boosting HMOX1 up to 888%), and the stimulation ofnatural superoxide scavenger activity for advanced antioxidant and pollution protection(increases NQO1 up to 528% within 2 days) were observed [ 89].Neuphroline’s in vivo efﬁcacy was also demonstrated: within 2 weeks, Neurophro-line™signiﬁcantly recovered volunteers’ skin color and luminosity, even when tested inpolluted environments, and visibly reduced the signs of stress after one month of use. Inparticular, dark circles, eye bags, and the appearance of redness were reduced, conﬁrming
its fast action on stress relief [ 78,89]. Due to these properties, Neurophroline ™can be usedto formulate anti-aging night and day creams, antistress/fatigue serums, and eye care
its fast action on stress relief [ 78,89]. Due to these properties, Neurophroline ™can be usedto formulate anti-aging night and day creams, antistress/fatigue serums, and eye careproducts [ 78].GIV AUDAN proposed the same T ephrosia Purpurea seed extract to formulate body sculpt-ing products—such as Betaphroline, which stimulates the re lease ofβ-endorphins [ 56,133].4.1.3. Neurocosmetics as a Strategy to Combat Inﬂammatory Responses Related toSkin StressIt has been reported that the constant exposure to stress affects NF- κB (nuclear factorkappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) transcription factor in skin keratinocytes,increases cytokines, chemokines, and inducible nitric oxide synthases (iNOS), promotescell inﬂammation, redness, dehydration, and dull skin tone, and worsens rosacea-prone
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 27 of 80skin [ 89,134–137]. To reduce (up to 10% in vivo ) the skin inﬂammation and redness in-duced by stress, PROVITAL launched Agascalm, a ﬂower/leaf/stem extract derived fromAgastache mexicana , to provide a solution for inhibiting the release of cytokines (up to104% in vitro ) and the movement of NF- κB transcription factor to the nucleus (up to 70%in vitro ) [138–140]. Additionally, the improvement of vascular tonicity and the restorationof the skin’s moisture barrier (reducing water loss up to 13% in vivo ) are other beneﬁts.More youthful skin radiance and skin tone for a more uniform complexion are furthereffects [ 89].To boost skin comfort by reducing inﬂammation, Sepicalm S WP and Sepicalm VGWP (both Seppic)—derived from Nymphaea alba ﬂower extract, combined with amino acidsand minerals—are presented to soothe irritation, calm redness, and relieve any stinging
sensation [ 141,142]. These ingredients work by limiting the transcription factors necessaryfor the expression of inﬂammatory genes, reducing inﬂammation on both the dermal andepidermal skin layers by reducing IL-6 and IL-8 (key inﬂammatory mediators) and theirexpression, and by favoring the skin’s production of β-endorphins. The in vivo test resultsshowed an overall soothing effect and an improvement in skin radiance [ 89,143].4.1.4. Intriguing Hints about Sleep-Related Beauty: The Melatonin Receptor MT1It was reported that the melatonin receptor, MT1, is related to sleep and beauty. In thisregard, for example, the relationship between atopic dermatitis and sleep disorders is welldocumented [ 144,145]. Disorders of the circadian rhythms can locally affect melatonin syn-thesis in the skin. Indeed, poor sleep efﬁciency is associated with increased cortisol-inducedstress reactivity. Consequently, skin inﬂammation is caused by destroying the collagen
content and reducing the skin’s blood ﬂow efﬁciency, producing a subsequent decrement ofoxygen and amounts of nutrients. The eyes are particularly affected, manifesting dullnessand dark circles, making the skin look older [ 146–149].Several articles reported the connection between beauty sleep—understood as analternative to the alteration of circadian rhythms—and skincare ingredients via the skin–brain connection, based on their studies on the activity of melatonin and its receptor MT1in skin cells [ 150–152].In particular, a study presented at the 25th IFSCC conference on “CosmEthic Scienceand Conscience”, (Milan, 30 September–2 October, 2019) tested the efﬁcacy of a topicalformulation with sunﬂower stem cell extract ( Helianthus annuus cell culture extract, HACCE;rich in ﬂavonoids, polyphenols, and “phyto-melatonin”) as an alternative to melatonin, bymonitoring notable in vitro parameters in stressed and unstressed cells (such as melatonin
MT1 receptor gene expression, antioxidant activity, mitochondrial cell membranes, and soon), observing many clinical beneﬁts related to the skin–brain connection, stress reduction,and improved skin quality. Overall, HACCE extract exhibited very promising results:in vitro studies using HACCE at 0.002% as an optimal concentration were performed inorder to evaluate melatonin MT1 receptor gene expression in cells in the absence of stress(estimated about +130%), and in the presence of UV radiation (estimated about +117%)as a stressor. The means of MT1 signaling was studied, observing a reduction ( −99%) incyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in forskolin-stimulated cells and a consequentdecrease in adenylyl cyclase activity. Furthermore, in vitro antioxidant activity tests werealso performed: SOD and catalase gene expression in ﬁbroblasts were quantiﬁed by ELISAin the absence of stress and under UV irradiation, observing similar activities in all different
antioxidative enzymes (SOD 1, 2, and catalase).In vitro experiments on mitochondrial cell membranes and mitochondrial cells stressed
antioxidative enzymes (SOD 1, 2, and catalase).In vitro experiments on mitochondrial cell membranes and mitochondrial cells stressedby H 2O2were also objects of the study. In particular, by using HACCE at 0.002%, an ROS(reactive oxygen species) reduction in stressed cells of about −18% and −26%, respectively,was observed.Finally, in the in vitro experiments on the extracellular matrix, an increase in the typeI and III collagen gene expression (+42% and +31%, respectively, by ELISA quantiﬁcation),
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 28 of 80and a matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP1) gene expression decrease ( −17%), were alsoobserved when applying a HACCE concentration ﬁxed at 0.002%.The HACCE “antistress” melatonin-like activity was also demonstrated by performingin vivo experiments. Female volunteers of self-described stressed conditions applied aproduct formulated with HACCE 2 times daily. Their stress levels were recorded by astressometer and measured by an endpoint datum, which showed a signiﬁcant decreasein stress index after using a 1% HACCE complex for 1 month. Thus, the activation of theMT1 receptor in the skin could safely reinforce its natural defense responses by attenuatingthe aging-associated stress signs; this promotes skin repair and beauty, demonstrating theskin–brain connection [ 153].4.2. Neurocosmetic Ingredients for Sensitive Skin4.2.1. Neuro-Sensitization of the SkinThe concept of “sensitive skin” is a complex dermatological condition deﬁned by
abnormal sensory symptoms. According the International Forum for the Study of Itch (IFSI),sensitive skin is deﬁnable as follows: “a syndrome deﬁned by the occurrence of unpleasantsensations (stinging, burning, pain, pruritus, and tingling sensations) in response to stimulithat normally should not provoke such sensations. These unpleasant sensations cannotbe explained by lesions attributable to any skin disease. The skin can appear normal orbe accompanied by erythema. Sensitive skin can affect all body locations, especially theface” [ 154]. Approximately half of the population considers their skin to be sensitive,mainly women [ 155–157]. Three main types of sensitive skin can be considered, and as awhole, their manifestations could be ascribed to reduced barrier functions, inﬂammationwith an intact barrier function or, commonly, to healthy individuals having skin thatoverreacts to environmental factors (wind, pollution, UV , temperature changes, and so on),
detergents, cosmetics, or clothes [ 155].These reactions can range from slight discomfort to frequent visible skin irritationsigns, such as redness. In detail, the adverse reactions refer to objective/visible andsubjective/sensory symptoms—for example, tightness, stinging, burning, and tingling, orsometimes pain, itching, and discomfort [ 155,158–161].Thus, it appears that these manifestations involve cutaneous nerve ﬁbers [ 162–164]due to the overactivation of transient receptor potential (TRP)-type receptors in the skin,which leads to constant inﬂammation and local redness. In detail, with regard to TRPreceptors, the attention should be focused on the transient receptor potential ion channelssubfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) involved in neuroinﬂammation. [ 165–169].The Molecular Basis of Sensitive Skin: TRPV-1-Mediated NeuroinﬂammationIt is known that an important role in the transduction of pain from a variety of envi-
ronmental stimuli is played by TRP channels—in particular, the TRPV1 vanilloid receptor.This receptor responds to different irritant stimuli—such as temperature (heat), pH (acids),and some chemical compounds (for example capsaicin)—by opening the transmembranechannel, allowing the inﬂux of Ca2+ions inside the cell [155,163,170,171].The result is theactivation of the signaling pathway, which promotes the release of neuromediators able toinduce inﬂammation, pain, and itching sensations [ 155,166,171].In general, TRPV1 receptors are largely present in sensory nerve cells, but it is worthremembering that they are also expressed in keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts [ 155,166,172,173].Since the keratinocytes are the ﬁrst cell types exposed to external stimuli, they canquickly induce the pain signal to the underlying nerve cells. In sensitive skin, an increase inthe nervous response to harmless environmental inﬂuences is often due to an overreaction
of the TRPV1 receptor, attributable to the lower activation threshold and higher expressionlevels of TRPV1 [ 163,167,174].
of the TRPV1 receptor, attributable to the lower activation threshold and higher expressionlevels of TRPV1 [ 163,167,174].Interestingly, TRPV1 also plays a role in skin aging. Indeed, it was shown that inphoto-aged human skin, TRPV1 is usually overexpressed [ 170,175,176]. Furthermore, theconstant activation of TRPV1 caused, for example, by heat and/or infrared radiation, leads
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 29 of 80not only to inﬂammation, but also to the upregulation of enzymes that destroy collagen inthe skin, inducing premature skin aging [ 155,175,177–179].The inﬂammation process develops through the classical pathway that involves therelease of cytokines (interleukins), with visible effects, and neuroinﬂammation perceiveddifferently by each subject. When external factors interact with the skin, as the ﬁrststep, the keratinocytes release interleukin-1 α(IL-1α), provoking an immediate inﬂam-matory response [ 89,180,181]. As the second step, the keratinocytes communicate withneuron ﬁbers through the nerve growth factor (NGF) (overexpressed during inﬂammationprocesses, [ 27]), which activates a speciﬁc receptor—the tropomyosin receptor kinase A(trkA)—which, in turn, interacts with the TRPV1 receptor, enhancing its expression levelsat the surface of the nerve ﬁbers [ 182–185].Since TRPV1 controls the release of neuropeptides and delays the recovery of the
skin barrier function, the diffusion of many inﬂammatory mediators occurs. Thus, in-creased sensitivity of nociceptors to noxious stimuli manifests, leading to long-term skinsensitivity [ 167,186].Moreover, all of the stress effects discussed so far are worsened by aging and lack ofsleep [ 166].TRPV1 receptor activation is also involved in atopic skin (atopic dermatitis)—achronic inﬂammatory disease with a prevalence of 25% during childhood and 7–10%in adults [186–188]. Atopic dermatitis is a skin physiopathology caused by to impairedskin barrier function and neurogenic inﬂammation, which manifests as signiﬁcant skindryness and red spots frequently covered by small vesicles (small “bubbles”) that causea strong itching (85% of subjects) [ 189]. It is really the activation of TRPV1 that increasesoxidative stress and causes itching and burning sensations. Indeed, by blocking TRPV1,the skin barrier function improves [ 188,190,191]. Thus, a possible solution for sensitive
skin is to strengthen the tolerance level by reducing the reactivity of TRPV1 [ 155,186,190].4.2.2. Providing Solutions for Sensitive Skin: Neurocosmetic IngredientsPerfect skin is a common consumer desire. However, this goal is not easily achievable,because several “stressors” exist that render the skin tone irregular. For these reasons,there is a strong need for functional cosmetic ingredients that protect the skin. As anexample, Mariliance ™by GIVAUDAN is claimed to be a “neuro-soothing” extract de-rived from Rhodosorus marinus, a red microalga [ 89,158,162,185,192,193]. In order to assessthe sensitivity of skin towards external stimuli, in vitro tests using Mariliance ™demon-strated that it downregulates TRPV1 expression in astrocytes and inhibits the release ofneuroinﬂammatory mediators, with particular reference to IL-1 αand NGF [ 162,166].This product’s efﬁcacy through the skin layers was further evaluated by performing
ex vivo and in vitro penetration tests. In particular, its capacity for reducing skin sensitivitywas demonstrated by using the clinical evaluation of capsaicin. Mariliance ™signiﬁcantlydecreased the pain sensation, and 100% of panelists conﬁrmed that a cream containing thisingredient at 3%, soothes and softens the skin by inducing a general feeling of comfort.Thus, thanks to these properties, Mariliance ™can be used to formulate day creams, coldcreams, after-sun products, and shampoos for sensitive skin, and is also suitable forformulating post-depilatory, post-peeling, and after-shaving cosmetic products [ 162,192].MIBELLE BIOCHEMISTRY proposes Pinolumin, an extract from Swiss stone pinewood that contains high amounts of pinosylvin , a stilbenoid resveratrol-like molecule [ 194].The idea of its use as a “neuro-relaxing” ingredient in cosmetic products derived frominteresting research demonstrating that, when sleeping in a Swiss stone pine bed, the pine
The idea of its use as a “neuro-relaxing” ingredient in cosmetic products derived frominteresting research demonstrating that, when sleeping in a Swiss stone pine bed, the pinewood stimulates relaxation during deep sleep phases and reduces the heart rate [ 195–197].More detailed studies about its action mechanism showed that the Swiss stone pineextract inhibits the TRPV1 receptor, protects skin collagen by preventing the UVA-inducedproduction of MMP-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-1, a collagen-degrading enzyme), andreduces the production of inﬂammatory markers during oxidative stress, as well as localredness and age spots [ 198,199].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 30 of 80Oxidative stress induced by ROS—generally caused by pollution, UV light, or agingprocesses—leads to inﬂammation and, consequently, skin redness. The exposure to UV lightupregulates MMP-1 and stimulates melanin overproduction, resulting in the formationof age spots [ 200,201]. Pinosylvin not only neutralizes free radicals by upregulating hemeoxygenase-1, but also reduces the amounts of intra- and extracellular ROS. Furthermore, byinhibiting inﬂammatory gene expression, pinosylvin reduces skin inﬂammatory responsesand neuroinﬂammation [ 199,202].Swiss stone pine extract’s ability to modulate sensory neuron activation was evaluatedin a cell culture model simulating the irritation of nerve endings due to TRPV1 receptoractivation. In particular, sensory neurons were irritated using capsaicin—a TRPV1 receptoragonist—both in the presence and absence (control) of Swiss stone pine extract. In the
case of irritated neurons, they reacted by releasing the calcitonin gene-related peptide(CGRP), provoking vasodilation and histamine release, along with activating inﬂammatorypathways. Meanwhile, in the presence of the Swiss stone pine extract, the dose-dependentCGRP release induced by capsaicin was reduced, suggesting a soothing effect. Indeed,in vivo studies demonstrated that Pinolumin, when present at 2%, improved skin tonehomogeneity, with a visibly radiant skin appearance [ 166,203].Skinasensyl®LS 9749 (liquid synthetic tetrapeptide) and Skinasensyl®LS 9852 (pow-dered synthetic tetrapeptide) from BASF are other two functional ingredients designedto soothe sensitive skin [ 204–206]. These ingredients improve skin comfort by reducingoverreactions that lead to burning and stinging [ 207]. Furthermore, both Skinasensyl®LS9749 and Skinasensyl®LS 9852 inhibit the release of the neuromediator CGRP from sensoryneurons, and increase the skin’s tolerance threshold [ 207–209].
With the aim of relieving sensitive skin, Wandrey et al. (2017) studied a bioinspiredpeptide from the analgesic component of sea anemone ( Heteractis crispa ) venom protein,proposing it as a novel neurocosmetic soothing ingredient, with interesting effects soonafter the ﬁrst application [ 210]. Interestingly, in the venom of the leathery sea anemone,scientists have discovered a small protein called analgesic polypeptide HC1 (APHC1),which was the ﬁrst polypeptide inhibitor of the TRPV1 receptor [ 211–213]. It was alsoshown that treatment with APHC1 improved the effects on the pain response in both acuteand chronic pain models [ 214]. Therefore, this protein is a very interesting molecule fortargeting TRPV1 to reduce irritation in sensitive skin [ 215].A supramolecular assembly made of a shea-butter-based soft sphere carrier sys-tem incorporating the peptide was proposed for improving the skin’s peptide uptake
and protecting it from degradation. An in vitro assay showed that this peptide reducedthe activation of the TRPV1 pain receptor. During clinical studies, the increase in theskin’s electrical current perception threshold (CPT)—measured using a Neurometer—alsodemonstrated its ability to decrease the skin’s reactivity and sensitivity towards an irritantstimulus; thus, the skin appears more resistant to environmental stresses [ 210,216].Thanks to the studies on the sea anemone protein, a pentapeptide (RRRFV) wasdesigned to mimic the TRPV1 binding sequence for formulating soothing cosmetic prod-ucts. The peptide was synthetically produced in order to respect sustainability and purityrequests, and the resulting soothing active ingredient SensAmone P5 by MIBELLE BIO-CHEMISTRY was obtained [ 217]. A placebo-controlled double-blind clinical study wasperformed on volunteers with sensitive skin in order to assess the related skin-comforting
properties via in vivo tests. In detail, a cream containing 2% SensAmone P5 was applied
performed on volunteers with sensitive skin in order to assess the related skin-comfortingproperties via in vivo tests. In detail, a cream containing 2% SensAmone P5 was appliedon one half of the subjects’ faces, while the corresponding placebo cream was applied onthe other half. The obtained results revealed that the single application of the 2% soothingactive ingredient increased the CPT, suggesting a reduced reactivity of the skin towardsexternal stimuli [ 210,218].Interestingly, Fatemi et al. (2016) identiﬁed the inhibitory effect of bPOMC—an inno-vative POMC-derived biomimetic tripeptide present in Neutrazen™, by LUCAS MEYERCOSMETICS—on humans’ sensory irritation induced by capsaicin. To improve its pene-tration and efﬁcacy, bPOMC was linked to a lipid [ 27]. The authors reported that bPOMC
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 31 of 80soothed irritated skin, and maintained and restored the sensitivity threshold of normalskin without affecting melanogenesis. It was concluded that the bPOMC reduced thecapsaicin-induced inﬂammation by limiting the release of substance P and preventing therelease of IL-1-induced IL-8 [ 27].These considerations can be better understood by considering that the skin is also a tar-get organ for POMC peptides, whose activities determine antagonism and downregulationof adhesion molecules and reduce inﬂammation by modulation of IL-10 production [ 121].POMC peptides are expressed by melanocytes, keratinocytes, ﬁbroblasts, microvascularendothelial, mast, Langerhans, and immune cells (monocytes and macrophages) [ 100].Thus, to organize the skin’s stress response system against local stress, the skin’s neuroen-docrine system—regulated by POMC peptides—should interact with the skin’s immunesystem [ 103,180].
system [ 103,180].In detail, the POMC peptides exert their effects through ﬁve subtypes of heterodimericG-protein-coupled receptors with seven transmembrane domains indicated as melanocortinreceptors (MC-1R through MC-5R) [ 96,100,110].During in vitro experiments, it has been observed that POMC binds to melanocortin-1receptor (MC1-R), reducing the production of interleukin 8 (IL-8)—a proinﬂammatorychemokine that is involved in the pathogenesis of some inﬂammatory skin diseases—without affecting melanogenesis [ 100,219,220].Experimental evidence revealed that both neuropeptides and neurohormones exertan important immunoregulatory role, and that the articulated cascade of mediators thatinteract with one another is involved in the physiopathology of sensitive skin. In particular,the latter refers to a nonspeciﬁc reaction that involves cutaneous sensory innervationthrough unmyelinated (C) or myelinated (A δ) ﬁbers that respond to a wide range of
chemical and physiological stimuli [ 27,176,221].For example, sensitivity to capsaicin is mediated by non-mechanosensory C ﬁbers,while during heat perception, mostly mechanosensory C ﬁbers and BC ﬁbers are in-volved [ 29,222].The application of capsaicin to the skin boosted the noxious stimuli: it binds to theTRPV1 receptor and activates the C nerve ﬁbers, resulting in the appearance of redness andlocal inﬂammation—a process called “neurogenic inﬂammation” [ 174]. Thus, starting fromthese considerations, this biomimetic peptide bPOMC should represent another strategy toinhibit sensory irritation [ 27]. For example, when used for formulating skincare products,bPOMC reduces the symptoms of contact dermatitis [ 110].It should be remembered that the POMC peptide chain, synthesized and released bykeratinocytes, contains the β-endorphin sequence which, in turn, contains enkephalin—apentapeptide composed of Tyr–Gly–Gly–Phe–Met/Leu, found near epidermal nerve end-
ings (Merkel cells) [ 100,223]. It has also been supposed that the anti-pruritic effectiveness ofopioids is due to their action on these nerve ﬁbers. Furthermore, cooperation between thecalcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and opioids in the suppression of the pain processcan also be considered: the main effect is centered on met-enkephalinergic neurons, whichrelease their opioids under the stimulation of CGRP . Some opioid peptides, synthesized byepidermal and nervous cells, can act at the CGRP-releasing sensory nerve level to sootheskin [ 29].Other interesting experimental studies reported that the endogenous dipeptide Tyr–Arg named kyotorphin, discovered in 1979, has receptors that activate calcium inﬂux (IP3gate) by releasing met-enkephalin, inducing analgesia [ 209,224,225]. However, kyotorphinis not suitable for cosmetic applications due to its hydrophilicity, which prevents it fromreaching the epidermis. Lintner et al. (2009) derivatized the peptide to improve its
bioavailability by synthesizing N-Acetyl–Tyr–Arg–Hexadecyl ester (NATAH) [ 29]. This
reaching the epidermis. Lintner et al. (2009) derivatized the peptide to improve itsbioavailability by synthesizing N-Acetyl–Tyr–Arg–Hexadecyl ester (NATAH) [ 29]. Thislipopeptide is commercially available from SEDERMA under the name Calmosensine [ 226].As a ﬁrst step of the study, human keratinocytes were incubated with different con-centrations of the NATAH peptide for 24 h, with the aim of investigating its pseudo-opioidability for upregulating the gene responsible for POMC synthesis. Indeed, the POMC
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 32 of 80increase, observed in the presence of the NATAH peptide, indicates an improved secre-tion of opioid derivatives such as the keratinocyte met-enkephalin. In a second step, theNATAH-mediated CGRP modulation was studied. During in vitro experiments, sensoryneurons spontaneously released CGRP into the culture medium. This phenomenon wasalso observed after stimulation with different stressors (capsaicin, for example), indicatingthe neuronal activation and the existence of action potential. With the NATAH peptide,marked desensitization was noted at a concentration of 5 ppm, reducing CGRP secretionto half its baseline value. As a result, it appears that NATAH has the proﬁle of a potentialsoothing and “relaxing” neurocosmetic ingredient [ 29].DEFENSIL®-SOFT by RAHN AG is a neuro-soother formulation based on the extractof an edible mushroom Albatrellus ovinus , and proposed as a functional ingredient [ 227].
Due to the presence of the bioactive phenolic compounds grifolin, neogrifolin, and scutig-eral in this extract, the effective inhibition of the TRPV1 receptor was observed duringin vitro studies [ 203,228,229]. Furthermore, when applied to the skin, DEFENSIL®-SOFTprovides soothing ( in vivo study) and anti-aging effects [ 230]. In detail, from in vivo andin vitro studies, it has been reported that DEFENSIL®-SOFT counteracts neuroinﬂamma-tion, reduces skin irritation, and soothes hyperalgesic skin, as well as preventing IR agingby protecting skin from IR-induced heat stress [ 227].On the whole, DEFENSIL®-SOFT delays intrinsic and extrinsic skin aging, as well asthermal aging, and resets the skin’s pain threshold.Based on the relatively recent scientiﬁc evidence that POMC-derived neuropeptidesexert anti-inﬂammatory activity in the skin through the binding to—and subsequent activa-tion of—MC1-R, LUCAS MEYER COSMETICS developed Neutrazen ™, a soothing lipopep-
tide derived from the α-MSH sequence, particularly suitable for sensitive skin [231,232];itis composed of three amino acids coupled with palmitic acid to help its absorption throughthe skin. Among the other biomimetic peptides tested in in vitro experiments, Neutrazen ™demonstrated a high binding afﬁnity for MC1-R (comparable to that of α-MSH), a weakmelanogenic activity, and the ability to counteract the skin’s inﬂammatory processes [ 27].Generally, the in vitro experiments showed that α-MSH downregulates the produc-tion of proinﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF- αand, conversely,upregulates the production of the cytokine synthesis inhibitor IL-10 [ 233–235]. Part of theanti-inﬂammatory effect seems to be mediated by the inhibition of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-κB) at a molecular level. α-MSH binds MC1-R with a high afﬁnity, exerting anti-inﬂammatory activity, as conﬁrmed by experiments carried out using MC1-R-selective
synthetic agonists [ 236,237]. Many skin cells are targets for the anti-inﬂammatory effects ofα-MSH, including monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, keratinocytes, melanocytes,ﬁbroblasts, and endothelial cells [ 238]. Keratinocytes respond to external stimuli such asUV radiation by producing interleukins, which act as messengers mobilizing inﬂamma-tory cells. The ﬁrst cytokines to be released are IL-1 and TNF- α[103,239]. In the skin,interleukin-driven inﬂammatory reactions are a major cause of erythema (redness) andedema (swelling) [ 240,241]. In this regard, for example, Neutrazen ™reduces UVB-inducedinﬂammatory response, and consequently protects from the harmful effects of sun ex-posure. In vitro tests showed that in keratinocytes, it downregulates the production ofUVB-induced inﬂammatory cytokines such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), and in ﬁbroblasts in-hibits the release of IL-1-induced IL-8, reinforcing its anti-inﬂammatory potential. When
tested ex vivo, Neutrazen ™inhibited neurogenic inﬂammation by reducing the effects
hibits the release of IL-1-induced IL-8, reinforcing its anti-inﬂammatory potential. Whentested ex vivo, Neutrazen ™inhibited neurogenic inﬂammation by reducing the effectsof substance P on skin explants. More speciﬁcally, the addition of Neutrazen ™to skinexplants reduces edema formation (by 60%), inhibits blood vessel dilation in the presenceof substance P , and prevents the release of TNF- αproduced during substance-P-inducedneurogenic inﬂammation. Knowing that neurogenic inﬂammation is linked to photo-aging,Neutrazen ™potentially also prevents the signs of premature aging of/on the skin. Clinicalstudies were performed to evaluate and compare the anti-inﬂammatory and anti-irritantefﬁcacy of a Neutrazen ™formulation when applied as preventive care or soothing care onchemically challenged skins. The chemical agent used for these tests was sodium dode-
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 33 of 80cyl sulfate (SDS)—an anionic surfactant—at a concentration of 0.5%. The results provedthat Neutrazen ™effectively reduces redness in SDS-challenged skin, and successfullyalleviated the signs of inﬂammation. Thus, it can be recommended for soothing care tomaintain a normal skin sensitivity threshold. Additionally, after performing consumertests, it appeared that Neutrazen ™quickly reduces sensations of burning, tingling, andirritated skin, soothes itching, and provides protection and skin comfort. Overall, visiblysmoother skin, reduced wrinkles, healthier and more radiant complexion, and an increasedinﬂammatory resistance were observed [ 242].4.2.3. Providing Solutions for Sensitive Skin: “Coolant” Neurocosmetic IngredientsAn Insight about the Skin Sensation: Warm and Cold ReceptorsCutaneous skin sensitivity refers to sensory inputs from the skin surface, and describes
the neurobiological processes that confer to the skin the ability to “sense.” When cosmeticproducts are applied onto the skin’s surface, the skin’s sensory neural architecture is highlyreceptive to different physicochemical forms of stimulation: the skin’s sensations can bedescribed by referring to touch, temperature, itch, and pain, which are related to differentreceptors [ 4]. In particular, these sensations, by traveling along different pathways, reachdifferent targets in the brainstem. The sensory information is thus represented in the brainin the primary and secondary somatosensory cortex, where the contralateral body surfacesare mapped in each hemisphere.Focusing the attention on the effect that temperature could have on the skin, it is worthmentioning that the cutaneous somatosensory system can detect an impressive range oftemperature changes.The free nerve endings for cold- or warm-sensitive nervous ﬁbers are located beneath
the surface of the skin, and can sense temperature changes, not absolute temperature.Particularly, non-glabrous skin contains a system of nerves that speciﬁcally code for thepleasant properties of touch [ 4].The thermal stimuli that differ from the homeostatic condition excite speciﬁc temperature-sensory nerves in the skin, and transmit this change to the spinal cord and brain. There aretwo kinds of thermosensory ﬁbers: warm and cold receptors, which respond to warmthand cold, respectively. These receptors can be distinguished from nociceptors that respondto noxious low and high temperatures (<20◦C and >45◦C), and also from thermosensitivemechanoreceptors [ 4].In this ambit, the cooling ingredients—intended to work on a neurological level byeliciting a feeling of freshness—can be inserted and considered to be neurocosmetics. Oneof the ﬁrst and oldest coolant ingredients present on the market was menthol and, later, itsderivatives [ 243].
derivatives [ 243].With HydroSal™SalCool, SALVONA proposes a patented blend of cooling ingredientsthat act in a non-competitive way on the skin’s different sensory nerve endings, and conferthe pleasant sensation without adaptation phenomena [ 244]. HydroSal™SalCool is madeof submicron spheres with a diameter of approximately 0.1–0.3 µm, suitable to enhancethe products’ delivery to sensory nerves while avoiding bodily cooling. In particular, theslow release of the substances constituting this ingredient is optimized in order to obtaina long-lasting, enhanced, refreshing experience, without skin irritation. Furthermore, asdescribed in SALVONA’s brochures, this technology is suitable and safe for all differentskin types—even near the eyes [ 245].Similarly, GIVAUDAN provided a patented combination of cooling active ingredientsin Evercool Skin [ 246].In vitro /ex vivo tests demonstrated the activation of the cold sensa-
tion receptor TRMP8 (transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 8),while in vivo experiments proved a long-lasting cooling effect (also after 120 min from itsapplication to the skin) using it at 2% [ 47,247,248].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 34 of 804.2.4. Soothing Neurocosmetic Products on the MarketSome neurocosmetic functional ingredients have been used for formulating sensitiveskincare products targeted not only to the mass market, but also to beauty centers or spas.Many examples are presented below:DOCTOR BABOR Intensive Calming Cream is claimed to soothe the manifestation ofneuro-sensitive, extremely sensitive, and very dry skin [ 249]; it relieves unpleasant feelingsof tightness and itching, aiming to obtain an even skin appearance. This product can also beused as a helpful skincare treatment for atopic eczema during symptom-free intervals [ 249].The active complex is Neuroxyl, made of gamma-linolenic acid from evening primrose oil,panthenol, and micro silver. Its action reduces irritation and redness and relieves itching.It promotes the regeneration of the skin’s natural protective barrier, and improves skinresistance and elasticity [ 250,251].
resistance and elasticity [ 250,251].Similarly, DOCTOR BABOR Neuro Sensitive Cellular Intensive Calming Cleanser isformulated with a Neuroxyl complex [ 249]; it is a mild, cleansing milk that replenisheslipids, speciﬁcally designed for extremely dry and sensitive skin; it reduces unpleasantitching and pulling sensations, promotes skin barrier regeneration, and improves the skin’ssmoothness and elasticity [ 249].Recently, due to the increased popularity of neurocosmetics, many brands workedto produce professional skincare products available in spas and beauty centers. ZensibiaNeoZen Mask, from ISABELLE LANCRAY, is one example; it is a soft leave-on mask thatcan be applied as a skincare cream, and is particularly indicated for aged, sensitive, anddry skin that presents redness. The Camellia sinensis leaf extract and ceramides contained inZensibia NeoZen Mask help to repair, reinforce, and protect the skin barrier. If, on the one
hand, the contained polyphenols (for example, magnolol), minerals, and micronutrientsexhibit antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory properties, on the other hand, the probioticingredients (Lactobacillus/Arundinaria gigantea ferment ﬁltrate, Leuconostoc/radishroot ferment ﬁltrate) ensure healthy skin ﬂora, and activate the skin’s natural immunesystem [ 252–255].The neurocosmetic ingredients palmitoyl tripeptide-8 (Neutrazen) and acetyl dipeptide-3 aminohexanoate (Bodyfensine by LIPOTEC) work to regenerate skin, reduce redness,and strengthen vein walls for a glowing skin appearance [ 256,257].Since sensitive skin needs special precautions, especially regarding the use of speciﬁccosmetic products that should not exacerbate the problems of this imperfection, interestedconsumers must be reassured in the conscious choice of the products that they will buy,even from a simple reading of the label—especially with regard to neurocosmetics.4.3. Neurocosmetic Ingredients for Skin Aging
4.3. Neurocosmetic Ingredients for Skin AgingOver the years, signiﬁcant anatomical and physiological changes at the skin level,which progressively decrease skin thickness, elasticity, tone, and chromatic uniformity, areobserved. Although the aging process is gradual, skin aging times and methods largelydepend on individual characteristics. The nature of the main causes that affect agingare genetic and environmental; for this reason, intrinsic aging and extrinsic aging aredistinguished, as well described in the literature [ 1,258–260].• Intrinsic (chronological) aging or chrono-aging.Intrinsic aging is linked to the subject’s age; it depends on complex physiologicalmechanisms involving a series of skin changes (exposed or not to sunlight), and is mani-fested through a slow process of tissue degeneration. If it is thought of as a phenomenonregarding a single individual, it can occur earlier or later depending on their genetic pre-
disposition, and hormonal levels can inﬂuence the thickness of the skin, the quantities ofcollagen, and its water content. When considering people of the same age and lifestyle, the
disposition, and hormonal levels can inﬂuence the thickness of the skin, the quantities ofcollagen, and its water content. When considering people of the same age and lifestyle, thesigns of aging appear more evident in women than in men due to the lower thickness ofthe female skin, their greater sensitivity to hormones, and their frequent expressiveness ofthe face. Furthermore, male skin is also richer in sebaceous glands that favor the forma-
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 35 of 80tion of a hydrolipidic ﬁlm containing more lipids, guaranteeing protection from externalagents [ 261–263].• Extrinsic agingExtrinsic aging is age-independent, and is associated with many features, includinglife behaviors, diseases, environmental pollution, and sunlight exposure (photo-aging).In particular, smoking, toxic substances, some drugs, and UV rays induce the release ofinﬂammatory mediators, the deactivation of the body’s natural defense systems, and theproduction of free radicals, with a consequent increase in the tendency for the manifestationof aging skin. Photo-aging mainly depends on the individual’s skin phototype, sunexposure time, use of sun-care products, and geographical position (by latitude, the sun’srays reach the ground with a different inclination) [ 261–263].4.3.1. Physiological and Morphological Characteristics of Aged SkinAmong the most frequent phenotypic manifestations of intrinsic and extrinsic ag-
ing, there are the onset of wrinkles at different depth levels, hyperkeratosis, reductionin the production of hydrolipidic ﬁlm (natural moisturizing factor, NMF), and modiﬁ-cations to the dermo–epidermal junction (basal membrane), dermis, hypodermis, andskin appendages. Moreover, melanin distribution is often inhomogeneous, and this fa-vors the formation of dyschromia and hyperpigmentation, especially at the level of thephoto-exposed areas [ 1,239,264].4.3.2. Skin Neuro-Aging and Neurocosmetic IngredientsSeveral studies have demonstrated that neuronal cells, like other cellular types, aresubject to aging, and this process is known as neurodegeneration [ 265].The latter process was deeply investigated, and the role of a neurotoxic peptide—amyloid-beta (A β)—involved in the formation of senile plaques on the surface of nerveendings has been highlighted [ 266]. This protein is obtained from the proteolytic cleavage
of the s-amyloid precursor protein (APP) [ 267,268]. The APP cleavage follows two differentenzymatic pathways: the amyloidogenic cleavage pathway, and the non-amyloidogenicpathway. In the ﬁrst enzymatic process, the β-secretase enzyme causes the generation ofneurotoxic A β, releasing the N-terminus of A βfrom APP , and a presenilin-dependentγ-secretase complex releases the C-terminus of A βfrom the membrane. In an alternative,non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP is processed by the α-secretase enzyme, generating anN-terminal fragment (the sAPP αpeptide), considered to be a potent neurotrophic factorwith neuroprotective properties [ 269–272].These two cleavage pathways exist in a balanced manner within a neuronal popu-lation that could be considered young. The aging process and oxidative stress lead toa gradual imbalance, in which the neurotoxin becomes dominant, enhancing the neuro-aging [ 271,272]. When exposed to neuro-aging, the messengers released by neurons affect
ﬁbroblasts’ viability, causing skin aging—neuro-aging promotes ﬁbro-aging [ 21,273,274].In this research ﬁeld, studies by CODIF demonstrated that neurons’ aging inﬂuences thecommunication between nerves and ﬁbroblasts, decreasing the vitality of collagen, elastin,and ﬁbroblasts, which visibly impacts the skin [ 89,261,275,276]. With this in mind, CODIFdeveloped the active ingredient Neuroguard, which targets the aging of nerve endings bystimulating the sAPP αneuroprotector, restoring the features of neurons not exposed toneuro-aging [ 275,276].While neurons not exposed to neuro-aging have active synapses, an extensive network,and integral cell nuclei, the neuro-aged ones show fragmented nerve endings, “burnt-out” nuclei, and a limited network [ 275,276].In vitro experiments demonstrated thatNeuroguard increased soluble amyloid precursor protein alpha production by 87% within24 h, protecting the neurons from neurodegeneration [ 89,275,276]. It is possible to say that
this ingredient has revolutionized the neurocosmetic world thanks to its mechanism of
24 h, protecting the neurons from neurodegeneration [ 89,275,276]. It is possible to say thatthis ingredient has revolutionized the neurocosmetic world thanks to its mechanism ofaction [ 276].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 36 of 80Neuroguard is an oligosaccharide composed of guluronic and mannuronic acid, ob-tained via the enzymatic depolymerization of polysaccharides from the brown algae Lami-naria hyperborea and Lessonia nigrescens [275,276]. It was developed to re-establish healthycommunication between nerves and ﬁbroblasts and regenerate dermal cells weakened bythe “messenger of aging” [ 265,277,278]. Thanks to the reactivation of collagen and elastinsynthesis, Neuroguard can treat deep wrinkles within 28 days [ 275,279–282].As reported in CODIF’s brochure, Neuroguard can effectively protect neurons’ vi-ability when used both before neuro-aging begins, and when neuro-aging is already inprogress [ 275,283,284].Another interesting property of this active ingredient is its ability to protect neuronsagainst H 2O2toxicity (42% of protection). It has been reported that the high presenceof free radicals induces a gradual imbalance, more pronounced with age, between the
neuroprotector sAPP αand the neurotoxic A β[275,284,285]. Neuroguard’s neuroprotectiveproperties have been studied on both affected and unaffected nerve endings, observingpreventive and restorative effects towards ﬁbroblasts and extracellular matrices [ 89,265,280].Interestingly, by preserving the activity of the ﬁbroblasts from neuro-aging toxicity, thein vitro tests revealed that Neuroguard promoted the expression of genes coding for typeIII collagen (+40%), elastin (+17%), syndecan (+29%), laminin IV (+31%), and extracellularmatrix proteins [ 27,53] Tests performed in vivo showed a 25% reduction in the volume ofcrow’s feet wrinkles over 56 days for smoother skin (+ 11%) [ 89,275,280,281].In summary, in terms of cosmetic beneﬁts, Neuroguard’s neuroprotective actionprevents neuro-aging by protecting neurons from free radicals’ toxicity, stimulates thesynthesis of the neuroprotector sAPP α, restores a healthy communication between nerve
cells and ﬁbroblasts, protecting dermal cells from aging, and prevents ﬁbro-aging byprotecting and reactivating collagen and elastin synthesis [ 279,286,287].Neuroguard, especially for mature skin types, provides a speciﬁc anti-wrinkle solution,preventing and delaying cellular disorders [ 276].Glistin by BIOSIL TECHNOLOGIES is another interesting neurocosmetic functionalingredient that offers an original approach for cellular communication [ 288]. It is a pep-tide able to substitute the NGF, favoring nervous cells’ survival and development in theepidermis via NGF-like effects [ 289]. Indeed, while in the skin, nerve cells regulate theactivity of all cell types by secreting cytokines, keratinocytes, ﬁbroblasts, and adipocytes,which secrete NGF, ensuring the survival and development of nerve cells. With aging, themetabolism of all skin cells slows down. Keratinocytes, ﬁbroblasts, and adipocytes produce
less NGF; thus, nerve cells are unable to support the activities of other cells—especiallykeratinocytes. Starting from these considerations, a neuroprotection strategy should beadopted, and it should consist of:• The protection of nerve cells in the epidermis by providing good support for otherskin cells;• The maintenance of good barrier function in order to improve skin hydration (in theepidermis, nervous cells could stimulate the activity of keratinocytes, enhancing thebarrier function that, in turn, causes hydrated and protected skin);• The ﬁrming of skin by preserving the lipolytic activity in adipocytes. In the hypoder-mis, nervous cells stimulated the adipocytes’ lipolytic activity, which decreases withaging. By protecting nerve cells, good skin ﬁrmness is ensured [ 290].Furthermore, it is well known that skin changes exposed to different stresses can leadto a re-organization in the skin’s structures and reduce cellular communication, slowing
the cutaneous metabolism. In particular, cellular communication is present at all skin
to a re-organization in the skin’s structures and reduce cellular communication, slowingthe cutaneous metabolism. In particular, cellular communication is present at all skinlevels—in the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis—enabling cells to assist and supportone another. Some exchanges occur between different cell types belonging to the samecompartment, or between cells in different compartments. Therefore, it clearly appearsessential to maintain these exchanges at all levels.On these grounds, Glistin offers the solution to the problem, as a functional ingredientthat can protect the skin’s cellular communication from aging effects, maintain hydration,
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 37 of 80and give maximum comfort. This ingredient was speciﬁcally designed to target stem cellsin the epidermis, in order to stimulate their proliferation and increase their resistance toUV rays.Another peptide ingredient provided by BIOSIL TECHNOLOGIES is Glutrapep-tide [ 291]; its action mechanism is focused on cellular communication that involvesadipocytes and nerve cells at the hypodermis level. Glutrapeptide supports the activ-ity of adipocytes, and their related ability to eliminate fats by protecting nerve cells [ 291].As previously explained, when chronic stress occurs, cortisol levels increase, impactinghypodermis cells. In fact, since cortisol inhibits the production of NGF in adipocytes,neurodegeneration begins. As a result of neurodegeneration, neurons secrete less nore-pinephrine, which reduces lipolysis (the adipocytes’ ability to consume fats), and then
adipogenesis (the differentiation of preadipocytes into mature and functional adipocytes)is stimulated.Stress is thus responsible for the increasing number of adipocytes with a low fat-excretion capacity due to the effects of cortisol. Glutrapeptide’s action lies in preventingneurodegeneration by substituting for NGF, promoting the survival and development ofnerve cells in the hypodermis by increasing their capacity to excrete fats and inhibiting theeffects of cortisol on lipolysis; it is compatible with traditional lipolytic treatments, such ascaffeine, for a synergistic effect [ 290,292].Rethinking Skin Aging by Modulating Senescence Marker Proteins: The Case of ProgerinFor daily life and social wellbeing, the skin’s appearance and vitality have primaryimportance [ 261–263].It has been discovered that ﬁghting the signs of aging is not the only strategy toimprove skin appearance—the delaying of processes of senescence should also be rele-
vant [ 293]. Senescence refers to changes that occur in the biology of an organism duringthe aging process. In particular, the concept of cellular senescence indicates the loss ofnormal cells’ ability to divide, even if the cells are still active. Moreover, an increase in themetalloproteinase activity promoting extracellular matrix degradation arises [ 294–296].Senescent cells are also linked to progerin (from the Latin “progeria”; Greek “prema-ture old age”), a toxic protein deﬁned as an “aging biomarker” [ 297–299].During the cells’ aging process, the amount of progerin increases, inducing nucleardefects, DNA damage, and the appearance of signs of aging [ 293,298].Progeline ™by LUCAS MEYER [ 300], a three-amino-acid biomimetic peptide (tri-ﬂuoroacetyl tripeptide-2), was thus developed to improve wrinkles and sagging skin bymodulating progerin [ 301,302]. More speciﬁcally, this active compound decreases progerin
synthesis and accumulation, and inhibits metalloproteinases [ 297,303].In vivo tests performed using a cream containing 2% Progeline ™applied to the faceand neck, both in the morning and evening, for 56 days, demonstrated how the volume ofthe jawline decreases [ 302].Progeline ™, showing its efﬁcacy on skin slackness and sagging, reduces the appear-ance of wrinkles and increases skin ﬁrmness, elasticity, and viscoelasticity [ 300]. In otherwords, Progeline ™shows several properties: rebuilding collagen matrices, remodelingfacial contour lifting, improving skin micro-sculpture and architecture, lifting jawlines, andreducing drooping cheeks [ 302]. As a ﬁnal beneﬁt, the skin’s ﬂexibility and elasticity arerestored.Cell Communication Supports by Stimulating POMC-Related Receptor ExpressionCarli et al. (2016) reported that an excess of neuropeptides in the absence of receptorscould induce the cells’ desynchronization. For example, during aging processes in the
human epidermis, when the levels of the POMC neuropeptide in the keratinocytes rise,the melanocortin receptor-2 (MC-2R) and micro-opioid receptor 1 (MOR-1)—which are
human epidermis, when the levels of the POMC neuropeptide in the keratinocytes rise,the melanocortin receptor-2 (MC-2R) and micro-opioid receptor 1 (MOR-1)—which arethe ACTH and β-endorphin receptors, respectively—decrease [ 100,112,304]. Hence, animbalance of communication between the nervous and skin cells occurs [ 89,305].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 38 of 80BASF selected a neurocosmetic ingredient— Achillea millefolium extract, marketed asNeurobiox—able to upregulate receptor expressions [ 305–307]. The ingredient works forrebalancing communication, with the aim of improving cellular message transmission [ 89].BASF evaluated the Achillea millefolium extract’s effects on the different epidermal differenti-ation markers’ expression patterns during ex vivo studies performed on normal human skinbiopsies [ 306,307]. The Achillea millefolium extract’s properties for smoothing and rejuve-nating skin’s surface appearance were also evaluated during in vivo studies. The obtainedresults showed an improved expression of cytokeratin 10, transglutaminase-1, and ﬁlaggrin,and an increased epidermal thickness (+10%), cohesion, and regeneration [ 304,308].Another aspect in which the results of Neurobiox ’s use are interesting is some skin
defects due to intrinsic and extrinsic factors, such as hormones, diet, and stress. Becauseof these, the skin can develop irregularities and lose its natural glow. To prevent theseconsequences, attention should be focused on proper skin exfoliation, puriﬁcation, andregulation of sebum [ 307].With this aim, in vivo treatments with 2% Achillea millefolium extract demonstrated animproved appearance of wrinkles (reduction up to −14%) and pore size (reduction up to−21%), compared to placebo, after 2 months of treatment [ 89,100,305,307].Thus, pores are visibly reﬁned, and dark spots are reduced for an overall lighter,brighter, smoother, and more radiant skin appearance [ 307]. Therefore, beyond nervecell communication, Achillea millefolium extract decrypts, targets, and provides preventivetreatment against skin neuro-aging [ 275].A Strategy to Combat Dark Spots and Skin StressOne of the most common features of aged and photo-exposed skin is pigment spots.
Indeed, recent studies demonstrate that skin’s cellular stress is an intrinsic factor for formingdark spots. In particular, literature and CODIF studies reported a correlation between thedegree of skin innervation, an important release of neuropeptides, and photo-induced skindamage, including pigment spots [ 180,309,310].The p53 protein, known as “the stress protein” because its levels increase duringcellular stress, shows a critical role for cell survival [ 311–313]. It was demonstrated thatp53 directly regulates POMC expression, which encodes α-MSH, involved in melanogen-esis activation [ 313–315]. Hence, when inhibiting the expression of POMC, melanin’soverproduction cannot be triggered, thus preventing the pigment spots [ 309].Melanogenesis occurs in melanocytes, and to export the synthesized melanin, theycommunicate with keratinocytes through their dendrites. Melanocytes are also connected
to nerve ﬁbers, which release neuropeptides. When the latter bind to their receptors atthe dendrites’ surface, these neuropeptides cause melanin synthesis and/or the exportto keratinocytes. In detail, the neuropeptide substance P binds to tachykinin receptor1 (TacR1)—also known as neurokinin 1 receptor (NK1R), or substance P receptor (SPR).TacR1 is placed on the surface of the melanocyte dendrites and activates melanin’s exportto the upper layers of the skin. If the length of dendrites and the synthesis of substance Preceptors are limited, a reduction in the quantity of melanin exported to the surface of thepigment spots can be enabled [ 137,309,316].For this purpose, CODIF has developed Neurolight.61 G—an aqueous extract ofPancratium maritimum , able to reduce the area and the pigmentation of dark spots (up to−61%) by inhibiting both the melanin synthesis induced by stressed keratinocytes and themelanin release triggered by substance P [ 279,309].
CODIF reported that when Neurolight.61 G is used at 0.33%, it can inhibit POMCexpression by 65%, reducing both melanin synthesis ( −73%) and melanin transfer (by
CODIF reported that when Neurolight.61 G is used at 0.33%, it can inhibit POMCexpression by 65%, reducing both melanin synthesis ( −73%) and melanin transfer (by−62%). A 50% reduction of receptor TacR1 for substance P synthesis was also observed,thus reducing substance P’s effects [ 309].In vitro tests demonstrated that Neurolight.61G could be considered to be a solution for clarifying dark spots’ pigmentation withoutlightening all skin [ 59], with additional functionality as an anti-aging ingredient [ 279].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 39 of 80The Youth Proteins: KLOTHO and FOXOFOXO (forkhead box) proteins are a family of transcription factors that play importantroles in regulating the gene expression involved in cell growth, proliferation, differentiation,and longevity [ 84,317–319].The role of FOXO proteins in cellular protection and longevity to ﬁght aging is wellknown. In particular, the “nuclear” form of FOXO activates the transcription of the geneinvolved in cellular detoxiﬁcation and in repairing DNA damage. When phosphorylatedby the AKT (protein kinase B, PKB) factor, FOXO becomes FOXOP and leaves the nucleusfor the cytoplasm, where it loses its properties. The AKT factor activation occurs mainlywith age, favoring the inactive form FOXOP (Figure 3A) [319].Figure 3. Role of FOXO ( A) and KLOTHO ( B).KLOTHO is considered to be the “new youth protein” that slows down aging [320–323],is able to inhibit AKT activation, and maintains FOXO inside the cell nucleus. Its mutation
favors the traditional signs of aging, leading to premature death [ 322–324]. A large numberof signaling pathways involve the KLOTHO protein, aiming to restore optimal cellularfunction (Figure 3B) [322,323].Unfortunately, the decrease in KLOTHO expression starts from 30 years of age, andthe problem worsens with the aging of ﬁbroblasts [ 322]. Thus, a new strategy to combatskin aging should be devoted to increasing KLOTHO synthesis in ﬁbroblasts.Recently, the KLOTHO protein has received great attention in cosmetic studies [ 325].In this regard, as a result, a liposoluble extract derived from Pistacia lentiscus —a plantnative to the Mediterranean region, able to increase the KLOTHO protein synthesis inﬁbroblasts—has been discovered [ 326].Lakesis is the commercial name of a functional ingredient provided by CODIF [ 327].In accordance with in vitro test protocol, human dermal ﬁbroblasts from donors of different
ages were incubated with Lakesis at 0.005% for 24 h, observing a 28% decrease in activeAKT levels. By inhibiting the AKT factor, Lakesis lowers the phosphorylation of FOXO,which activates the transcription of detoxiﬁcation and cellular repair factors in the nucleus.In this case, the predominance of the active form of FOXO was estimated to be 16%.Moreover, the in vitro test demonstrated that Lakesis increases the catalase level—part ofthe enzymatic pool that detoxiﬁes the cell—by 145%.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 40 of 80By following in vitro protocol, it was observed that 0.2% Lakesis, when appliedtopically for 24 h to reconstituted human skin, promotes cellular detoxiﬁcation processesby inhibiting the thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) (50% decrease), a thioredoxininhibitor. Thioredoxin is a powerful antioxidant system widely studied for its involvementin cellular detoxiﬁcation, and in combating cellular senescence [ 328,329].In vitro tests performed on human dermal ﬁbroblasts from donors of different agesshowed that Lakesis improves cellular activity, increasing the total amount of cellularRNA and, thus, fronting off the aging process. Indeed, the amount of RNA present insidea cell provides important information about the cellular activity rate, which drops withage. Lakesis, when employed at 0.003% for treating human dermal ﬁbroblasts for 24 h,improves type I collagen synthesis by 47%. Indeed, in vitro tests performed on 54-year-
old human dermal ﬁbroblasts treated with Lakesis at 0.005% for ﬁve days showed therejuvenating effect of Lakesis on the extracellular matrix via the reactivation of the synthesisof ﬁbrillin—a major component of elastic ﬁbers—and collagen. In clinical tests, the anti-aging effects of Lakesis on the dermis were also evaluated. With twice-daily applicationof a cream containing 0.2% Lakesis to the whole face for 28 days, by 20 volunteers agedfrom 55 to 65 years old, it was shown that Lakesis increased the density of the supportingﬁbers throughout the dermis, and also ensured their homogeneous distribution. As aresult, from consumer analysis, it exhibits anti-aging efﬁcacy on the face. In detail, afterLakesis treatment for 4 weeks, two-thirds of women involved in the studies observedan improvement of facial contours (+24%), skin ﬁrmness (+23%), and skin thickness(+22%) [ 327].4.4. Biomimetic Peptides
(+22%) [ 327].4.4. Biomimetic PeptidesAs arises from the previous discussion, with the aging of the population and the desireto maintain a young and healthy aspect, the signiﬁcant development of anti-aging productshas been prompted [ 330]. Interestingly, since 2000, the use of peptides has increased rapidlyfor a wide range of skincare applications [ 301,331–333]. This highlights the necessity ofacquiring in-depth knowledge of the different molecules and their associated physiologicalprinciples [ 301].Chemically, peptides are short chains of amino acids linked together by peptidebonds [ 209]. Instead, in the personal care industry, the term ”peptide” refers to moleculesthat can signal physiological changes at the dermal level or, in some cases, effectivelytravel into the dermis and compete with neurotransmitter-binding sites to alter physio-logical activity temporarily [ 301,331–334]. Today, peptides can be developed or modiﬁed
in several ways—to improve solubility, to have better penetration, to increase receptoractivity, etc. [ 301]. More speciﬁcally, it is better to specify that in the ﬁeld of researchand development of skincare cosmetic formulations, bioactive peptides—also known asbiomimetic peptides—are compounds that have an identical amino acid sequence to physi-ological peptides, but are frequently synthesized biotechnologically [ 110,331,332]. They arebecoming increasingly popular for preventing or attenuating the clinical manifestations ofdamaged and dysfunctional skin, especially during the aging process, hyperpigmentation,and wrinkle development [ 35,110]. Many peptides marketed in cosmetic products asanti-aging, antioxidant, skin-lightening, tissue repairing, soothing and neuromodulating,hair growth controlling, moisturizing, and barrier repair peptide ingredients are claimedto slow down the skin’s aging process [ 35,209,332]. Hence, the commercial potential for
these molecules appears to be high [ 301].Biomimetic peptides play several biological roles, especially as signaling/regulating
these molecules appears to be high [ 301].Biomimetic peptides play several biological roles, especially as signaling/regulatingmolecules in a variety of physiological processes (for example, defense, immunity, stress,growth, and homeostasis) [ 110,333], by mimicking the mechanisms of action and the effectsexerted by natural peptides such as growth factors, by interacting with the correspondingreceptors and leading to ﬁnal effects (i.e., slowing of aging) [ 110,331,335–337].Several companies, such as PHARMASPECIAL®, GALENA®, BIOTEC®, LIPOTEC®,and SILAB®, are investing in technologically innovative signal- and neurotransmitter-
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 41 of 80inhibitor peptides particularly indicated as anti-aging ingredients for the formulation ofskincare products [ 110,303].In recent years, advanced techniques to study molecular structures and extract, isolate,characterize, and synthesize novel molecules have been greatly improved [ 35,338–340].Although the process is not complicated or difﬁcult to perform, peptide synthesis, witha deﬁned sequence and high purity (> 90%), can be expensive [ 209,332,341,342]. In thisregard, however, it should be noted that the high efﬁcacy compensates for the cost. In otherwords, for the formulation of cosmetic products, it is possible to employ these peptides inlow amounts [ 303,343].Regarding synthetic procedures, usually, as precursors, the standard synthetic processfor obtaining peptides to be adopted as cosmetic ingredients utilizes amino acids fromplants, fermentation origin, or extracted from certain protein hydrolysates [ 36,331,338,340].
For years, the recombinant production of peptides has also been studied, because it isconsidered less expensive, but the end products are unlikely to be considered to be aspure as those obtained synthetically. In any case, other synthetic approaches for peptidesexist, providing the opportunity to create novel “designed” skincare ingredients [331,338].Indeed, through the synthesis of peptides, the screening of these virtually endless combi-nations of amino acid sequences, the optimization of the chemical structure of potentialpeptide ingredients, their delivery, and their formulation, should open new possibilities forthe future of cosmetic ingredients [ 331,338,339,344].Another aspect for consideration is the peptide concentration that should be supportedby clinical and product-speciﬁc studies [ 332,333]. As a whole, peptides act at extremelylow concentrations—generally at the nanomolar level (10−9mol/L)—because they exhibit
a speciﬁc activity at a speciﬁc target level through a speciﬁc binding process [ 209,331].Indeed, each peptide sequence shows a highly selective binding afﬁnity that translates intoa speciﬁc message. The well-known and simpliﬁed concept of “key” and “lock” interaction(referring, in this case, to the peptide and receptor, respectively) is used to explain thisaction. Unfortunately, peptides exhibit a short lifetime in the organism due to the pres-ence of proteolytic enzymes that break their structure to avoid the overload at the targetsite [ 209,332]. Therefore, the stability of bioactive peptides within a cosmetic formulationis a key feature to ensure active form preservation with the related beneﬁcial effects. Thecost/beneﬁt ratio should depend on the ability to use suitable and optimized amino acid se-quences intended to maximize the bioactivity and targeted beneﬁts [209,332,333,339,345].4.4.1. Topical Peptides and Their Skin Permeability
Topical peptides can be classiﬁed as signals, carriers, enzyme inhibitors, or neurotrans-mitter inhibitors [ 110,301,303,335,346].In detail, signal oligopeptides—also called matrikines—are commonly synthesizedfrom extracellular matrix proteins (EMPs). They boost ﬁbrillogenesis, i.e., they stimulatedermal ﬁbroblasts, with the intent of modulating the EMP network. Furthermore, theyincrease the levels of collagen, elastin, proteoglycan, glycosaminoglycan (GAG), andﬁbronectin deposition, causing ﬁrmer and younger-looking skin, as do the subclass ofcarrier peptides [ 336,344,345,347]. In fact, carrier peptides can be considered a subcategoryof signal oligopeptides [ 336,344]. As an example of this class of topical peptides, it is worthmentioning that Matrixyl (palmitoyl pentapeptide-3) is the ﬁrst peptide to be formulatedin skincare products [ 301,303,331,332,336,344,345,348,349].Enzyme inhibitor peptides act directly and indirectly on enzymes, causing cellu-
lar anti-aging effects in the dermis, generally ascribed to ﬁbrillogenesis and deposi-tion [ 301,303,336,350].
Enzyme inhibitor peptides act directly and indirectly on enzymes, causing cellu-lar anti-aging effects in the dermis, generally ascribed to ﬁbrillogenesis and deposi-tion [ 301,303,336,350].Neurotransmitter peptides proteolyze acetylcholine, releasing proteins at the neuro-muscular junction—such as SNAP-25, syntaxin-1, and synaptobrevin [ 110,303,346,348,351].In detail, the most common peptides that affect the biological function of acetylcholineinclude acetyl hexapeptide-3, pentapeptide-18, pentapeptide-3, acetyl octapeptide-3, andtripeptide-3. [ 303,336,337,344,348,349,352–354]. These peptides can be considered to be
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 42 of 80valid alternatives to botulinum neurotoxin (Botox)—a protein produced by the bacteriumClostridium botulinum (which will be discussed later).The main difﬁculty that should be taken into account when peptides are studied istheir skin permeability [ 224,301,331,335,336,355,356], which generally depends on:• The physicochemical properties of the substance (pKa, molecular size, stability, bind-ing afﬁnity, solubility, and partition coefﬁcient);• The time necessary for the permeation;• The integrity, thickness, and components of the skin, and the cutaneous metabolism;• The site, area, duration of application, and local depot at the site of application.The ideal parameters for topical peptides are listed below:• Molecular weight of less than 500 Da;• Moderate log of partition coefﬁcient octanol/water between 1 and 3;• Melting point less than 200◦C;• Reasonable aqueous solubility (>1 mg mL−1);• Zero or few polar centers.
• Zero or few polar centers.It is worth mentioning that peptides’ transdermal penetration is an important parame-ter to measure the activity and efﬁcacy of topical peptides [ 301,349,356,357]. In this regard,the superﬁcial layer of the epidermis—the stratum corneum (SC)—provides the ﬁrst andmost rate-limiting barrier for skin permeation by substances [ 356,358,359].The SC is a negatively charged tissue, is bound together by tight junctions, and itspH ranges from 5 to 6. It is composed of dead corneocytes surrounded by an intercellularlipid layer, and contains structural proteins, water, and lipids. More speciﬁcally, theextracellular lipid system, which acts as a protective barrier to maintain skin hydration,contains ceramides, cholesterol, and free fatty acids. Sebum, organic acids, antioxidants,glycerol, GAGs, and inorganic ions are also present at the surface. Molecules’ diffusivitythrough the stratum corneum is related not only to the size of the molecule, but also to
the number of hydrogen bonds present in the molecule itself. In detail, the diffusivityis maximal for small, non-hydrogen-bonding molecules, and reaches a minimum whenapproximately four hydrogen bonds are present. It is necessary for a peptide to cross thecutaneous barrier to reach the viable epidermis (keratinocytes), the basal layer (melanocytes,nerve cell endings), the dermis (ﬁbroblasts), and even the hypodermis (adipocytes) [ 209,336,360–362]. However, since peptides and proteins contain many amide bonds (as hydrogenbond donor and acceptor groups), and usually show large molecular size, a low diffusivityin the skin is exhibited [ 335,362].Although the topical use of peptides can be considered promising in terms of efﬁcacy,the delivery across the skin could be difﬁcult due to the ionic nature of these materials.Indeed, these peptides are charged at physiological pH, and as a result, they are intrin-
sically hydrophilic. Thus, the lipophilic stratum corneum represents a barrier to theirpenetration [ 332,335,359]. Moreover, proteolytic enzymes and the skin’s bacterial ﬂorasupport this barrier in degrading topical peptides [ 336].Interestingly, regarding the SC, the skin permeability varies on different parts of thebody. However, three main permeation methods can be taken into account for topicaldrugs: intercellular, transcellular, and transappendageal [ 360,363,364].Hydrophobic substances are more permeable in parts of the skin with higher lipidcontent, such as the face. In contrast, hydrophilic substances permeate more readily in thepalms and the soles of the feet, since they contain relatively lower lipid quantities [ 336].Lastly, permeation is affected by biological factors, including age, the integrity of theskin, its thickness, and its components, as well as the cutaneous metabolism [ 336] and the
skin type (particularly in the case of dry or aged skin) [ 262,332,365]. Overall, aged skincontains fewer lipids. Therefore, topical peptides may be more effective in aged people
skin type (particularly in the case of dry or aged skin) [ 262,332,365]. Overall, aged skincontains fewer lipids. Therefore, topical peptides may be more effective in aged peoplethan in younger populations [ 262,336].With the advent of more sophisticated software, there is considerably further pre-dictability in estimating a compound’s behavior with respect to skin penetration [ 332].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 43 of 80For example, Ham et al. demonstrated that, by simple amino acid substitution, the skinpenetration of peptides might be signiﬁcantly increased [ 366].4.4.2. Delivery Systems for PeptidesLiposome formulations and colloidal carrier systems are preferred for the dermaldelivery of peptides through the epidermal barrier by targeting hair follicles or structurallyaltering the intercellular lipid network [ 335,336,361,367,368]. An important advantage ofthe use of liposomal carriers is the ability to protect encapsulated proteins, and deliverto different cell types while avoiding, according to the case, skin toxicity—especially ifliposomes are made of epidermal lipids [ 336,364,369,370].The delivery efﬁcacy is related to the site and time of the topical protein’s application,and to the possibility of creating a local depot at the application site [ 336,364,371,372].The use of chemical penetration enhancers might also be valu able [ 332,335,342,349,373].
Another approach to improve delivery is the use of fatty acid derivatives that increase thepeptides’ lipophilic properties (for example, the palmito yl derivative) [333,335,336,349,374].Interestingly, recent studies have discovered good, alternative ways to increase tran-scutaneous delivery—by using amphiphilic cell penetration peptides (CPP) [ 374–376],attaching a polyarginine chain to a peptide [ 377–380], or designing hyaluronic acid (HA)conjugates [ 379,381]—thus improving peptides’ bioactivity and bioavailability [ 331]. Inrecent years, other approaches for the transdermal delivery of peptides are gaining popu-larity, including iontophoresis—which uses small electric currents to enable the passage ofcharged peptides through the skin—and microdermabrasion, a method that removes someof the layers of the SC in order to improve the absorption of topical peptides, suitable forﬁne lines and wrinkles [ 336,355,370,382–385].
ﬁne lines and wrinkles [ 336,355,370,382–385].Another important aspect that should be taken into consideration, especially froma regulatory and toxicological point of view, is the safety of peptides’ use in cosmeticproducts. In particular, they should be non-immunogenic and non-irritant in order toavoid any side effects [ 209,331,332,338]. Therefore, studies were performed both in vitroand in vivo on the safety of the bioactive peptides.For example, according to the FDA (Food and Drug Administration), up to 2012,palmitoyl-like peptides have been the most extensively tested molecules, together with thebioactive acetyl hexapeptide-3, whose safety has been evaluated via skin irritation test andpatch test [ 110,353,354,386,387].In conclusion, new horizons in this ﬁeld are expected, and some of them suggest theuse of functional foods, such as nutritional supplements, as a comprehensive approach tohealth maintenance [ 333,338,388–390].
health maintenance [ 333,338,388–390].Moreover, since the demand on the personal care market is growing, the manufactur-ers’ competition to guarantee claims about the improvement of the appearance of skin isalso increasing [ 301,303,391]. Research to develop novel ingredients, smart delivery sys-tems, and convenient technologies is a fascinating challenge facing cosmetic manufacturers.It is worth mentioning that despite these formulation challenges, peptides remain the mostpopular, widely used functional ingredients—especially for anti-aging skincare products.4.4.3. Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesWrinkles are partially due to excessive stressor stimuli on the facial muscles; unsur-prisingly, it is usual to refer to them as “ expression lines ” [392–394].From a physiological point of view, the release of a speciﬁc neurotransmitter—acetylch-oline—allows muscles to contract. This mechanism starts at the presynaptic terminal, where
a cascade of protein–protein interactions ends with the fusion of vesicles loaded with acetyl-choline to the neuron membrane. In detail, a variation in membrane potential enhances the
a cascade of protein–protein interactions ends with the fusion of vesicles loaded with acetyl-choline to the neuron membrane. In detail, a variation in membrane potential enhances theentry of Ca2+ions into the neuron. Then, once these ions enter the presynaptic terminal,the release of acetylcholine from the vesicles occurs [ 301,393]. SNAP-25 (synaptosomal-associated protein 25)—a membrane receptor protein associated with vesicles, involving theSNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor activating protein receptor) complex—
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 44 of 80modulates this process, regulating the binding and fusion of the vesicles [ 301,395,396]. Indetail, to form the SNARE complex, Munc-18 (mammalian uncoordinate-18) proteins mustbind to syntaxin, followed by SNAP-25 and VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein,necessary for the synaptic vesicle’s docking and fusion to the presynaptic membrane forthe acetylcholine release) [ 397,398].Munc-18 proteins are considered important both as components of the synaptic vesi-cle fusion protein complex, and for exocytosis. This protein directly promotes syntaxinstability by controlling the assembly of core complexes for SNARE-dependent fusion, orby interacting with the SNARE core. In particular, Munc-18a binds to the N-terminal ofsyntaxin, favoring a conformational change that induces the activation of syntaxin, whichin turn connects to the ternary SNARE complex [ 399].It has also been reported that proteins belonging to the Munc-18 class bind to the
C-terminal of synaptobrevin, suggesting that this type of protein is involved in membranefusion.The VAMP protein is linked to a vesicle containing acetylcholine that, after the SNAREcomplex’s formation, fuses with the neuron membrane, inducing the release of acetyl-choline into the synaptic space [ 397,399]. Thus, acetylcholine binds to its receptors onmuscle cells, leading to muscle contraction through the release of Ca2+ions [ 301,397,400].It is worth mentioning that some synthetic peptides, used for anti-aging cosmetic products,exhibit structural analogies with the sequence present within the SNAP-25 (amino acids12–17) N-terminal region, and compete with SNAP-25 for the binding sites in the SNAREcomplex, modulating its formation [ 110,301,303,330]. This structural feature destabilizesthe SNARE complex, causing the inhibition of the acetylcholine release and the attenuationof muscle contraction [ 330].
of muscle contraction [ 330].These kinds of peptides that speciﬁcally inhibit neurosecretion, relax muscles, andsoften wrinkles are known as neurotransmitter-inhibitor peptides [ 110,301,338,348,401,402];pentapeptide-3, acetyl tripeptide-30 citrulline, and pentapeptide-18 can be considered someexamples (see Table 2).• Pentapeptide-3 (Vialox) is a synthetic peptide derived from snake venom, which actsat the postsynaptic membrane level by following a tubocurarine-like mechanism ofaction [ 301,335,344,348]. It is a competitive antagonist of the nicotinic acetylcholinemembrane receptor [ 21,403]. Indeed, it prevents the release of sodium ions (Na+)required for the depolarization and contraction of muscle ﬁbers, leading to musclerelaxation [ 21,335,336]. Less frequent contractions of muscles result in thinner lines.Softened wrinkles and reduced skin roughness were observed during in vivo andin vitro studies performed for testing this product; the results showed that, after
28 days of twice-daily use, wrinkle depth was reduced by about 49% [ 21,335];• Vanistryl®, commercialized by Galena and Lipotec [ 404], is a complex of the bioac-tive peptides acetyl tripeptide-30 citrulline and pentapeptide-18 [ 110,404]. If acetyltripeptide-30 citrulline is a signal peptide [ 301,335,336], conversely, pentapeptide-18is a neurotransmitter inhibitor peptide [ 335,336,348,405]. These peptides are used informulations for wrinkle smoothing, and act synergistically, when applied to the skin,to modulate muscular tension and inhibit matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [ 110,406].Vanistryl®protects the connective tissue from degradation, and rebuilds ECM anddermal components, conferring to skin the integrity and elasticity needed. Further-more, it exhibits wound-healing and smoothness effects, and reduces skin tension.In vivo skin surface studies (tightness and drying), color studies, and skin elasticity
analysis were performed to demonstrate a visible attenuation of stretch marks whenVanistryl®is used [ 110,404,406].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 45 of 80Table 2. Neurotransmitter-affecting peptides1.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesDSM VialoxAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Pentapeptide-3.Competitive antagonisteffect towards theacetylcholine receptorscoupled with the enkephalinreceptor and closure of thecalcium channels, leading tomuscle relaxation (in vitro);reduction of musclecontractions by 71% within 1min after treatment, and 58%2 h later (in vitro).Decrease inwrinkle size(−49%) and skinroughness ( −47%)after 28 days ofapplication.None -Powder;water-soluble.A topical alternativeto muscle relaxinginjections;an intensivetreatment forﬁghting expressionlines.Galena;LipotecVanistrylFirming agent;deliverysystems/carriers.Water/aqua (and)caprylyl/caprylglucoside (and)lecithin (and)glycerin (and)Pseudoal-teromonasferment extract
Pseudoal-teromonasferment extract(and) acetyltripeptide-30citrulline (and)pentapeptide-18(and) xanthangum (and)caprylyl glycol(and) potassiumsorbate (and)phenoxyethanol.Inhibition of extracellularmatrix (ECM) degradation(in vitro);modulation of acetylcholinerelease from neuron cellcultures by preventing theentry of Ca2+into the neuron:attenuation of musclecontraction and relaxation ofthe muscle tissuesurrounding striae (in vitro);increases dermal proteinsynthesis: type I collagenraised to 128%, type IV to81%, and elastin to 31%, in15 days (in vitro); increasesﬁbroblast adhesion (125% in5 h) and keratinocyte growth(36% after 48 h) (in vitro);enhancement of woundhealing effect onkeratinocytes (in vitro).Improvement ofthe skin surface,dryness, andﬁrmness; decreasein erythema(−18%);attenuation ofstretch marks;improvement ofthe color of stretchmarks.Phenoxyethanol(and) potassiumsorbate5%Liquid;Water-soluble.Incompatibilities:oxidants and
Water-soluble.Incompatibilities:oxidants andelectrophiles.Processing:Incorporate in theaqueous phase inthe ﬁnal step ofthe manufacturingprocess. In thecase of emulsionpreparation, itshould be addedonce the emulsionis formed.Generally, add at atemperaturebelow 40◦C;pH usage range:4.0–8.0.Maintenance andimprovement of thedermal structure;regeneration ofthethe epidermis,reconstruction of theconnective tissue byprotectingand boosting dermalproteins;increase in skinelasticity.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 46 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesTopical peptidomimetic ingredients as alternatives to BotoxLipotec ArgirelineAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Aqua/water (and)acetylhexapeptide-8(and) caprylylglycol.Modulation of SNAREcomplex formation (in vitro);modulation of catecholaminerelease in chromafﬁn cells(in vitro).Reduction ofexpression ofwrinkles (volumeby 20.6% andlength by 15.9%)in just 1 week,with a solution ofArgireline peptide(2%).None Max 10%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless.Processing:incorporation atthe ﬁnal stage ofthe manufacturingprocess, at atemperaturebelow 40◦C.pHusage range:3.0–6.0.Reduction ofwrinkle depthcaused by thecontraction ofmuscles of facialexpression,especially on theforehead andaround the eyes,after 1 week.Lipotec ArgireloxAnti-aging;
after 1 week.Lipotec ArgireloxAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Aqua/water (and)glycerin (and)acetylhexapeptide-8(and)pentapeptide-18(and) citric acid(and) caprylylglycol.Modulation of glutamaterelease (in vitro).Reduction ofexpression lines infrontal andperiorbital regions,prolonging theeffects of BoNT-Aeven after 6months.None 10%Liquid;water-soluble.Incompatibilities:oxidants andelectrophiles.Processing:incorporation inthe aqueous phaseof emulsions andgels in the ﬁnalstep of themanufacturingprocess.Whenpreparing theemulsion, itshould be addedonce the emulsionis formed at atemperaturebelow 40◦C;colorless;pH usage range:3.0–8.0Muscle relaxation bymodulatingacetylcholine (ACh)release;smoothing effect onexpression lines bymodulating theSNARE complexand calciumchannels; reductionof reappearance ofexpression lines inthe crow’s feet area.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 47 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesInﬁnitecBONT-LPeptideSolutionAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Water/aqua (and)palmitoylhexapeptide-19.SNARE protein complexinhibition by 30%.A creamcontaining 5%BONT-L Peptidewas tested for 28days on 15volunteers; anaverage reductionof 38% ofmacro-relief ofhuman skin.Phenoxyethanol 3–5%Liquid;water-soluble.Muscles’ relaxationby minimizing therelease ofacetylcholine, andconsequent wrinklereduction, in 4weeks.InﬁnitecBONT-LPeptidePowderAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Dextran (and)palmitoylhexapeptide-19.SNARE protein complexinhibition by 30%.A creamcontaining 5%BONT-L Peptidewas tested for 28days on 15volunteers; anaverage reductionof 38% ofmacro-relief ofhuman skin.None 3–5%Powder;water-soluble.Muscles’ relaxation
water-soluble.Muscles’ relaxationby minimizing therelease ofacetylcholine, andconsequent wrinklereduction, in 4weeks.Sederma CalmosensineAnti-Aging;anti-wrinkle; skinmoisturizer;soothing agent;smoothingagent;coolingagent.Butylene glycol(and) aqua/water(and) laureth-3(and)hydroxyethylcellulose (and)acetyl dipeptide-1cetyl ester.Stimulation of the release ofpro-endorphins bykeratinocyte; progressivereduction in musclecontraction, with levels aslow as 1 ppm leading to totalmuscular inhibition within 2h (in vitro).Modulation of thecutaneousperception tolessen unpleasantsensations;reduction of theperception of heat.None 3%Liquid;water-soluble.Processing:incorporation atroom temperature.Enhancement ofskin comfort;relief of tension tohelp prevent theonset of wrinklesand expression lines.Suitable for sensitiveskinLipotec InylineAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Aqua/water (and)acetylhexapeptide-30(and) arginine(and) caprylyl
hexapeptide-30(and) arginine(and) caprylylglycol.Reduction of AChRclustering, a key step in thepost-synaptic functionalityof the neuromuscularjunction (NMJ) (in vitro).Decrease inwrinkle depth ofup to 14.9%.None 5%Liquid;water-soluble.Attenuation ofexpression wrinkles.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 48 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesLipotec LeuphasylAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Aqua/water (and)glycerin (and)pentapeptide-18(and) caprylylglycol.Modulation of glutamaterelease in a neuron cellculture(in vitro).Decrease in depthof expressionwrinkles(−11.64%).None 3–10%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless;pH usage range:2.0–5.0.Processing:incorporation atthe ﬁnal stage ofthe manufacturingprocess at atemperaturebelow 40◦C.Reduction ofwrinkle depthcaused by thecontraction ofmuscles responsiblefor facial expression,especially in theforehead andaround the eyes;has a synergisticeffect withArgireline.Lipotec Snap 8Anti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent.Aqua/water (and)acetyloctapeptide-3(and) caprylylglycol.Inhibition of SNAREcomplex formation (in vitro);
complex formation (in vitro);modulation of catecholaminerelease in chromafﬁn cells(in vitro);modulation of glutamaterelease in a neuron cellculture (in vitro).Wrinkle depthreduction (63%).None 3–10%Liquid;water-soluble;colorless.By reducing musclecontractions, depthof ﬁne lines andexpression wrinklesis reduced withinone month oftreatment.DSM Syn-akeAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;smoothing agent.Glycerin (and)aqua/water (and)dipeptidediaminobutyroylbenzylamidediacetate.Reversible antagonist of themuscular nicotinicacetylcholine receptor(mnAChR) (in vitro);inhibition of the Na+uptakeat the postsynapticmembrane to attenuatemuscle cell contractions(in vitro);mimics/mimic waglerin-1functionality.Wrinkle reductionup to 52% after 28days; measurablesmoothing effecton 80% of thevolunteers;measurablewrinkle reductionon 73% of thevolunteers;reduction ofwrinkle depth;smoothing ofcrow’s feet linesand foreheadwrinkles.None 1–4%Liquid;
and foreheadwrinkles.None 1–4%Liquid;water-soluble.Reduction of theappearance of mimicwrinkles.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 49 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesInﬁnitec X50 MyoceptAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent;cosmetic drone.Powder form:lacticacid/glycolic acidcopolymer (and)palmitoylhexapeptide-52(and)polyvinyl alcohol(and)palmitoylheptapeptide-18.Liquidsuspension:water/aqua (and)xanthan gum(and) lacticacid/glycolic acidcopolymer (and)palmitoylhexapeptide-52(and)polyvinylalcohol (and)palmitoylheptapeptide-18.Additives:phenoxyethanol(and) caprylylglycol (and)glycerin (and)glyceryl caprylate(and)phenylpropanol.Reduction of the entry ofcalcium into the neuron, andinhibition of the formation ofthe SNARE protein complex;reduction of the neuronalexocytosis.−20% wrinkledepth and lengthreduction in just 4weeks.Phenoxyethanol 1%Powder/liquidsuspension;water-soluble.Reduction of the
suspension;water-soluble.Reduction of theexpression lines.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 50 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesPlant extract alternatives to BotoxGattefoss éGatulineExpressionAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;myorelaxantagent; smoothingagent.Alcohol (and)water (and)Acmella oleraceaextract.Inhibition of musclecontractions (in vitro).Smoothingefﬁcacyon crow’s feetwrinkles.None 2–5%Liquid;water-soluble;insoluble in oils;color: yellow toamber;odor:characteristic;pH usage range:5.0–7.0.Processing:incorporation atcold temperatures.Improvement of theeye contour byreducing expressionlines and wrinkles.BASF MyoxinolAnti-aging;Botox-like agent.HydrolyzedHibiscusesculentus extract(and) dextrin.Inhibition of muscle cellcontraction; free radicalscavenging.Wrinklesmoothening (1%).None 0.5–2%Powder;water-soluble;insoluble in oilsand fats;color: beige topale yellow;
and fats;color: beige topale yellow;odor:characteristic;pH usage range:5.0–7.0.Processing:incorporate below50◦C during theﬁnishing process,or at roomtemperature forcold processing.Anti-oxidant;smooths expressionlines.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 51 of 80Table 2. Cont.Neurotransmitter-Affecting PeptidesCompany/SupplierProductFunctionalityCategoryINCI Name In vitro/Ex vivo In vivo Preservatives Use LevelFormulation/processingFeaturesCodifTechnologieNaturelleStoechiolAnti-aging;anti-wrinkle;Botox-like agent.Caprylic/caprictriglyceride (and)LavandulastoechasWrinkle relaxation;stimulation of the division ofkeratinocytes in the basallayer to restore the densityof the epidermis;promotes the production ofthe lipid cement involved inthe restructuring of thestratum corneum. Byincreasing the expression ofthe adhesion proteins,Stoechiol increases theformation of inter-corneocytelinks, promoting thereorganization of thecorneocytes and, therefore,the cohesion of the corneallayer. Immobilization of thewrinkle coupled with are-densifying and smoothingeffect of the epidermis leadsto a rapid and lastingreduction in the depth ofexpression lines.Immediateanti-age effectfrom 0.25%.
anti-age effectfrom 0.25%.Within just 1 h, theamplitude of thecutaneous relief issmoothed; after 24h wrinkles are lessvisible; 7 daysafter the end oftreatment,wrinkles arevisibly attenuated.An immediateanti-wrinkleaction coupledwith a long-termanti-age effect thatcontinues beyondthe end oftreatment.None 0.25%Liquid;liposoluble.Reversible andrepetitive inhibitionof musclecontractions;redensifying andrestructuring actionon the epidermis;immediate andlong-term reductionin the main wrinkle;immediate andlong-termsmoothing action onthe roughness of theskin; decrease in theexpression lines(visible within 24 h).1Abbreviations key: SNARE = soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor; BoNT-A = botulinum neurotoxin type A; AChR = acetylcholine receptor.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 52 of 804.4.4. Botulinum Neurotoxin: The First Neurotransmitter Inhibi tor Anti-Wrinkle IngredientBotulinum toxin is a neurotoxic protein produced by the Clostridium botulinum bac-terium [ 407–410]. Its commercial name is Botox, and it is the most potent known toxin, andone of the most powerful muscle blockers [ 330,408,411–415].Structurally, the protein is a disulﬁde-linked heterodimer constituted by two polypep-tidic chains: one at a higher molecular weight (”heavy”, 100 kDa), and the other lighter(“light”, 50 kDa) [ 408,416,417].The toxin is internalized by receptor-mediated endocytosis after binding to the pe-ripheral neuronal presynaptic membrane, mediated by the heavy polypeptidic chain.After the translocation into the cytoplasm from the endocytic vesicles, the botulinum’slighter chain acts as a protease. It proteolytically cleaves one of the proteins (SNAP-25,
synaptobrevin, or syntaxin) of the neuromuscular junction, depending on the neurotoxin’sserological subtype. The cleavage of these proteins is an important factor needed forthe acetylcholine vesicles’ fusion with the inner side of the nerve terminal membrane.Thus, the result is the inhibition of the release of neurotransmitters at neuromuscularjunctions [ 330,408,409,412,413,416,418,419]. According to several studies, one botulinumtoxin can inhibit a single neuron. This explains the extraordinary toxicity of this substance.The inhibition of acetylcholine determines the block of the nerve impulse. There-fore, the botulinum toxin acts by temporarily paralyzing the muscles into which it is in-jected [418,419]. Due to its high toxicity, its use for aesthetic reasons is authorized only in themedical ﬁeld (i.e., maxillofacial surgery, dermatology, and ophthalmology) [410,415,420,421].If these injections take place at the facial mimic muscles (responsible for facial expression
lines), they can reduce or eliminate this kind of wrinkles, conferring a more youthfulappearance to the facial skin [ 421,422].However, the risk is high, so many consumers chose to avoid Botox, and started tolook for topical, non-injected solutions that mimic its activity [ 334,345,423].4.4.5. Topical Peptidomimetic Ingredients as Alternatives to BotoxMuscular contractions also perturb the lipid matrix; when muscle contraction isblocked, the lipid matrix maintains its proﬁle, and the skin deformation does not occur,stopping the appearance of wrinkles [ 301,334].Several studies are focused on discovering novel functional ingredients as non-invasive alternatives to Botox, focusing the interest especially on peptides that can mois-turize, ﬁrm, reduce roughness, and smooth wrinkles by interfering with neurosecretionaccording to different mechanisms [ 301,330,332,337,344]. Generally, they work to inhibit
the release of neurotransmitters involved in muscle contraction indirectly by closing Ca2+channels [ 110,301,344,345,424], or by stimulating the release of endogenous messengers(i.e., enkephalins) that induce muscle relaxation [ 335,405]. Several biomimetic peptideswere studied for the interesting properties they display at the level of the dermal struc-ture, where they stimulate ﬁbroblasts to produce collagen, conferring anti-wrinkle andmoisturizing beneﬁts on the facial skin [ 110,209,330,337].Traditionally, peptides have been produced by partial hydrolysis of proteins of plantor animal origin, in order to obtain mixtures of peptides [ 36,337,338,343,397].The cosmetics industry searched for and developed a variety of safer, Botox-likefunctional ingredients, providing similar and relatively rapid results [ 301,332,334,344,348,376]. Peptides and plant extracts available on the market as alternatives to Botox
will be discussed, presenting their mechanisms of action, scientiﬁc efﬁcacy, and in vivoexperimental results.An overview of the most used Botox-like functional ingredients is carefully reported
will be discussed, presenting their mechanisms of action, scientiﬁc efﬁcacy, and in vivoexperimental results.An overview of the most used Botox-like functional ingredients is carefully reportedin Table 2, with the related useful features for their use.• Acetyl hexapeptide-3 and -8—synthetic peptides that, by mimicking the portion ofSNAP-25, compete with it for the SNARE complex—were the ﬁrst Botox-like ingredi-ents brought to market by LIPOTEC, with the trade name Argireline®[425,426]. Whenthis analog peptide replaces SNAP-25, the SNARE complex is destabilized, and the
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 53 of 80release of acetylcholine is inhibited, resulting in muscle contraction being signiﬁcantlyreduced [ 334,337,353,354]. It was scientiﬁcally demonstrated that Argireline®is a safe,effective anti-wrinkle ingredient [ 337,352,427], particularly suitable for eye care prod-uct formulation [ 345,354]. The results derived from clinical tests showed a wrinkledepth reduction of up to 16.9% within 15 days, and up to 27% within 30 days [ 395,396].For performing these tests, a cream containing 10% Argireline®was applied twicedaily around the eyes by women aged 44. Moreover, when a cream containing 2%Argireline®was applied in the periorbital area by women aged 35–45, a reduction inwrinkle volume (up to 20.6%) and length (up to 15.9%) was observed within 7 days.An improvement of the skin tone and the presence of fewer wrinkles are the ﬁnalvisible beneﬁts [ 303,334,335,402];• Inyline®peptide (Acetyl Hexapeptide-30) by LIPOTEC uses a novel cosmetic approach
to reduce muscle contraction and expression wrinkles. It targets the agrin/MuSK post-synaptic pathway, behaving as a competitive antagonist of MuSK (muscle-speciﬁckinase) at the agrin-binding site [ 428], inactivating the formation of the agrin/MuSKcomplex and preventing acetylcholine receptor (AChR) clustering—a requirementfor triggering muscle contraction [ 330,429–431]. Agrin is a proteoglycan involved inthe organization of the basement membrane architecture [ 432,433]. A speciﬁc form ofagrin, released by motor neurons, was mainly studied for developing skeletal muscleﬁbers; it represents a signal for maintaining the acetylcholine receptors’ aggregation,ensuring the neuromuscular junction (NMJ)’s assembly [ 434,435]. In detail, the agrin,produced by the growing ends of motor neuron axons, binds to MuSK—a tyrosinekinase receptor required for the formation of the neuromuscular junction [ 429,430,
435,436].In vitro and in vivo experiments were performed to assess the ability ofInyline®to attenuate expression lines. During in vivo tests, 20 female volunteers aged41–50 applied a cream containing 5% Inyline®peptide solution to the crow’s feet areatwice daily for 28 days. The obtained results showed that the treatment decreasedwrinkle depth by 14.9% [ 437];• BONT-L Peptide Solution (palmitoyl hexapeptide-19) is a synthetic Botox-like pep-tide [ 438] by INFINITEC [ 334], able to inactivate SNAP-25 by inhibiting the formationof the SNARE protein complex [ 439,440]. As a result, the release of acetylcholine intothe synaptic cleft is prevented [ 440]. Moreover, an in vivo study on 15 volunteerswho used a 5% cream applied twice daily showed a reduction in periorbital areamicro-reliefs of 38% in 28 days [ 334];• Acetyl octapeptide-3, marketed as Snap 8 by LIPOTEC [ 441], is an elongated sequence
of Argireline peptide [ 303,442]. This analogy allows Snap 8 to mimic SNAP-25 in orderto compete effectively in the SNARE complex, obtaining a signiﬁcant inhibitory effect.It is promoted as the “next-generation” Botox alternative. When used in a 10% creamapplied twice a day for 28 days, a reduction in wrinkle depth around the periorbitalarea of up to 63% was observed [ 334,336,441–443].Another way to reduce muscular contractions is to prevent or reduce the inﬂux ofCa2+ ions into the cell—a necessary condition for the fusion of the vesicle containingACh with the cell membrane, and its release into the synaptic space [ 334]. As previouslydiscussed, if the Botox equivalents act as competitors with SNAP-25, conversely, othernovel ingredients can inhibit the formation of the SNARE protein complex and the vesiclemigration by blocking calcium entry [ 334].For example, this behavior can be observed for palmitoyl hexapeptide-52 and Pentape-ptide-18.
ptide-18.• X50 Myocept by INFINITEC [ 444]—a blend of palmitoyl hexapeptide-52, lactic acid,glycolic acid, and palmitoyl heptapeptide-18—when used at just 0.001%, reduces
ptide-18.• X50 Myocept by INFINITEC [ 444]—a blend of palmitoyl hexapeptide-52, lactic acid,glycolic acid, and palmitoyl heptapeptide-18—when used at just 0.001%, reducesexpression lines around the periorbital area by 20–27% in 28 days [ 334];• Pentapeptide-18 (Leuphasyl) by LIPOTEC mimics the physiological mechanism ofenkephalins and, by blocking calcium channels in the neuron, inhibits catecholamineand acetylcholine release [ 21,301,405,445]. As a consequence, the inhibitory G-protein-
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 54 of 80coupled receptor activation occurs with a decrease in the neuronal cell’s excitability,preventing the neurotransmitter release [ 336]. Its Botox-like effects and its safe ef-ﬁcacy were demonstrated, observing the reduction in the depth of ﬁne lines andwrinkles. Moreover, other interesting properties include its hydration ability andimprovement of skin ﬁrmness and tone [ 301,445,446]. Recently, another aspect wasalso explored, widening pentapeptide-18 (Leuphasyl)’s cosmetic qualities. Park et al.(2020) modiﬁed the commercial anti-aging pentapeptide-18 by substituting the N-terminal L-tyrosine with D-tyrosine, or adding L/D-tyrosine at the C-terminus. Therole in the melanogenesis process was clearly demonstrated, particularly in the caseof Leuphasyl peptide analogs containing C-terminal D-tyrosine, adding whiteningproperties to a remarkable anti-aging cosmeceutical [ 446]. It was also well proven that
pentapeptide-18, when in the presence of acetyl hexapeptide-3, shows a synergisticeffect [ 110,301,334]. Many studies showed that a cream containing 5% Leuphasyl with5% Argireline caused a reduction of wrinkles in the periorbital area from 25% to 47%within 28 days [ 334,402];• Acetyl dipeptide-1 cetyl ester (Calmosensine™), by SEDERMA—a synthetic replica ofthe naturally occurring peptide in the body—provides an in vitro Botox-like activityfor the reversible inhibition of muscle contractions [ 334,447]. More speciﬁcally, it stim-ulates the release of pro-endorphins by keratinocytes, leading to the stimulation ofrelaxation messengers in the skin [ 334]. As a whole, Calmosensine™prevents the onsetof wrinkles and expression lines by relieving muscular tensions [ 334,447]. Further-more, Calmosensine™plays an important role in modulating the cutaneous perceptionof unpleasant sensations—such as heat—improving skin comfort, as conﬁrmed by
in vivo studies [ 303,448]. Another important cosmetic property of the active acetyldipeptide-1 cetyl ester is its ability to signiﬁcantly upregulate epidermal barrier genes,as shown by the results in the work of Khmaladze et al. (2020). [ 449] Moreover, acetyldipeptide 1 cetyl ester can signiﬁcantly reactivate elastogenesis by upregulating someof the most important dermal genes associated with skin wrinkling, such as alpha-1type I collagen, decorin, lysyl oxidase-like 1, and ﬁbrillin-1. Additionally, it showedinteresting anti-glycation activity and promoted proteasomal activity. Thus, acetyldipeptide 1 cetyl ester is a promising active compound for skincare formulations,especially if an improved barrier function is essential [ 449].4.4.6. Plant Extract Alternatives to BotoxAlongside Botox-like functional peptide ingredients of both natural and syntheticorigins, some extracts derived from plants as further alternatives to muscle relaxants can
be used to formulate anti-aging cosmetic products.Interestingly, CODIF re-discovered the ancestral use of Lavandula stoechas oil—alsoknown as butterﬂy lavender oil—to provide a relaxing effect on expression lines. Theydeveloped and patented Stoechiol [ 273]—a liposoluble lavender extract obtained via asupercritical CO 2extraction process—as a Botox-like anti-aging ingredient speciﬁcallydesigned for mature skin types [ 273].The wrinkle-relaxing strategy proposed using Stoechiol consists of reversible inhibi-tion of muscle contractions for an instantaneous smoothing effect on the cutaneous reliefs,and the restructuring of the epidermis to reduce wrinkles’ depth. In fact, over time, therepeated contractions break down the structure of the epidermis and stratum corneum,worsening the already formed furrows. As a result, a loss of epidermal cohesion acceleratesthe formation of wrinkles and the natural desquamation processes. Cell co-cultures of
motor neurons on a monolayer of muscle cells were used to perform in vitro tests to assessthe relaxing effect of Stoechiol on their contraction frequency.
motor neurons on a monolayer of muscle cells were used to perform in vitro tests to assessthe relaxing effect of Stoechiol on their contraction frequency.It was also shown that Stoechiol stimulates keratinocyte division in the basal layerand promotes the synthesis of the lipid cement by the keratinocytes present in the stratumgranulosum.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 55 of 80Stoechiol helps the reorganization and the cohesion of the corneocytes by increasingthe expression of the adhesion proteins of the stratum corneum.Clinical tests on 20 volunteers aged between 46 and 59 years proved the anti-wrinkleand smoothing efﬁcacy after 7 days of applying 0.25% or 1% Stoechiol, twice daily to, thecrow’s feet area [ 273].BASF Care Creations offers Myoxinol ™[450]—an oligopeptide complex obtainedfrom the native proteins extracted from the seeds of Hibiscus esculentus [451]. It is used tosigniﬁcantly inhibit facial muscle contraction, preventing the formation of crow’s feet andnasolabial lines [ 452,453].Myoxinol’s potential as an anti-wrinkle functional ingredient was ﬁrstly assessedby an in vitro test on a co-cultured muscle cell and neuron system. Its ability to inhibitmuscle cells’ contraction was evaluated by measuring the frequency of contractions over
24 h. These in vitro tests also demonstrated an antioxidant effect, as an additional advan-tage [ 454–456].A clinical test performed involving the application of a cream containing 1% Myoxinolto the crow’s feet area for three weeks suggested that wrinkles became less noticeable—byapproximately 26%. The skin appeared lifted and revitalized as ﬁnal beneﬁts, thanks to amild exfoliation, an improvement of epidermal thickness, and cohesion [ 457].Gatuline Expression by GATTEFOSS Éis an alternative to Botox based on a plantextract derived from Acmella oleracea , which was standardized to contain the key activeconstituent, spilanthol [ 334,458–460].Due to its Botox-like action, spilanthol inhibits subcutaneous muscle contractions,particularly at the facial level [ 458,461–465].In vivo studies revealed that a cream containing 2% of this extract, when applied twicedaily to the crow’s feet area, showed results in 75% of volunteers even during the ﬁrst day
of application. Interestingly, after 20 days of application, a reduction in skin roughness ofup to 16% was evident to the participants [ 334].Santana et al. (2011) evaluated the properties of Laricifomes ofﬁcinalis , rice protein,and glutamic acid as anti-aging ingredients by using neuromuscular preparations. Bysimulating a Botox-like effect, these components induced a neuromuscular blockade, bothindividually and in the mixture. A dose–response curve with the mixture was performedto assess these effects [ 466].Laricifomes ofﬁcinalis is a wood-rotting fungus present on coniferous tree trunks in thenorthern region of China and in the Paciﬁc Northwest of the United States, Canada, andEurope. Vital Especialidades market it as a functional ingredient for anti-aging cosmeticproducts [ 466,467].Generally, rice protein from Oryza sativa L. seeds is considered to be an enzymeinhibitor due to its mechanism of action. It can be used alone as an anti-aging active
ingredient. It inhibits matrix metalloprotease activity, and causes hyaluronan synthase 2gene expression in keratinocytes [ 466,468].4.4.7. In Silico Designed Botox-Like PeptidesBiomimetic peptides can also be designed in silico; thus, their structures are optimizedto ﬁnd the lowest energy interactions between amino acids and their biological target,necessary for highly speciﬁc and efﬁcacious interfacing [ 339,397,398,469].Through a randomized screening process, the researchers can test many structurallysimilar compounds but differ from their constituents. In this way, it is possible to simul-taneously evaluate large “libraries” of peptides to identify the most active compoundquickly [ 339]. As a whole, these peptides are usually synthesized in the solid phase tocreate novel cosmetic ingredients.Acetyl-hexapeptide-1 is one example [ 397]; it was synthesized by using the followingsteps: After the identiﬁcation of the best amino acid sequence to target pre-synaptic
muscle contraction pathways, the acetyl-hexapeptide-1 was identiﬁed as being able to
steps: After the identiﬁcation of the best amino acid sequence to target pre-synapticmuscle contraction pathways, the acetyl-hexapeptide-1 was identiﬁed as being able tocompete with Munc-18 for binding to syntaxin, thus exhibiting a Botox-like activity [ 397].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 56 of 80Interestingly, the results obtained from in vitro efﬁcacy tests showed a reduction of Munc-18/syntaxin binding of up to 37%, consequently reducing acetylcholine release by up to35%. Furthermore, computational analysis shows the possibility that acetyl-hexapeptide-1could have a potential post-synaptic activity, conﬁrmed by in vitro tests. Thus, this peptidebinds to the post-synaptic receptors, disrupting the acetylcholine receptor cluster andimpeding the Ca2+release needed for muscle contraction [ 397].Acetyl-hexapeptide-1 can be considered to be the ﬁrst available ingredient that affectsboth the pre-and post-synaptic muscle contraction processes, showing a double-actionapproach corroborated by in vivo studies. Thus, acetyl-hexapeptide-1 can reduce theexpression of wrinkles and lift the labial commissures [ 397].From a recent study, it has been demonstrated that Botox-like peptides, usually used
as SNARE modulators, could inhibit synaptotagmin 1 (Syt1) [ 398].Syt1 is a transmembrane Ca2+sensor protein located on synaptic vesicles that plays akey role in neurotransmitter release [ 399]. Indeed, the Ca2+-dependent neurotransmitterrelease in neurons is strongly inhibited by botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs), which behaveas metalloprotease enzymes able to speciﬁcally break down the synaptic proteins requiredfor the neuronal-controlled exocytosis—the plasma membrane protein syntaxin (Syn), thesynaptic protein SNAP-25, and the vesicular protein VAMP . As a consequence, the SNAREcomplex made of these proteins is destabilized, delaying vesicle fusion with the plasmamembrane and inhibiting the Ca2+-triggered exocytosis [ 398,399].Thus, an interesting approach to reduce wrinkles consists of reducing neuron activityby inhibiting Syt1.For this purpose, Wongrattanakamon et al. (2018) studied the ability of Botox-like
peptides as Syt1 inhibitors by adopting molecular docking and molecular dynamics (MD)simulation investigations in their work [ 398]. The authors identiﬁed the possible bindingcleft and mechanism of action, and these ﬁndings could represent a starting point fordeveloping novel Botox-like anti-wrinkle molecules that target and modulate Syt1 function.During this work, the Botox-like peptides Argireline, SNAP-8, and Leuphasyl were selectedfor docking and studied by analyzing the predicted binding energy, the ligand-bindingconformation, and the interacting amino acid residue and atom; a good docking afﬁnityto Syt1 was observed. In particular, the authors reported that these Botox-like peptidesoccupied the binding site area inside Syt1—speciﬁcally referring to the C2 domains, C2Aand C2B, which also bind to Ca2+and synaptic SNARE complexes. The MD simulationsshowed that these peptides induce Syt1 rigidity by binding to C2A–C2B, which are involved
during the conformational change of Syt1from a closed to an open form [ 398].However, the next step could focus on designing more selective Botox-like moleculesas inhibitors of Syt1, avoiding the occurrence of conformational changes in order to offersafer anti-wrinkle ingredients.These results should open novel horizons for modulating Syt1 to explore and appro-priately characterize the Botox-like molecules’ binding sites and their possible mechanismof action [ 398].In conclusion, the Botox-like ingredients could provide consumers with the beneﬁtsthat they desire from using skincare products, without the risks or discomfort associatedwith the injectable treatments [ 344,410].5. Anti-Aging Neurocosmetic Formulations on the MarketIn recent times, many cosmetic companies have tried to bring their innovative neuro-cosmetic product lines to market, both as regards formulation technologies and ingredients,intending to offer beneﬁts to consumers in short timeframes.
In general, consumers’ demands focus on innovative cosmetic products that are safe,
intending to offer beneﬁts to consumers in short timeframes.In general, consumers’ demands focus on innovative cosmetic products that are safe,effective, and of high quality. Hence, industries have tried to meet those demands [ 470,471].Moreover, each cosmetic product on the market must conform to the current legislationof the country or countries where the cosmetic is marketed, in order to guarantee quality,efﬁcacy, and safety [ 472,473].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 57 of 80It is necessary to demonstrate that:• All ingredients are safe after testing their toxicity in vitro , ex vivo, and in vivo [29,473];• All ingredients are compatible with one another and with their packaging as theﬁnished formulation. Consequently, to assess this aspect, it is necessary to carry outstability studies on the end product in the chosen ﬁnal pack [ 474,475];• The active ingredients do not claim any therapeutic effect on the skin [ 29];• The packaging is aesthetically attractive and safe;• All information about the products labeled on the packaging is clear for consumers [ 476];• End products are also pleasant and have an adequate cost–beneﬁt ratio.A signiﬁcant challenge for the marketing of the manufacturing companies is howcosmetic products can be portrayed, as well as ﬁnding the right way to communicate toconsumers the innovations related to a novel functional ingredient present in the cosmetic
product’s formulation, its effectiveness, the product’s use, or innovative packaging [ 476].Regarding innovative active ingredients, ARKANA [ 477]—a modern brand fromPoland—represents an example, proposing a series of interesting active polypeptide ingre-dients, some of which are described in the following.• Suitable for mature skin types, Bo2Look Therapy MD estetic serum, elixir, and wrinklerelaxer are formulated with the patented neuropeptide XEP™-018 [ 478,479]. The latteris a non-invasive anti-aging ingredient alternative to Botox, indicated for smooth-ing mimic wrinkles by relaxing facial muscles [ 480]. The main component of thisformulation is the Mu-conotoxin CnIIIC, a synthetic biomimetic peptide inspiredby that of venomous marine cone snail ( Conus consors ) [442,480–483]. This peptideblocks both voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav 1.4) and nicotinic acetylcholinereceptors (nAChR), performing its action as a neuromuscular transmission modula-
tor [ 442,480,483–486]. It instantly relaxes expression wrinkles when used for formu-lating a cosmetic product, giving a smooth skin appearance. In fact, in vivo studiesconducted on 33 volunteers using a product containing 3% XEP-018 showed a visiblereduction in wrinkle depth and rugosity 2 h after a single application [ 480,483,487];• NEURO GABA&NANA THERAPY MD serum, cream, peel, and neuro gaba liftmask consist of a combined lifting and peeling instant treatment that contains GABA(gamma-aminobutyric acid) and NANA (N-acetyl-5-neuraminic acid) neurotrans-mitters, and lactic acid [ 488]. The smoothing of furrows and improvement of skintension (“freezing effect”), immediate ﬁlling of wrinkles (“plumping effect”), and skinmoisturization (“hydro effect”) are the ensured visible effects. When low- and high-molecular-weight hyaluronic acid is added, it deeply and long-lastingly moisturizesthe skin, ﬁlls wrinkles, and makes the skin ﬁrm and ﬂexible [ 489].
The action performed by the combination of the ingredients indicates that GABArelaxes muscles, soothes the skin, repairs cellular damage, promotes hyaluronic acid andcollagen synthesis, and reduces wrinkles [ 490,491], while NANA promotes collagen andelastin regeneration by preventing their degradation, as well as reducing wrinkles [ 492].Lactic acid, beyond the ability to enhance the other functional ingredients’ penetration,makes the skin ﬂexible, moisturizes it, and stimulates the production of ceramides thatseal the lipid barrier [ 13,493,494]. This intense lifting treatment is particularly indicated formature skin types [ 489].• Carbo V Re-Constructor Serum, Carbo V Elixir, and Carbo V Re-Constructor—non-invasive “home care” treatments with effects similar to carboxytherapy—combineXIMILENE®(ethyl ximenynate), arginine, and PROGELINE™—a remodeling peptide—as an alternative to thread lifts [ 495–498].
as an alternative to thread lifts [ 495–498].Ximenynic acid and arginine improve microcirculation, promote skin oxygenation,
as an alternative to thread lifts [ 495–498].Ximenynic acid and arginine improve microcirculation, promote skin oxygenation,stimulate collagen production, and increase skin nourishment to make skin ﬁrm [ 340,499–503]. PROGELINE™boosts these effects by restoring and improving the facial oval shapein the “V” zone, reinforcing collagen and elastin ﬁbers, ﬁrming and lifting the skin, andeliminating double chin, ﬂabby skin, and jowls [ 297,302,303].
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 58 of 80• Biomimetic Therapy PRO line is an intense home care treatment for mature skin typesthat prevents and reduces the signs of aging. This product, thanks to the presence ofProgeline™, Adipoﬁll’in™, and hyaluronic acid, is proposed for the loss of deﬁned facecontour, skin laxity, and drooping eyelids. It improves skin elasticity and ﬂexibility,ﬁrms, and lifts wrinkles [ 504].LUCAS MEYER COSMETICS produces another interesting formulation containingmodern active ingredients, with the trade name Adipoﬁll’in™[505–507].Adipoﬁll’in™is a patented neurocosmetic functional ingredient containing an L-Ornithine amino acid biotechnologically obtained from vegetable starch and encapsulatedin an Ionosome™delivery system. It mimics the lipohormesis phenomenon (an adaptiveresponse of the adipose tissue to micro-stress exposure) by activating the gene expressionof the transcription factor HIF-1 α(hypoxia-inducible factor 1- α), affecting the activation
of adipogenesis (transformation of pre-adipocytes into adipocytes), the activation of lipo-genesis (triglyceride synthesis), and the inhibition of lipolysis (the breakdown of lipidsinto free fatty acids) [ 508–513]. In particular, since Adipoﬁll’in™lowers the free fatty acidrelease from adipocytes, it induces triglyceride storage, provoking adipocyte swelling, i.e.,increase in size. Therefore, by inducing the reﬁlling of cell fat with the increases in fattytissue volume, the result mimics the cosmetic surgery effect of lipoﬁlling. Clinical testsdemonstrated that Adipoﬁll’in™, with its non-invasive and bio-controlled mechanism,combats age-related lipoatrophy, improving the signs of aging—such as nasogenian folddepth, skin smoothness, and roughness, causing a plumper and more youthful look [ 508].Generally, as reported by Rattan (2013), if referring to the aging process, hormesiscan be deﬁned as the beneﬁcial effects derived from the cellular response after stimuli by
physical, chemical, and biological stressors—i.e., irradiation, pro-oxidants, exercise, etc.—resulting in the improvement of cells, tissues, organs, and organisms’ physiology [ 514].Moreover, several studies reported in the literature show that many foods’ componentsare responsible for positive effects on human health [ 514,515].For this reason, these ingredients started to be used for the formulation of differentanti-aging skincare cosmetic products [ 514,515].As for the formulation of cosmetics more suitable for delivering the active ingredientto the target, it is necessary to consider various parameters, such as the skin type or thedesired aesthetic effect.The anti-age treatments can be formulated to meet different needs, depending on thetype of effect (protective/preventive and restorative/soothing, in case of the ﬁrst and mostevident accentuated aging signs, respectively), and be made suitable for different skin
types. Indeed, melting emulsions, for example, with their rich and comfortable after-feel,are preferred for dry/very dry skin, while light-textured products with an evanescentskin-feel are preferred for combination/oily skin.Therefore, the most common cosmetic forms—the O/W (oil in water) or W/O (waterin oil) emulsions—are applied differently.Today, anti-aging creams can also be formulated with sunscreen ingredients, differen-tiating daily and night treatments.Usually, a cream treatment is often proposed in combination with the concentratedserum, which must be applied ﬁrst, with the aim of enhancing the derived beneﬁts [ 471].6. Neurocosmetics: What about Regulation?In our society, as it emerges from several surveys and web sources, loyalty andtransparency—the best premises for safety and efﬁcacy—are fundamental for each prod-uct [ 516–519].In the Cosmetic Regulation (EC) 1223/2009, it can be read: “ The consumer should be
protected from misleading claims concerning efﬁcacy and other characteristics of cosmetic products.
uct [ 516–519].In the Cosmetic Regulation (EC) 1223/2009, it can be read: “ The consumer should beprotected from misleading claims concerning efﬁcacy and other characteristics of cosmetic products.In particular, Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market is applicable.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 59 of 80Furthermore, the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, should deﬁne commoncriteria in relation to speciﬁc claims for cosmetic products .” [15].Considering the high number of cosmetic products available on the EU market, it isvery important to offer speciﬁc, understandable, and reliable information, substantiatedby using generally accepted methods, to enable consumers to make informed choices andcompare products to ﬁnd the ones that best suit their needs [ 15].This is the aim of the report provided by the European Commission about cosmeticclaims and advertising, which are considered essential tools necessary to inform consumersabout the qualities and characteristics of each cosmetic product [ 15,520].Through the label present on the packaging, consumers are informed about theproduct and its features. Therefore, the ingredients, its use, period after opening (PAO),
storage, beneﬁcial effects, claims, warnings, etc. must be reported [ 476,521–525]. Moreover,product claims are also used by cosmetic companies to differentiate their products fromcompetitors; thus, the claim should contribute to stimulating innovation and competitionamong companies [ 15,526,527].For cosmetic products’ claims that meet their purposes adequately, it is important tohave a well-organized framework that ensures that these claims are fair and do not misleadconsumers when considering the context and the marketing tools (printed material, a TVadvertisement, or the use of new media such as the internet or smartphones) in which suchclaims are shown [ 15,527].To respect social, linguistic, and cultural diversity, a ﬂexible approach for communicat-ing the messages to end users should be followed. Indeed, the marketing communicationsshould be clear, precise, relevant, and understandable by the target audience [ 527].
For this purpose, competent authorities tasked with market surveillance must be ableto easily verify all claims based on harmonized common criteria at the EU level [ 15].As reported in the CTPA Guide to Cosmetic Advertising Claims (2018), the CosmeticProducts Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and (EU) Commission Regulation No 655/2013 onCommon Criteria for Claims introduced particular and speciﬁc requirements about claimsfor cosmetic products [ 471].The claims must conform to the Common Criteria and be legally compliant, truth-ful, supported by evidence, honest, fair, and allow informed decision-making by con-sumers [ 471].The measures provided by Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 agree with the StandingCommittee on Cosmetic Products’ opinion. However, it should be considered that thecommon criteria should be applied only to products deﬁned as cosmetic products accordingto Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009. A gap of knowledge should be resolved with
the aim of deﬁning the attribution of each product to a certain category. For example, thereis a concrete risk that products are wrongly considered cosmetics when, in fact, they aremedical devices or medicines [ 15].Hence, the Member States agree on a case-by-case basis whether a product can beconsidered a cosmetic or not [ 15].After deﬁning neurocosmetics and their action mechanisms in the previous para-graphs, and cosmetic products according to Article 2 of Regulation (EC) 1223/2009, somedoubts may arise regarding the fact that in order for the cosmetic to carry out its functions,it is “ intended to be placed in contact with the external parts of the human body ” [528–530], whilefor neurocosmetics the place of action does not seem clear.In general, to exploit their action, the neurocosmetic ingredients should pass throughthe dermis—the layer just below the epidermis; thus, starting from these preliminaryconsiderations, some questions arise:
considerations, some questions arise:How could we deﬁne neurocosmetics?Should this feature lead us to think of neurocosmetics as drugs?Should they be considered as “borderline products”?
considerations, some questions arise:How could we deﬁne neurocosmetics?Should this feature lead us to think of neurocosmetics as drugs?Should they be considered as “borderline products”?As for the United States, it is too early to determine the Food and Drug Administra-tion’s position in this regard. The current difference between cosmetics, quasi-drugs, and
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 60 of 80pharmaceutical products makes it difﬁcult for the manufacturing ingredient companies tomake progress, in a short time, in the neurocosmetic ﬁeld.Everything depends on what is declared both on the label—especially from the claimspoint of view—and when the product must be advertised (example: anti-stress, massageaction, aromatherapy in the case of a particular neurocosmetic fragrance, even if the“aromatherapy” is improperly deﬁned as neurocosmetics).By considering the deﬁnition of a cosmetic product according to Article 2 of Regulation(EC) 1223/2009 [ 531], “a substance or mixture intended to be ingested, inhaled, injected orimplanted into the human body should be not considered a cosmetic product ” [532]; there is a cleardifference both for products intended to be applied to different sites or for product usesthat go beyond the cosmetic sphere.Indeed, sometimes, it may not be entirely clear whether a given product is a cosmetic
within the meaning of Regulation (EC) 1223/2009, or if it falls under other regulations.In the case of these products deﬁned as “borderline products”, the classiﬁcation decisionmust be made on a case-by-case basis. A case-by-case evaluation of the product’s features—including absorption, concentration, route of administration, frequency of application, ap-plication site, and the degree of penetration, if considering the delivery pathway—shouldbe carried out by the competent national authority in order to decide the product qualiﬁca-tion. For example, it often happens that products—such as hair regrowth products—areincorrectly classiﬁed as cosmetics. To harmonize the qualiﬁcation of the products acrossthe Single Market, and to determine whether the product falls within the deﬁnition givenin Article 2 [ 527], several guidance documents have been produced by the European Com-mission about the delimitation between cosmetic products and other product categories,
e.g., medicines (governed by legislation Medicinal Products Directive 2001/83/EC) [ 533],biocidal products (governed by Biocidal Products Regulation 528/2012) [ 534], or medicaldevices (governed by EU Regulation on Medical Devices 745/2017) [ 535].The European Commission has published guidance documents to facilitate the ap-plication of the legislation in these cases, publishing the borderline manual for cosmeticproducts (Manual of the Working Group on Cosmetic Products (Sub-Group on BorderlineProducts) on the scope of application of the Cosmetics Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 [ 531].This manual is updated periodically with the addition, for example, of other categoriesor practical examples. Thus, the manual of borderline products helps to answer thequestion: “ is this product a cosmetic or does it fall under other regulations? ” [531]. The latestupdate was published in February 2020, and it is related to version 5.1 [ 536].
However, it is worth mentioning that, as indicated in the text of the manual, it is notlegally binding, and does not represent an ofﬁcial document of the European Commission.It should be interpreted more as an orientation manual—a practical collection of exam-ples to be applied case-by-case that can support both cosmetic industries and competentauthorities [ 536].The manual is based on three aspects related to cosmetics:• Product type;• Application site;• Cosmetic purpose.An example that can be found in this manual concerns anti-wrinkle cosmetic products:Speciﬁcally, the question is: “ are anti-wrinkle products cosmetics? ”. As a whole, anti-wrinkle products can be cosmetic products if they are mentioned in Regulation (EC)No 1223/2009 [ 15]. However, some products presented as anti-wrinkle that can restore,correct, or signiﬁcantly modify physiological functions by exercising a pharmacological,immunological, or metabolic action would not qualify as cosmetics [ 536].
The regulation will continue to support the innovations in anti-age skincare products.
immunological, or metabolic action would not qualify as cosmetics [ 536].The regulation will continue to support the innovations in anti-age skincare products.There is still much to learn about the skin and topical applications of functionalcosmetic ingredients.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 61 of 80Today, it is difﬁcult to harmonize the regulation of cosmetic products globally; indeed,for example, compliance with Chinese regulation represents a limiting problem for novelfunctional ingredients.What may be possible in the near future for topical skincare?7. ConclusionsAs B. Carli (2017) wrote, how we feel inside is reﬂected by how we look outside [ 334].Today, science’s progress helps to improve the appearance and wellbeing of skin,particularly with the beneﬁts offered by using neurocosmetic ingredients.Since the information about the deﬁnition of neurocosmetics is often confused, espe-cially by the marketing ﬁeld, this review has been focused on the concept of neurocosmetics,highlighting the importance of the ancestral biological and physiological connection be-tween skin and brain; an outline on psychosomatics better explains this link.An overview of the neurosciences and their applications in the cosmetic ﬁeld, particu-
larly related to cosmetic product pleasantness, is described.Technical information (i.e., company/supplier, physico-chemical characteristics, func-tionality categories, recommended use level, formulation/processing, claim ideas, beneﬁts,proven efﬁcacy demonstrated by in vitro , ex vivo, and in vivo tests, compliances) on mar-keted neurocosmetic ingredients in skincare products—mainly targeted for anti-agingcosmetic treatments—has been reported. The cosmetic products’ regulatory status andthe importance of the safety assessment of cosmetics to guarantee their quality, efﬁcacy,and safety have been evidenced. More speciﬁcally, the challenge for neurocosmetics isto formulate ideal multitasking products, suitable for each consumer’s skin type, whilerespecting their anatomical and physiological assets (hormonal and genetic factors, skinthickness, age, skin complexion), without forgetting to analyze their behaviors (smoking)
or environmental exposure (extrinsic factors). Thus, new and interesting advances arepresented as a great opportunity for cosmetic companies. The next step of this emergingtrend is the innovation in researching and developing new methodologies, strategies, andtechniques to formulate cosmetic products that will allow the discovery of a new world ofbeneﬁts and claims.Consumers are excited about new experiences that can introduce them to an uncon-ventional beauty routine that also meets their requests in lowering the associated costs.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.G. and V .R.; methodology, V .R.; validation, V .R., J.G.,and P .F.; formal analysis, P .C.; resources, J.G. and P .C.; writing—original draft preparation, J.G.;writing—review and editing, P .C. and V .R.; supervision, P .C.; project administration, P .C. All authorshave read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References1. Bovero, A. Dermocosmetologia Dall’inestetismo al Trattamento Cosmetico , 1st ed.; Tecniche Nuove: Milano, Italy, 2011; ISBN 978-88-481-2626-7.2. Niedziela, M. Designing (Neuro) cosmetics for healthy mind, healthy body. Househ. Pers. Care Today 2019 ,14, 21–22.3. Val éry, P . L’Idée Fixe ou Deux Hommes àla Mer ; Collection Blanche; Gallimard, 1933; p. 172. (French Edition).4. McGlone, F.; Reilly, D. Sensitive skin and the somatosensory system, 2nd Edition. In Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures ;Draelos, Z.D., Ed.; Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 38–46, ISBN 978-1-4051-8635-3.5. Chamberlin, C.M.; Peschard, O.; Mondon, P .; Lintner, K. Quantifying Skin Relaxation and Well-Being. Cosmet. Toilet. Mag. 2004 ,119, 65–70.6. Roosterman, D.; Goerge, T.; Schneider, S.W.; Bunnett, N.W.; Steinhoff, M. Neuronal Control of Skin Function: The Skin as a
Neuroimmunoendocrine Organ. Physiol. Rev. 2006 ,86, 1309–1379. [ CrossRef ]
Neuroimmunoendocrine Organ. Physiol. Rev. 2006 ,86, 1309–1379. [ CrossRef ]7. Pincelli, C.; Bont é, F. The ‘beauty’ of skin neurobiology. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2003 ,2, 195–198. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]8. Lafrance, M. From the Skin Ego to the Psychic Envelope: An Introduction to the Work of Didier Anzieu BT—Skin, Culture andPsychoanalysis ; Cavanagh, S.L., Failler, A., Hurst, R.A.J., Eds.; Palgrave Macmillan: London, UK, 2013; pp. 16–44, ISBN 978-1-137-30004-1.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 62 of 809. Misery, L. Les nerfs àﬂeur de peau. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2002 ,24, 111–116. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]10. França, K.; Lotti, T.M. Psycho-Neuro-Endocrine-Immunology: A Psychobiological Concept BT—Ultraviolet Light in Human Health,Diseases and Environment ; Ahmad, S.I., Ed.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 123–134, ISBN978-3-319-56017-5.11. Lombardi, S.A.; Ratti, A. Neurocosmesi, psicocosmesi e neuroscienze: Cosa sono? Kosmet. Numer. Due 2019 , 40–42. Availableonline: https://www.bregaglio.eu/2018/09/18/neurocosmesi-psicocosmesi-e-neuroscienze-cosa-sono/ (accessed on 14 July2021).12. Boulais, N. The epidermis: A sensory tissue. Eur. J. Dermatol. 2008 ,18, 119–127. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]13. Pillai, S.; Manco, M.; Oresajo, C. Epidermal Barrier. In Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, 2nd Edition ; Draelos, Z.D.,Ed.; Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2016; pp. 3–12, ISBN 978-1-118-65546-7.
14. Ramos-e-Silva, M.; Celem, L.R.; Ramos-e-Silva, S.; Fucci-da-Costa, A.P . Anti-aging cosmetics: Facts and controversies. Clin.Dermatol. 2013 ,31, 750–758. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]15. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Consolidated Text: Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and ofthe Council of 30 November 2009 on Cosmetic Products (Recast) (Text with EEA Relevance) Text with EEA Relevance. Availableonline: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02009R1223-20201203 (accessed on 17 May 2021).16. Ahsan, H. The biomolecules of beauty: Biochemical pharmacology and immunotoxicology of cosmeceuticals. J. Immunoass.Immunochem. 2019 ,40, 91–108. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]17. U.S. Food & Drug Administration Is It a Cosmetic, a Drug, or Both? (Or Is It Soap?). Available online: https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetics-laws-regulations/it-cosmetic-drug-or-both-or-it-soap#Deﬁnecosmetic (accessed on 10 May 2021).
18. Surber, C.; Kottner, J. Skin care products: What do they promise, what do they deliver. J. Tissue Viability 2017 ,26, 29–36. [ CrossRef ]19. Bom, S.; Jorge, J.; Ribeiro, H.M.; Marto, J. A step forward on sustainability in the cosmetics industry: A review. J. Clean. Prod.2019 ,225, 270–290. [ CrossRef ]20. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Report From the COMMISSION to the European Parliament and the Council onProduct Claims Made Based on Common Criteria in the Field of Cosmetics COM/2016/0580 Final. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2016:0580:FIN (accessed on 17 May 2021).21. Husein el Hadmed, H.; Castillo, R.F. Cosmeceuticals: Peptides, proteins, and growth factors. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2016 ,15,514–519. [ CrossRef ]22. Morganti, P .; Coltelli, M.-B. A New Carrier for Advanced Cosmeceuticals. Cosmetics 2019 ,6, 10. [ CrossRef ]
23. Draelos, Z.D. Cosmetics, categories, and the future. Dermatol. Ther. 2012 ,25, 223–228. [ CrossRef ]24. Misery, L. Neuro-immuno-cutaneous system (NICS). Pathol. Biol. 1996 ,44, 867–874.25. Theoharides, T.C.; Stewart, J.M.; Taracanova, A.; Conti, P .; Zouboulis, C.C. Neuroendocrinology of the skin. Rev. Endocr. Metab.Disord. 2016 ,17, 287–294. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]26. Misery, L. Skin, immunity and the nervous system. Br. J. Dermatol. 1997 ,137, 843–850. [ CrossRef ]27. Fatemi, S.A.; Jafarian-Dehkordi, A.; Hajhashemi, V .; Asilian-Mahabadi, A. Biomimetic proopiomelanocortin suppresses capsaicin-induced sensory irritation in humans. Res. Pharm. Sci. 2016 ,11, 484–490. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]28. Global Cosmetic Industry. The Beauty Innovator’s Resource Chemical Reaction: Neurocosmetics. Available online: https://www.gcimagazine.com/business/rd/technology/7333696.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).
29. Lintner, K.; Mas-Chamberlin, C.; Mondon, P .; Peschard, O.; Lamy, L. Cosmeceuticals and active ingredients. Clin. Dermatol. 2009 ,27, 461–468. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
29. Lintner, K.; Mas-Chamberlin, C.; Mondon, P .; Peschard, O.; Lamy, L. Cosmeceuticals and active ingredients. Clin. Dermatol. 2009 ,27, 461–468. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]30. Morganti, P .; Chen, H.-D.; Gao, X.-H.; Gazzaniga, G.; Morganti, L. Natural Ingredients for advanced neurocosmetics. Pers. Care2013 ,6, 19–24.31. Wanninger, A. Well-being with Neurocosmetics? Available online: https://www.cossma.com/ingredients/article/well-being-with-neurocosmetics-36213.html (accessed on 12 May 2021).32. Karashima, Y.; Damann, N.; Prenen, J.; Talavera, K.; Segal, A.; Voets, T.; Nilius, B. Bimodal Action of Menthol on the TransientReceptor Potential Channel TRPA1. J. Neurosci. 2007 ,27, 9874–9884. [ CrossRef ]33. Deckner, G. Cool Off or Warm Up with Neurocosmetics. Available online: https://knowledge.ulprospector.com/10629/pcc-cool-off-or-warm-up-with-neurocosmetics/ (accessed on 12 May 2021).
34. Kamatou, G.P .P .; Vermaak, I.; Viljoen, A.M.; Lawrence, B.M. Menthol: A simple monoterpene with remarkable biologicalproperties. Phytochemistry 2013 ,96, 15–25. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]35. Gazitaeva, Z.I.; Drobintseva, A.O.; Chung, Y.; Polyakova, V .O.; Kvetnoy, I.M. Cosmeceutical product consisting of biomimeticpeptides: Antiaging effects in vivo and in vitro. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2017 ,10, 11–16. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]36. Zappelli, C.; Barbulova, A.; Apone, F.; Colucci, G. Effective Active Ingredients Obtained through Biotechnology. Cosmetics 2016 ,3,39. [ CrossRef ]37. Juliano, C.; Magrini, G.A. Cosmetic Functional Ingredients from Botanical Sources for Anti-Pollution Skincare Products. Cosmetics2018 ,5, 19. [ CrossRef ]38. Dias, R.; Oliveira, H.; Fernandes, I.; Simal-Gandara, J.; Perez-Gregorio, R. Recent advances in extracting phenolic compounds
from food and their use in disease prevention and as cosmetics. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2021 ,61, 1130–1151. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 63 of 8039. Pinkas, A.; Gonçalves, C.L.; Aschner, M. Neurotoxicity of fragrance compounds: A review. Environ. Res. 2017 ,158, 342–349.[CrossRef ]40. Dhanjal, D.S.; Bhardwaj, S.; Sharma, R.; Bhardwaj, K.; Kumar, D.; Chopra, C.; Nepovimova, E.; Singh, R.; Kuca, K. PlantFortiﬁcation of the Diet for Anti-Ageing Effects: A Review. Nutrients 2020 ,12, 3008. [ CrossRef ]41. Niedziela, M.M. Thoughtful packaging: Using applied consumer neuroscience to see what the consumer sees. Househ. Pers. CareToday 2016 ,11, 14–16.42. Niedziela, M.M.; Ambroze, K. Chapter 17—Neuroscience tools: Using the right tool for the right question. In ; Meiselman, H.L.B.T.-E.M.,Ed.; Woodhead Publishing: Sawston, UK, 2021; pp. 559–592, ISBN 978-0-12-821125-0.43. Frick, R. Happy Cosmetics: The Trend That Reconnects Beauty to Life? Available online: https://www.premiumbeautynews.com/en/happy-cosmetics-the-trend-that,16680 (accessed on 10 May 2021).
44. KENZO Lotus Blanc. Available online: https://www.kenzoparfums.com/gb/en/white-lotus/ (accessed on 12 May 2021).45. KENZO Serum in a Mask KENZOKI WHITE LOTUS. Available online: https://www.kenzoparfums.com/gb/en/skincare/skincare-femme/kenzoki-lotus-blanc/serum-in-a-mask/K30400016.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).46. Tungmunnithum, D.; Kongsawadworakul, P .; Hano, C. A Cosmetic Perspective on the Antioxidant Flavonoids from Nymphaealotus L. Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 12. [ CrossRef ]47. Furrer, S.M.; Slack, J.P .; McCluskey, S.T.; Ungureanu, I.M.; Daniher, A.T.; Blancher, G.; Bell, K.; Krawec, P .; Cole, L.; Gray, K. NewDevelopments in the Chemistry of Cooling Compounds. Chemosens. Percept. 2008 ,1, 119–126. [ CrossRef ]48. Oh, S.-H.; Yu, J.-J.; Kim, H.-J.; Oh, K.-W.; Eun, J.-S. Effects of white lotus extracts on sleeping, chloride inﬂux, and oxidation. FoodSci. Biotechnol. 2011 ,20, 949. [ CrossRef ]
Sci. Biotechnol. 2011 ,20, 949. [ CrossRef ]49. Cosmetics & Toiletries Euphoryl Omega-3. Available online: http://dir.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/detail/tradeName.html?id=19492 (accessed on 17 May 2021).50. Saengsorn, K.; Jimtaisong, A. Determination of hydrophilic–lipophilic balance value and emulsion properties of sacha inchi oil.Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed. 2017 ,7, 1092–1096. [ CrossRef ]51. Penagos-Calvete, D.; Duque, V .; Marimon, C.; Parra, D.M.; Restrepo-Arango, S.K.; Scherf-Clavel, O.; Holzgrabe, U.; Montoya, G.;Salamanca, C.H. Glycerolipid Composition and Advanced Physicochemical Considerations of Sacha Inchi Oil toward CosmeticProducts Formulation. Cosmetics 2019 ,6, 70. [ CrossRef ]52. Soimee, W.; Nakyai, W.; Charoensit, P .; Grandmottet, F.; Worasakwutiphong, S.; Phimnuan, P .; Viyoch, J. Evaluation of moisturiz-ing and irritation potential of sacha inchi oil. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,19, 915–924. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
53. Corradi, I.; De Souza, E.; Sande, D.; Takahashi, J.A. Correlation Between Phenolic Compounds Contents, Anti- tyrosinase andAntioxidant Activities of Plant Extracts. Chem. Eng. Trans. 2018 ,64, 109–114. [ CrossRef ]54. PresseBox Euphoryl(TM) Omega -3 LS 9846—Naturally Enhances Beauty and Well-Being. Available online: https://www.pressebox.com/inactive/basf/Euphoryl-TM-Omega-3-LS-9846-naturally-enhances-beauty-and-well-being/boxid/258069 (ac-cessed on 17 May 2021).55. Lombardi, S.A.; Ratti, A. Emotional effects induced by lip balms containing different emollients: Neuroscientiﬁc approach tostudying the tactual experience. Househ. Pers. Care Today 2017 ,12, 42–47.56. De Tollenaere, M.; Meunier, M.; Scandolera, A.; Sandre, J.; Lambert, C.; Chapuis, E.; Auriol, D.; Reynaud, R. Well-aging: A newstrategy for skin homeostasis under multi-stressed conditions. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,19, 444–455. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
57. Denda, M. Epidermis as the “Third Brain”? Dermatol. Sin. 2015 ,33, 70–73. [ CrossRef ]58. Personal Care Creating Skin Wellbeing by Dopamine Stimulation. Available online: https://www.personalcaremagazine.com/
58. Personal Care Creating Skin Wellbeing by Dopamine Stimulation. Available online: https://www.personalcaremagazine.com/story/5507/creating-skin-wellbeing-by-dopamine-stimulation (accessed on 12 May 2021).59. Bousquet, M.; Saint-Pierre, M.; Julien, C.; Salem, N., Jr.; Cicchetti, F.; Calon, F. Beneﬁcial effects of dietary omega-3 polyunsaturatedfatty acid on toxin-induced neuronal degeneration in an animal model of Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 2008 ,22, 1213–1225.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]60. Sgoifo, A.; Carnevali, L.; Pattini, E.; Carandina, A.; Tanzi, G.; Del Canale, C.; Goi, P .; De Felici del Giudice, M.B.; De Carne, B.;Fornari, M.; et al. Psychobiological evidence of the stress resilience fostering properties of a cosmetic routine. Stress 2021 ,24,53–63. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]61. Berke, J.D. What does dopamine mean? Nat. Neurosci. 2018 ,21, 787–793. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
62. Global Cosmetic Industry. The Beauty Innovator’s Resource Happy Talk is Serious Science. Available online: https://www.gcimagazine.com/business/rd/ingredients/Happy-Talk-is-Serious-Science-574289811.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).63. Effegilab The Era of Psycho-Cosmetics. Available online: https://effegilab.com/en/lera-della-psico-cosmesi/ (accessed on 17May 2021).64. Giannakakis, G.; Grigoriadis, D.; Giannakaki, K.; Simantiraki, O.; Roniotis, A.; Tsiknakis, M. Review on psychological stressdetection using biosignals. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 2019 , 1. [ CrossRef ]65. Chojnowska, S.; Ptaszy´ nska-Sarosiek, I.; K˛ epka, A.; Kna´ s, M.; Waszkiewicz, N. Salivary Biomarkers of Stress, Anxiety andDepression. J. Clin. Med. 2021 ,10, 517. [ CrossRef ]66. Pössel, P .; Ahrens, S.; Hautzinger, M. Inﬂuence of cosmetics on emotional, autonomous, endocrinological, and immune reactions.Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2005 ,27, 343–349. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 64 of 8067. Cosmetics Business Active Ingredient Neurophroline Blocks Stress Hormone to Control Skin. Available online: https://cosmeticsbusiness.com/news/article_page/Active_ingredient_Neurophroline_blocks_stress_hormone_to_control_skin/120025 (accessed on 17 May 2021).68. Researchgate Study of the Application and Validation of the Ethological Coding System for Interviews (ECSI). Availableonline: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287225071_Study_of_the_application_and_validation_of_the_Ethological_Coding_System_for_Interviews_ECSI (accessed on 15 May 2021).69. Paas Oliveros, L.K.; Villanueva Valle, J.; Gonz ález Arredondo, S.I.; Fres án, A.; Arango de Montis, I.; Brüne, M.; MuñozDelgado, J. Study of the Application and Validation of the Ethological Coding System for Interviews (ECSI). Available online:http://www.revistasaludmental.mx/index.php/salud_mental/article/view/SM.0185-3325.2015.005 (accessed on 15 May 2021).
70. Gabriel, D.; Merat, E.; Jeudy, A.; Cambos, S.; Chabin, T.; Giustiniani, J.; Haffen, E. Emotional Effects Induced by the Applicationof a Cosmetic Product: A Real-Time Electrophysiological Evaluation. Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 4766. [ CrossRef ]71. Dunn, J.H.; Koo, J. Psychological Stress and skin aging: A review of possible mechanisms and potential therapies. Dermatol.Online J. 2013 ,19, 18. [ CrossRef ]72. Fink, G. Stress: Deﬁnition and History. In Stress Science: Neuroendocrinology ; Fink, G., Ed.; Academic Press: Oxford, UK, 2009; pp.3–9, ISBN 9780123785718.73. Chen, Y.; Lyga, J. Brain-Skin Connection: Stress, Inﬂammation and Skin Aging. Inﬂamm. Allergy Drug Targets Former. Curr. DrugTargets Inﬂamm. Allergy 2014 ,13, 177–190. [ CrossRef ]74. Kimyai-Asadi, A.; Usman, A. The Role of Psychological Stress in Skin Disease. J. Cutan. Med. Surg. 2001 ,5, 140–145. [ CrossRef ]
75. Folkman, S. Stress: Appraisal and Coping BT—Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine ; Gellman, M.D., Turner, J.R., Eds.; Springer: NewYork, NY, USA, 2013; pp. 1913–1915, ISBN 978-1-4419-1005-9.76. Antonelli, M.; Donelli, D. Effects of balneotherapy and spa therapy on levels of cortisol as a stress biomarker: A systematic review.Int. J. Biometeorol. 2018 ,62, 913–924. [ CrossRef ]77. Dixon, L.J.; Witcraft, S.M.; McCowan, N.K.; Brodell, R.T. Stress and skin disease quality of life: The moderating role of anxietysensitivity social concerns. Br. J. Dermatol. 2018 ,178, 951–957. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]78. Givaudan Neurophroline®Overall Skin Stress Control. Available online: https://www.givaudan.com/fragrance-beauty/active-beauty/products/neurophroline (accessed on 17 May 2021).79. Hellhammer, D.H.; Wüst, S.; Kudielka, B.M. Salivary cortisol as a biomarker in stress research. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2009 ,34,163–171. [ CrossRef ]
163–171. [ CrossRef ]80. Evers, A.W.M.; Verhoeven, E.W.M.; Kraaimaat, F.W.; De Jong, E.M.G.J.; De Brouwer, S.J.M.; Schalkwijk, J.; Sweep, F.C.G.J.; Van DeKerkhof, P .C.M. How stress gets under the skin: Cortisol and stress reactivity in psoriasis. Br. J. Dermatol. 2010 ,163, 986–991.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]81. Choe, S.J.; Kim, D.; Kim, E.J.; Ahn, J.-S.; Choi, E.-J.; Son, E.D.; Lee, T.R.; Choi, E.H. Psychological Stress Deteriorates Skin BarrierFunction by Activating 11 β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase 1 and the HPA Axis. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 6334. [ CrossRef ]82. Maarouf, M.; Maarouf, C.L.; Yosipovitch, G.; Shi, V .Y. The impact of stress on epidermal barrier function: An evidence-basedreview. Br. J. Dermatol. 2019 ,181, 1129–1137. [ CrossRef ]83. Tia, N.; Singh, A.K.; Pandey, P .; Azad, C.S.; Chaudhary, P .; Gambhir, I.S. Role of Forkhead Box O (FOXO) transcription factor inaging and diseases. Gene 2018 ,648, 97–105. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
84. Tsitsipatis, D.; Klotz, L.O.; Steinbrenner, H. Multifaceted functions of the forkhead box transcription factors FoxO1 and FoxO3 inskin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2017 ,1861 , 1057–1064. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
skin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2017 ,1861 , 1057–1064. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]85. Meyrignac, C.; Plaza, C.; Capallere, C.; Botto, J. 263 Effect of environmental stress combined with “daily life stress” on skin aging.J. Investig. Dermatol. 2019 ,139, S259. [ CrossRef ]86. Botto, J.; Meyrignac, C.; Plaza, C.; Lequoy, V .; Oger, E.; Coquet-Morel, C.; Capallere, C. 636 Effect of daily life stress on skinaging—Development of 3D skin reconstructed models. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2018 ,138, S108. [ CrossRef ]87. DSM BEL-EVEN®Future-Proof Your Skin from the Effects of Daily Stress. Available online: https://www.dsm.com/personal-care/en_US/products/skin-bioactives/bel-even.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).88. Imfeld, D.; Jackson, E.; Seroul, P . Inhibition of cutaneous cortisol activation: A novel approach to protect skin from stress induceddamage and aging. 30th IFSCC Congr. 2018 , S1–S501. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327816215_
Inhibition_of_cutaneous_cortisol_activation_A_novel_approach_to_protect_skin_from_stress_induced_damage_and_aging (ac-cessed on 14 July 2021).89. Carli, B. Feeling good about neuro-cosmetics. Househ. Pers. Care Today 2016 ,11, 9–11.90. Schmelz, M.; Paus, R. Opioids and the skin: “Itchy” perspectives beyond analgesia and abuse. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2007 ,127,1287–1289. [ CrossRef ]91. Bigliardi, P .L.; Tobin, D.J.; Gaveriaux-Ruff, C.; Bigliardi-Qi, M. Opioids and the skin—Where do we stand? Exp. Dermatol. 2009 ,18, 424–430. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]92. Bigliardi, P .L.; Dancik, Y.; Neumann, C.; Bigliardi-Qi, M. Opioids and skin homeostasis, regeneration and ageing—What’s theevidence? Exp. Dermatol. 2016 ,25, 586–591. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]93. Bigliardi-Qi, M.; Bigliardi, P .L.; Eberle, A.N.; Büchner, S.; Ruﬂi, T. β-Endorphin Stimulates Cytokeratin 16 Expression and
Downregulates µ-Opiate Receptor Expression in Human Epidermis. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2000 ,114, 527–532. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 65 of 8094. Bigliardi, P .L.; Büchner, S.; Ruﬂi, T.; Bigliardi-Qi, M. Speciﬁc Stimulation of Migration of Human Keratinocytes by µ-OpiateReceptor Agonists. J. Recept. Signal Transduct. 2002 ,22, 191–199. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]95. Wintzen, M.; Gilchrest, B.A. Proopiomelanocortin, Its Derived Peptides, and the Skin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 1996 ,106, 3–10.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]96. Luger, T.A. Neuromediators—a crucial component of the skin immune system. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2002 ,30, 87–93. [ CrossRef ]97. Luger, T.A.; Scholzen, T.; Brzoska, T.; Becher, E.V .A.; Slominski, A.; Paus, R. Cutaneous Immunomodulation and Coordination ofSkin Stress Responses by α-Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormonea. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1998 ,840, 381–394. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]98. Mazurkiewicz, J.E.; Corliss, D.; Slominski, A. Spatiotemporal Expression, Distribution, and Processing of POMC and POMC-
derived Peptides in Murine Skin. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 2000 ,48, 905–914. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]99. Yardman-Frank, J.M.; Fisher, D.E. Skin pigmentation and its control: From ultraviolet radiation to stem cells. Exp. Dermatol. 2020 ,30, 560–571. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]100. Pain, S.; Dezutter, C.; Reymermier, C.; Vogelgesang, B.; Delay, E.; Andr é, V . Age-related changes in pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)and related receptors in human epidermis. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2010 ,32, 266–275. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]101. Yeo, H.; Ahn, S.S.; Lee, Y.H.; Shin, S.Y. Regulation of pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcription by interleukin-31 via earlygrowth response 1 (EGR-1) in HaCaT keratinocytes. Mol. Biol. Rep. 2020 ,47, 5953–5962. [ CrossRef ]102. Slominski, A.; Wortsman, J. Neuroendocrinology of the Skin. Endocr. Rev. 2000 ,21, 457–487. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
103. Pondeljak, N.; Lugovi´ c-Mihi´ c, L. Stress-induced Interaction of Skin Immune Cells, Hormones, and Neurotransmitters. Clin. Ther.2020 ,42, 757–770. [ CrossRef ]104. Slominski, A.; Zbytek, B.; Zmijewski, M.; Slominski, R.M.; Kauser, S.; Wortsman, J.; Tobin, D.J. Corticotropin releasing hormoneand the skin. Front. Biosci. 2006 ,11, 2230–2248. [ CrossRef ]105. Luger, T.A.; Paus, R.; Slominski, A.; Lipton, J. The Proopiomelanocortin System in Cutaneous Neuroimmunomodulation: AnIntroductory Overview. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1999 ,885, xi–xiv. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]106. Slominski, A.T.; Botchkarev, V .; Choudhry, M.; Fazal, N.; Fechner, K.; Furkert, J.; Krause, E.; Roloff, B.; Sayeed, M.; Wei, E.; et al.Cutaneous Expression of CRH and CRH-R: Is There a “Skin Stress Response System?”. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1999 ,885, 287–311.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]107. Mibelle Group Biochemistry Happybelle-PE Phyto-endorphins for a Youthful Glow. Available online: https://mibellebiochemistry.
com/happybelle-pe (accessed on 12 May 2021).108. Prospector Happybelle-PE. Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/eu/PersonalCare/Detail/2249/66038/Happybelle-PE (accessed on 17 May 2021).109. Schmidt, D.; Zülli, F. Role of Beta-Endorphin in the Skin. SÖFW J. 2005 ,131, 1–4.110. Lima, T.N.; Moraes, C.A.P . Bioactive Peptides: Applications and Relevance for Cosmeceuticals. Cosmetics 2018 ,5, 21. [ CrossRef ]111. Schmid, D.; Belser, E.; Zülli, F. Self-tanning Based on Stimulation of Melanin Biosynthesis. Cosmet. Mag. 2007 ,122, 55–62.112. Carli, B. Calm Down! Available online: https://search.informit.org/doi/10.3316/informit.409457987624542 (accessed on 17 May2021).113. Sunar, K.; Kumar, U.; Deshmukh, S.K. Chapter 12—Recent Applications of Enzymes in Personal Care Products ; Dhillon, G.S., Kaur,S.B.T.-A.-I.W. as F. for E.P ., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CL, USA, 2016; pp. 279–298, ISBN 978-0-12-802392-1.
114. Zahid, H.; Rizwani, G.H.; Ishaqe, S. Phytopharmacological Review on Vitex agnus-castus: A Potential Medicinal Plant. Chin.Herb. Med. 2016 ,8, 24–29. [ CrossRef ]
114. Zahid, H.; Rizwani, G.H.; Ishaqe, S. Phytopharmacological Review on Vitex agnus-castus: A Potential Medicinal Plant. Chin.Herb. Med. 2016 ,8, 24–29. [ CrossRef ]115. Webster, D.E.; Lu, J.; Chen, S.-N.; Farnsworth, N.R.; Wang, Z.J. Activation of the µ-opiate receptor by Vitex agnus-castus methanolextracts: Implication for its use in PMS. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2006 ,106, 216–221. [ CrossRef ]116. Piazzini, V .; Monteforte, E.; Luceri, C.; Bigagli, E.; Bilia, A.R.; Bergonzi, M.C. Nanoemulsion for improving solubility andpermeability of Vitex agnus-castus extract: Formulation and in vitro evaluation using PAMPA and Caco-2 approaches. DrugDeliv. 2017 ,24, 380–390. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]117. Joyderm La Neurocosmesi Polisensoriale. La Nuova Frontiera Della Cosmesi. Available online: https://www.joyderm.it/neurocosmesi/ (accessed on 9 May 2021).118. Charles Dorni, A.I.; Amalraj, A.; Gopi, S.; Varma, K.; Anjana, S.N. Novel cosmeceuticals from plants—An industry guided review.
J. Appl. Res. Med. Aromat. Plants 2017 ,7, 1–26. [ CrossRef ]119. Li, Y.; Pham, V .; Bui, M.; Song, L.; Wu, C.; Walia, A.; Uchio, E.; Smith-Liu, F.; Zi, X. Rhodiola rosea L.: An Herb with Anti-Stress,Anti-Aging, and Immunostimulating Properties for Cancer Chemoprevention. Curr. Pharmacol. Rep. 2017 ,3, 384–395. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]120. Talukdar, D.; Rhodiola Rosea, L. A critical review on biology, medicinal properties and pharmacological manifestations. J. Nat.Prod. Resour. 2015 ,1, 4–9.121. Dieamant, G.C.; Velazquez Pereda, M.D.C.; Eberlin, S.; Nogueira, C.; Werka, R.M.; De Queiroz, M.L.S. Neuroimmunomodulatorycompound for sensitive skin care: In vitro and clinical assessment. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2008 ,7, 112–119. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]122. Mimura, T.; Nakamura, Y.; Nishino, J.; Sawayama, T.; Komiya, T.; Deguchi, T.; Kita, A.; Nakamura, H.; Matsumoto, J. A novel
class of enkephalinase inhibitors containing a C-terminal sulfo group. J. Med. Chem. 1992 ,35, 602–608. [ CrossRef ]123. Ogawa, K.; Nakamura, S.; Sugimoto, S.; Tsukioka, J.; Hinomaru, F.; Nakashima, S.; Matsumoto, T.; Ohta, T.; Fujimoto, K.;Yoshikawa, M.; et al. Constituents of ﬂowers of Paeoniaceae plants, Paeonia suffruticosa and Paeonia lactiﬂora. Phytochem. Lett.2015 ,12, 98–104. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 66 of 80124. Torres-Le ón, C.; Ventura-Sobrevilla, J.; Serna-Cock, L.; Ascacio-Vald és, J.A.; Contreras-Esquivel, J.; Aguilar, C.N. Pentagalloylglu-cose (PGG): A valuable phenolic compound with functional properties. J. Funct. Foods 2017 ,37, 176–189. [ CrossRef ]125. Kim, K.-H.; Shim, J.S.; Kim, H.-J.; Son, E.D. Penta-O-galloyl- β-D-glucose from Paeonia lactiﬂora Pall. root extract enhances theexpression of skin barrier genes via EGR3. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020 ,248, 112337. [ CrossRef ]126. Letsiou, S.; Bakea, A.; Holefors, A.; Rembiesa, J. In vitro protective effects of Paeonia mascula subsp. hellenica callus extract onhuman keratinocytes. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 19213. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]127. Li, P .; Shen, J.; Wang, Z.; Liu, S.; Liu, Q.; Li, Y.; He, C.; Xiao, P . Genus Paeonia: A comprehensive review on traditional uses,phytochemistry, pharmacological activities, clinical application, and toxicology. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2021 ,269, 113708. [ CrossRef ]
[PubMed ]128. NUXE Paris First Wrinkles Skincare Nirvanesque®. Available online: https://uk.nuxe.com/nirvanesque (accessed on 1 May2021).129. Lancome Hydra Zen Anti-Stress Cream Hydra Zen Anti-Stress Cream. Available online: https://www.lancome.co.uk/skincare/by-product-category/moisturisers/hydra-zen-anti-stress-cream/085201-LAC.html (accessed on 12 May 2021).130. Rao, A.S.; Yadav, S.S.; Singh, P .; Nandal, A.; Singh, N.; Ganaie, S.A.; Yadav, N.; Kumar, R.; Bhandoria, M.S.; Bansal, P . Acomprehensive review on ethnomedicine, phytochemistry, pharmacology, and toxicity of Tephrosia purpurea (L.) Pers. Phyther.Res. 2020 ,34, 1902–1925. [ CrossRef ]131. Hubert, J.; Chollet, S.; Purson, S.; Reynaud, R.; Harakat, D.; Martinez, A.; Nuzillard, J.-M.; Renault, J.-H. Exploiting theComplementarity between Dereplication and Computer-Assisted Structure Elucidation for the Chemical Proﬁling of Natural
Cosmetic Ingredients: Tephrosia purpurea as a Case Study. J. Nat. Prod. 2015 ,78, 1609–1617. [ CrossRef ]132. Altemus, M.; Rao, B.; Dhabhar, F.S.; Ding, W.; Granstein, R.D. Stress-induced changes in skin barrier function in healthy women.J. Investig. Dermatol. 2001 ,117, 309–317. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]133. Bonte, F.; Dumas, M.; Lhermite, S.; Saunois, A. Use of Oligosaccharides to Stimulate Beta-endorphin Production. U.S. PatentApplication No. 10/332,136, 21 August 2003.134. Ahn, K.S.; Aggarwal, B.B. Transcription Factor NF- κB: A Sensor for Smoke and Stress Signals. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2005 ,1056 ,218–233. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]135. Alexopoulos, A.; Chrousos, G.P . Stress-related skin disorders. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 2016 ,17, 295–304. [ CrossRef ]136. Cals-Grierson, M.-M.; Ormerod, A.D. Nitric oxide function in the skin. Nitric Oxide 2004 ,10, 179–193. [ CrossRef ]
137. Costin, G.-E.; Hearing, V .J. Human skin pigmentation: Melanocytes modulate skin color in response to stress. FASEB J. 2007 ,21,976–994. [ CrossRef ]138. Zieli´ nska, S.; Matkowski, A. Phytochemistry and bioactivity of aromatic and medicinal plants from the genus Agastache(Lamiaceae). Phytochem. Rev. 2014 ,13, 391–416. [ CrossRef ]139. Provital Do Care Agascalm. Available online: https://www.weareprovital.com/en/careactives/agascalm (accessed on 17 May2021).140. Brooke Schleehauf Provital Group’s Agascalm. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/formulating/category/skincare/Provital-Groups-Agascalm-477545493.html (accessed on 10 May 2021).141. Hakozaki, T.; Deyer, B.F.; Laughlin II, L.T. Skin Care Composition. 2019. Available online: https://patents.google.com/patent/US20200405614A1/en (accessed on 7 May 2021).142. Pauﬁque, J. Active Ingredient Obtained From Nymphaea Alba Flowers. U.S. Patent Application No 16/912,958, 31 December2020.
2020.143. Ronsisvalle, S.; Panarello, F.; Longhitano, G.; Siciliano, E.A.; Montenegro, L.; Panico, A. Natural Flavones and Flavonols:
2020.143. Ronsisvalle, S.; Panarello, F.; Longhitano, G.; Siciliano, E.A.; Montenegro, L.; Panico, A. Natural Flavones and Flavonols:Relationships among Antioxidant Activity, Glycation, and Metalloproteinase Inhibition. Cosmetics 2020 ,7, 71. [ CrossRef ]144. Chang, Y.-S.; Chiang, B.-L. Sleep disorders and atopic dermatitis: A 2-way street? J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2018 ,142, 1033–1040.[CrossRef ]145. Oliveira, C.; Torres, T. More than skin deep: The systemic nature of atopic dermatitis. Eur. J. Dermatol. 2019 ,29, 250–258.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]146. Slominski, A.; Fischer, T.W.; Zmijewski, M.A.; Wortsman, J.; Semak, I.; Zbytek, B.; Slominski, R.M.; Tobin, D.J. On the role ofmelatonin in skin physiology and pathology. Endocrine 2005 ,27, 137–147. [ CrossRef ]147. Slominski, A.T.; Zmijewski, M.A.; Semak, I.; Kim, T.-K.; Janjetovic, Z.; Slominski, R.M.; Zmijewski, J.W. Melatonin, mitochondria,and the skin. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2017 ,74, 3913–3925. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
148. Wang, D.; Imae, T.; Miki, M. Fluorescence emission from PAMAM and PPI dendrimers. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2007 ,306, 222–227.[CrossRef ]149. Dong, K.; Goyarts, E.C.; Pelle, E.; Trivero, J.; Pernodet, N. Blue light disrupts the circadian rhythm and create damage in skin cells.Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2019 ,41, 558–562. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]150. Slominski, A.; Tobin, D.J.; Zmijewski, M.A.; Wortsman, J.; Paus, R. Melatonin in the skin: Synthesis, metabolism and functions.Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2008 ,19, 17–24. [ CrossRef ]151. Ndiaye, M.A.; Nihal, M.; Wood, G.S.; Ahmad, N. Skin, Reactive Oxygen Species, and Circadian Clocks. Antioxid. Redox Signal.2013 ,20, 2982–2996. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 67 of 80152. Granger, C.; Brown, A.; Aladren, S.; Narda, M. Night Cream Containing Melatonin, Carnosine and Helichrysum italicum ExtractHelps Reduce Skin Reactivity and Signs of Photodamage: Ex Vivo and Clinical Studies. Dermatol. Ther. 2020 ,10, 1315–1329.[CrossRef ]153. Lan, A.L.; Lu, N.; Kang, D.; Ye, L.; Lintner, K.; Zappelli, C.; Apone, F.; Colucci, M.G.; Bimonte, M.; Bertelli, G.; et al. Neuro-Cosmetics Approach: TCM based formula with HACCE stem cell extract reduces stress symptoms by activating cutaneousmelatonin receptor MT1. In Proceedings of the 25th IFSCC Conference CosmEthic Science and Conscience, Milan, Italy, 30September 2019.154. Misery, L.; Ständer, S.; Szepietowski, J.; Reich, A.; Wallengren, J.; Evers, A.; Takamori, K.; Brenaut, E.; Le Gall-Ianotto, C.; Fluhr, J.;et al. Deﬁnition of Sensitive Skin: An Expert Position Paper from the Special Interest Group on Sensitive Skin of the International
Forum for the Study of Itch. Acta Derm. Venereol. 2017 ,97, 4–6. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]155. Wandrey, F.; Schmid, D.; Zülli, F. Peptide Inspired by Sea Anemone Venom Comforts Sensitive Skin. SOFW J. 2018 , 19–23.Available online: https://www.sofw.com/de/hikashop-menu-for-categories-listing/product/221-peptide-inspired-by-sea-anemone-venom-comforts-sensitive-skin (accessed on 14 July 2021).156. Misery, L.; Loser, K.; Ständer, S. Sensitive skin. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2016 ,30, 2–8. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]157. Yu, J.; Wang, G.; Jiang, N. Study on the Repairing Effect of Cosmetics Containing Artemisia annua on Sensitive Skin. J. Cosmet.Dermatol. Sci. Appl. 2020 ,10, 8–19.158. Prospector MarilianceTM. Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/asia/PersonalCare/Detail/831/724171/Mariliance (accessed on 17 May 2021).159. Do, L.H.D.; Azizi, N.; Maibach, H. Sensitive Skin Syndrome: An Update. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 2020 ,21, 401–409. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]
[PubMed ]160. Misery, L.; Morisset, S.; Seite, S.; Brenaut, E.; Ficheux, A.-S.; Fluhr, J.W.; Delvigne, V .; Taieb, C. Relationship between sensitive skinand sleep disorders, fatigue, dust, sweating, food, tobacco consumption or female hormonal changes : Results from a worldwidesurvey of 10,743 individuals. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2021 ,35, 1371–1376. [ CrossRef ]161. Kligman, A.M.; Sadiq, I.; Zhen, Y.; Crosby, M. Experimental studies on the nature of sensitive skin. Ski. Res. Technol. 2006 ,12,217–222. [ CrossRef ]162. Givaudan MarilianceTMMarine Neuro-Soother. Available online: https://www.givaudan.com/fragrance-beauty/active-beauty/products/mariliance (accessed on 17 May 2021).163. Talagas, M.; Lebonvallet, N.; Berthod, F.; Misery, L. Cutaneous nociception: Role of keratinocytes. Exp. Dermatol. 2019 ,28,1466–1469. [ CrossRef ]164. Misery, L. Sensitive Skins May Be Neuropathic Disorders: Lessons from Studies on Skin and Other Organs. Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 14.
[CrossRef ]165. Pinolumin for Flawless Skin. Available online: https://www.personalcaremagazine.com/story/18396/pinolumin-for-ﬂawless-skin (accessed on 17 May 2021).166. Wandrey, F.; Schmid, D.; Zülli, F. Flawless skin via Swiss stone pine extract. Pers. CareA Asia Pac. 2016 , 27–30. Avail-able online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiJ39Xa3-LxAhVO4qQKHWZZApoQFnoECAUQAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fesent.pl%2Fpl%2Fp%2Fﬁle%2F1d68c6828d2d78974480bee2712e0596%2FFlawless_Skin_Via_Swiss_Stone_Pine_Extract_Personal_Care_Magazine_November_2016-1.pdf&usg=AOvVaw1QJLnqDi0iNyb206vtRpQn (accessed on 14 July 2021).167. Talagas, M.; Misery, L. Role of Keratinocytes in Sensitive Skin. Front. Med. 2019 ,6, 108. [ CrossRef ]168. Ehnis-P érez, A.; Torres- Álvarez, B.; Cort és-Garc ía, D.; Hern ández-Blanco, D.; Fuentes-Ahumada, C.; Castanedo-C ázares, J.P .
Relationship between transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 expression and the intensity of sensitive skin symptoms. J. Cosmet.Dermatol. 2016 ,15, 231–237. [ CrossRef ]
Relationship between transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 expression and the intensity of sensitive skin symptoms. J. Cosmet.Dermatol. 2016 ,15, 231–237. [ CrossRef ]169. Caterina, M.J. Transient receptor potential ion channels as participants in thermosensation and thermoregulation. Am. J. Physiol.Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2007 ,292, R64–R76. [ CrossRef ]170. Lee, Y.M.; Kang, S.M.; Chung, J.H. The role of TRPV1 channel in aged human skin. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2012 ,65, 81–85. [ CrossRef ]171. Misery, L. Sensitive skin. Expert Rev. Dermatol. 2013 ,8, 631–637. [ CrossRef ]172. Mandadi, S.; Roufogalis, B.D. ThermoTRP channels in nociceptors: Taking a lead from capsaicin receptor TRPV1. Curr.Neuropharmacol. 2008 ,6, 21–38. [ CrossRef ]173. Cortright, D.N.; Szallasi, A. Biochemical pharmacology of the vanilloid receptor TRPV1. Eur. J. Biochem. 2004 ,271, 1814–1819.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]174. Kueper, T.; Krohn, M.; Haustedt, L.O.; Hatt, H.; Schmaus, G.; Vielhaber, G. Inhibition of TRPV1 for the treatment of sensitive skin.Exp. Dermatol. 2010 ,19, 980–986. [ CrossRef ]175. Lee, Y.M.; Kim, Y.K.; Chung, J.H. Increased expression of TRPV1 channel in intrinsically aged and photoaged human skin in vivo .Exp. Dermatol. 2009 ,18, 431–436. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]176. Costa, A.; Eberlin, S.; Polettini, A.J.; Da Costa Pereira, A.F.; Pereira, C.S.; Cortes Ferreira, N.M.; Dolis, E.; Oliveira Torloni, L.B.Neuromodulatory and Anti-Inﬂammatory Ingredient for Sensitive Skin: In Vitro Assessment. Inﬂamm. Allergy Drug TargetsFormer. Curr. Drug Targets Inﬂamm. Allergy 2014 ,13, 191–198. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]177. Garg, C.; Sharma, H.; Garg, M. Skin photo-protection with phytochemicals against photo-oxidative stress, photo-carcinogenesis,
signal transduction pathways and extracellular matrix remodeling—An overview. Ageing Res. Rev. 2020 ,62, 101127. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 68 of 80178. Dupont, E.; Gomez, J.; Bilodeau, D. Beyond UV radiation: A skin under challenge. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2013 ,35, 224–232. [ CrossRef ]179. Jur áˇ nová, J.; Frankov á, J.; Ulrichov á, J. The role of keratinocytes in inﬂammation. J. Appl. Biomed. 2017 ,15, 169–179. [ CrossRef ]180. Pillai, S.; Oresajo, C.; Hayward, J. Ultraviolet radiation and skin aging: Roles of reactive oxygen species, inﬂammation andprotease activation, and strategies for prevention of inﬂammation-induced matrix degradation—A review. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci.2005 ,27, 17–34. [ CrossRef ]181. Dinarello, C.A. Interleukin 1 and interleukin 18 as mediators of inﬂammation and the aging process. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2006 ,83,447S–455S. [ CrossRef ]182. Christopoulos, G.I.; Uy, M.A.; Yap, W.J. The Body and the Brain: Measuring Skin Conductance Responses to Understand theEmotional Experience. Org. Res. Methods 2019 ,22, 394–420. [ CrossRef ]
183. Matsumura, S.; Terao, M.; Murota, H.; Katayama, I. Th2 cytokines enhance TrkA expression, upregulate proliferation, anddownregulate differentiation of keratinocytes. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2015 ,78, 215–223. [ CrossRef ]184. Feliciani, C.; Gupta, A.K.; Saucier, D.N. Keratinocytes and Cytokine/Growth Factors. Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med. 1996 ,7, 300–318.[CrossRef ]185. Scandolera, A.; Hubert, J.; Humeau, A.; Lambert, C.; De Bizemont, A.; Winkel, C.; Kaouas, A.; Renault, J.-H.; Nuzillard, J.-M.;Reynaud, R. GABA and GABA-Alanine from the Red Microalgae Rhodosorus marinus Exhibit a Signiﬁcant Neuro-SoothingActivity through Inhibition of Neuro-Inﬂammation Mediators and Positive Regulation of TRPV1-Related Skin Sensitization. Mar.Drugs 2018 ,16, 96. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]186. Yun, J.-W.; Seo, J.A.; Jeong, Y.S.; Bae, I.-H.; Jang, W.-H.; Lee, J.; Kim, S.-Y.; Shin, S.-S.; Woo, B.-Y.; Lee, K.-W.; et al. TRPV1 antagonist
can suppress the atopic dermatitis-like symptoms by accelerating skin barrier recovery. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2011 ,62, 8–15. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]187. Yang, G.; Seok, J.K.; Kang, H.C.; Cho, Y.-Y.; Lee, H.S.; Lee, J.Y. Skin Barrier Abnormalities and Immune Dysfunction in AtopicDermatitis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 2867. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]188. Voisin, T.; Chiu, I.M. Molecular link between itch and atopic dermatitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018 ,115, 12851–12853.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]189. Williams, H.C. Atopic Dermatitis. N. Engl. J. Med. 2005 ,352, 2314–2324. [ CrossRef ]190. Bonchak, J.G.; Swerlick, R.A. Emerging therapies for atopic dermatitis: TRPV1 antagonists. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2018 ,78,S63–S66. [ CrossRef ]191. Liu, T.; Ji, R.-R. Oxidative stress induces itch via activation of transient receptor potential subtype ankyrin 1 in mice. Neurosci.Bull. 2012 ,28, 145–154. [ CrossRef ]
Bull. 2012 ,28, 145–154. [ CrossRef ]192. Neuro-Soother for Comfort. Available online: https://www.personalcaremagazine.com/story/14348/formulations (accessed on12 May 2021).193. Ngo, D.-H.; Vo, T.S. An Updated Review on Pharmaceutical Properties of Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid. Molecules 2019 ,24, 2678.[CrossRef ]194. Mibelle Group Biochemistry PinoluminTMRelax Your Skin—Enjoy a Flawless Complexion. Available online: https://mibellebiochemistry.com/pinolumintm (accessed on 15 May 2021).195. Human Research Stone Pine. Available online: http://humanresearch.at/newwebcontent/?page_id=96&lang=en (accessed on16 May 2021).196. Ghadiriasli, R.; Mahmoud, M.A.A.; Wagenstaller, M.; Van de Kuilen, J.W.; Buettner, A. Molecular and sensory characterization ofodorants in Cembran pine ( Pinus cembra L.) from different geographic regions. Talanta 2020 ,220, 121380. [ CrossRef ]
197. Kotradyova, V .; Vavrinsky, E.; Kalinakova, B.; Petro, D.; Jansakova, K.; Boles, M.; Svobodova, H. Wood and Its Impact on Humansand Environment Quality in Health Care Facilities. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019 ,16, 3496. [ CrossRef ]
and Environment Quality in Health Care Facilities. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019 ,16, 3496. [ CrossRef ]198. Eräsalo, H.; Hämäläinen, M.; Leppänen, T.; Mäki-Opas, I.; Laavola, M.; Haavikko, R.; Yli-Kauhaluoma, J.; Moilanen, E. NaturalStilbenoids Have Anti-Inﬂammatory Properties in Vivo and Down-Regulate the Production of Inﬂammatory Mediators NO, IL6,and MCP1 Possibly in a PI3K/Akt-Dependent Manner. J. Nat. Prod. 2018 ,81, 1131–1142. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]199. Laavola, M.; Nieminen, R.; Leppänen, T.; Eckerman, C.; Holmbom, B.; Moilanen, E. Pinosylvin and Monomethylpinosylvin,Constituents of an Extract from the Knot of Pinus sylvestris, Reduce Inﬂammatory Gene Expression and Inﬂammatory Responsesin Vivo. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2015 ,63, 3445–3453. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]200. Reinisalo, M.; Kårlund, A.; Koskela, A.; Kaarniranta, K.; Karjalainen, R.O. Polyphenol Stilbenes: Molecular Mechanisms of
Defence against Oxidative Stress and Aging-Related Diseases. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2015 ,2015 , 340520. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]201. Brenneisen, P .; Sies, H.; Scharffetter-Kochanek, K. Ultraviolet-B Irradiation and Matrix Metalloproteinases. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.2002 ,973, 31–43. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]202. Bauerova, K.; Acquaviva, A.; Ponist, S.; Gardi, C.; Vecchio, D.; Draﬁ, F.; Arezzini, B.; Bezakova, L.; Kuncirova, V .; Mihalova, D.;et al. Markers of inﬂammation and oxidative stress studied in adjuvant-induced arthritis in the rat on systemic and local levelaffected by pinosylvin and methotrexate and their combination. Autoimmunity 2015 ,48, 46–56. [ CrossRef ]203. Abbas, M.A. Modulation of TRPV1 channel function by natural products in the treatment of pain. Chem. Biol. Interact. 2020 ,330,109178. [ CrossRef ]204. BASF Skinasensyl®LS 9749. Available online: https://carecreations.basf.us/products/skinasensyl-ls-9749 (accessed on 17 May2021).
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 69 of 80205. Schaefer, K. Tetrapeptide for Neurosensitive Skin. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/formulating/function/antiirritant/35799934.html (accessed on 8 May 2021).206. BASF LS Skinasensyl—A Next-Generation Cosmeceutical for Sensitive Skin. Available online: https://www.pressebox.com/inactive/basf/LS-Skinasensyl-a-next-generation-cosmeceutical-for-sensitive-skin/boxid/215473 (accessed on 17 May 2021).207. Olejnik, A.; Kapuscinska, A.; Schroeder, G.; Nowak, I. Physico-chemical characterization of formulations containing endomorphin-2 derivatives. Amino Acids 2017 ,49, 1719–1731. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]208. BASF Skinasensyl. The Neurocosmeceutical Soother. Available online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwixm9jK9NLwAhWGGewKHYZ0CfsQFjAAegQIBRAD&url=https%253A%252F%252Fbiakhim.com.ua%252Findex.php%253Foption%253Dcom_k2%2526Itemid%253D1173%2526id%253D617_5786cf0e9694d655
383c8947159ba238%2526lang%253Dru%2526task%253 (accessed on 18 May 2021).209. Lintner, K. Chapter 36: Peptides and Proteins. In Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures ; Draelos, Z.D., Ed.; John Wiley &Sons, Ltd.: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 308–317, ISBN 978-1-118-65558-0.210. Wandrey, F.; Schmid, D.; Zülli, F. Personal Care Europe. 2017, pp. 117–119.211. Andreev, Y.A.; Kozlov, S.A.; Koshelev, S.G.; Ivanova, E.A.; Monastyrnaya, M.M.; Kozlovskaya, E.P .; Grishin, E. V Analgesiccompound from sea anemone Heteractis crispa is the ﬁrst polypeptide inhibitor of vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1). J. Biol. Chem.2008 ,283, 23914–23921. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]212. Jardín, I.; L ópez, J.J.; Diez, R.; S ánchez-Collado, J.; Cantonero, C.; Albarr án, L.; Woodard, G.E.; Redondo, P .C.; Salido, G.M.; Smani,T.; et al. TRPs in Pain Sensation. Front. Physiol. 2017 ,8, 392. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
213. Vetter, I.; Lewis, R.J. Natural Product Ligands of TRP Channels BT—Transient Receptor Potential Channels ; Islam, M.S., Ed.; Springer:Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2011; pp. 41–85, ISBN 978-94-007-0265-3.214. Kozlov, S.A.; Andreev, Y.A.; Murashev, A.N.; Skobtsov, D.I.; D’yachenko, I.A.; Grishin, E.V . New polypeptide components fromthe Heteractis crispa sea anemone with analgesic activity. Russ. J. Bioorganic Chem. 2009 ,35, 711. [ CrossRef ]215. Pauly, G.; Moussou, P .; Contet-Audonneau, J.-L.; Danoux, L.; Freis, O.; Sabadotto, M.; Benoit, I.; Misery, L.; Rathjens, A. Newpeptidic active ingredient to reduce discomfort and painful sensations in sensitive skin. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2009 ,31, 480. [ CrossRef ]216. Nikolaev, M.V .; Dorofeeva, N.A.; Komarova, M.S.; Korolkova, Y.V .; Andreev, Y.A.; Mosharova, I.V .; Grishin, E.V .; Tikhonov,D.B.; Kozlov, S.A. TRPV1 activation power can switch an action mode for its polypeptide ligands. PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0177077.
[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]217. Mibelle Group Biochemistry SensAmone P5: Immediate Comfort for Sensitive Skin. Available online: https://mibellebiochemistry.com/sensamone-p5 (accessed on 17 May 2021).218. SensAmone P5: Immediate Comfort for Sensitive Skin. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsbusiness.com/news/article_page/SensAmone_P5_immediate_comfort_for_sensitive_skin/128848 (accessed on 17 May 2021).219. Kimura, A.; Kanazawa, N.; Li, H.-J.; Yonei, N.; Yamamoto, Y.; Furukawa, F. Inﬂuence of chemical peeling on the skin stressresponse system. Exp. Dermatol. 2012 ,21, 8–10. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]220. Slominski, A.; Wortsman, J.; Luger, T.; Paus, R.; Solomon, S. Corticotropin Releasing Hormone and ProopiomelanocortinInvolvement in the Cutaneous Response to Stress. Physiol. Rev. 2000 ,80, 979–1020. [ CrossRef ]221. Coates, S.J.; Lee, E.H.; Granstein, R.D. Cutaneous Neuroimmunology BT—Clinical and Basic Immunodermatology ; Gaspari, A.A., Tyring,
S.K., Kaplan, D.H., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 179–199, ISBN 978-3-319-29785-9.
S.K., Kaplan, D.H., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 179–199, ISBN 978-3-319-29785-9.222. Bonezzi, C.; Costantini, A.; Cruccu, G.; Fornasari, D.M.M.; Guardamagna, V .; Palmieri, V .; Polati, E.; Zini, P .; Dickenson, A.H.Capsaicin 8% dermal patch in clinical practice: An expert opinion. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2020 ,21, 1377–1387. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]223. Rhodes, M.E. Adrenocorticotropic Hormone. In Stress: Neuroendocrinology and Neurobiology ; Elsevier Inc.: Amsterdam, TheNetherlands, 2017; Volume 2, pp. 109–116, ISBN 9780128024232.224. Lintner, K.; Peschard, O. Biologically active peptides: From a laboratory bench curiosity to a functional skin care product. Int. J.Cosmet. Sci. 2000 ,22, 207–218. [ CrossRef ]225. Perazzo, J.; Marb, C.; Santos, S.S. Pharmacological Potential of the Endogenous Dipeptide Kyotorphin and Selected Derivatives.Front. Pharmacol. 1979 ,7, 530. [ CrossRef ]
Front. Pharmacol. 1979 ,7, 530. [ CrossRef ]226. CRODA CalmosensineTMSP Sensual Healing, Embrace Yourself in Wellbeing. Available online: https://www.crodapersonalcare.com/en-gb/products-and-applications/product-ﬁnder/product/2960/Calmosensine_1_SP#tab-collapse-literature (accessed on17 May 2021).227. RAHN DEFENSIL®-SOFT Help Your Skin Chill Out. Available online: https://www.rahn-group.com/en/cosmetics/product/29/(accessed on 30 April 2021).228. Hettwer, S.; Bänziger, S.; Suter, B.; Obermayer, B. Grifolin derivatives from Albatrellus ovinus as TRPV1 receptor blockers forcosmetic applications. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2017 ,39, 379–385. [ CrossRef ]229. Meotti, F.C.; Lemos de Andrade, E.; Calixto, J.B. TRP Modulation by Natural Compounds BT—Mammalian Transient Receptor Potential(TRP) Cation Channels: Volume II ; Nilius, B., Flockerzi, V ., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2014; pp.1177–1238, ISBN 978-3-319-05161-1.
1177–1238, ISBN 978-3-319-05161-1.230. RAHN Rahn’s DEFENSIL -SOFT Offers Zen-Like Soothing and Anti-Ageing Effects. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsbusiness.com/news/article_page/Rahns_DEFENSIL_SOFT_offers_zen-like_soothing_and_anti-ageing_effects/132934(accessed on 17 May 2021).
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 70 of 80231. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics Lipopeptide Derived from a Neuromediator. Available online: https://www.lucasmeyercosmetics.com/en/node/668 (accessed on 30 April 2021).232. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics NeutrazenTMThe Soothing Neurocosmetic. Available online: https://www.lucasmeyercosmetics.com/en/taxonomy/term/123 (accessed on 30 April 2021).233. Thody, A.J. α-MSH and the Regulation of Melanocyte Function. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1999 ,885, 217–229. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]234. Böhm, M.; Schulte, U.; Kalden, H.; Luger, T.A. Alpha-Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone Modulates Activation of NF- κB andAP-1 and Secretion of Interleukin-8 in Human Dermal Fibroblasts. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1999 ,885, 277–286. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]235. Slominski, A.; Paus, R.; Wortsman, J. On the potential role of proopiomelanocortin in skin physiology and pathology. Mol. Cell.Endocrinol. 1993 ,93, C1–C6. [ CrossRef ]
Endocrinol. 1993 ,93, C1–C6. [ CrossRef ]236. Auriemma, M.; Brzoska, T.; Klenner, L.; Kupas, V .; Goerge, T.; Voskort, M.; Zhao, Z.; Sparwasser, T.; Luger, T.A.; Loser, K.α-MSH-Stimulated Tolerogenic Dendritic Cells Induce Functional Regulatory T Cells and Ameliorate Ongoing Skin Inﬂammation.J. Investig. Dermatol. 2012 ,132, 1814–1824. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]237. Brzoska, T.; Luger, T.A.; Maaser, C.; Abels, C.; Böhm, M. α-Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone and Related Tripeptides: Biochem-istry, Antiinﬂammatory and Protective Effects in Vitro and in Vivo, and Future Perspectives for the Treatment of Immune-MediatedInﬂammatory Diseases. Endocr. Rev. 2008 ,29, 581–602. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]238. Luger, T.A.; Scholzen, T.E.; Brzoska, T.; Böhm, M. New Insights into the Functions of α-MSH and Related Peptides in the ImmuneSystem. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2003 ,994, 133–140. [ CrossRef ]
239. Bocheva, G.; Slominski, R.M.; Slominski, A.T. Neuroendocrine Aspects of Skin Aging. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 2798. [ CrossRef ]240. Scholzen, T.E.; Brzoska, T.; Kalden, D.-H.; O’Reilly, F.; Armstrong, C.A.; Luger, T.A.; Ansel, J.C. Effect of Ultraviolet Lighton the Release of Neuropeptides and Neuroendocrine Hormones in the Skin: Mediators of Photodermatitis and CutaneousInﬂammation. J. Investig. Dermatol. Symp. Proc. 1999 ,4, 55–60. [ CrossRef ]241. Gouin, O.; L’Herondelle, K.; Lebonvallet, N.; Le Gall-Ianotto, C.; Sakka, M.; Buh é, V .; Pl ée-Gautier, E.; Carr é, J.-L.; Lefeuvre, L.;Misery, L.; et al. TRPV1 and TRPA1 in cutaneous neurogenic and chronic inﬂammation: Pro-inﬂammatory response induced bytheir activation and their sensitization. Protein Cell 2017 ,8, 644–661. [ CrossRef ]242. Loing, E. Reaching a Zen-like State in Skin: Biomimetic Peptide to Balance Sensitivity. Available online: https://www.
cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/testing/sensory/Reaching-a-Zen-like-State-in-Skin-Biomimetic-Peptide-to-Balance-Sensitivity-420538914.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).243. Lefﬁngwell, J.C. Cooling Ingredients and Their Mechanism of Action. In Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology ; Barel, A.O.,Paye, M., Maibach, H.I., Eds.; Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2009; pp. 661–676, ISBN 978-1-4200-6963-1.244. Salvona Encapsulation Technology HydroSal®SalCool. Available online: https://www.salvona.com/product/hydrosal-salcool/(accessed on 13 May 2021).245. InﬁnityIngredients HydroSalTMSalCool. Available online: https://inﬁnity-ingredients.co.uk/product/salvona-hydrosal-salcool(accessed on 14 May 2021).246. Givaudan Evercool®Skin Advanced Cooling Technology. Available online: https://www.givaudan.com/fragrance-beauty/active-beauty/products/evercool-skin (accessed on 17 May 2021).
247. Lefﬁngwell, J.C. Cool without Menthol & Cooler than Menthol and Cooling Compounds as Insect Repellents. Available online:http://www.lefﬁngwell.com/cooler_than_menthol.htm#b (accessed on 18 May 2021).248. Rovner, S.L. Better Than Mint. Chem. Eng. News Arch. 2007 ,85, 95. [ CrossRef ]
http://www.lefﬁngwell.com/cooler_than_menthol.htm#b (accessed on 18 May 2021).248. Rovner, S.L. Better Than Mint. Chem. Eng. News Arch. 2007 ,85, 95. [ CrossRef ]249. Babor Doctor Babor—Neuro Sensitive Cellular Intensive Calming Cleanser. Available online: https://au.babor.com/products/doctor-babor/neuro-sensitive-cellular/59433-intensive-calming-cream.html#text (accessed on 17 May 2021).250. Muggli, R. Systemic evening primrose oil improves the biophysical skin parameters of healthy adults. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2005 ,27,243–249. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]251. Michalak, M.; Pierzak, M.; Kr˛ ecisz, B.; Suliga, E. Bioactive Compounds for Skin Health: A Review. Nutrients 2021 ,13, 203.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]252. Koch, W.; Zag órska, J.; Marzec, Z.; Kukula-Koch, W. Applications of Tea ( Camellia sinensis ) and Its Active Constituents inCosmetics. Molecules 2019 ,24, 4277. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics. Molecules 2019 ,24, 4277. [ CrossRef ]253. Yasin, Z.A.M.; Ibrahim, F.; Rashid, N.N.; Razif, M.F.M.; Yusof, R. The Importance of Some Plant Extracts as Skin Anti-agingResources: A Review. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2017 ,18, 864–876. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]254. Prasanth, M.; Sivamaruthi, B.; Chaiyasut, C.; Tencomnao, T. A Review of the Role of Green Tea ( Camellia sinensis ) in Antiphotoag-ing, Stress Resistance, Neuroprotection, and Autophagy. Nutrients 2019 ,11, 474. [ CrossRef ]255. Faccio, G. Plant Complexity and Cosmetic Innovation. iScience 2020 ,23, 101358. [ CrossRef ]256. LIPOTEC-Active Ingredients BODYFENSINE®Peptide. Available online: https://www.lipotec.com/en/products/bodyfensine-reg-peptide/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).257. Rull, M.; Davi, C.; Caufadas, E.; Cebriuen, J.; Delgado, R. Protect Skin, Reduce Discomfort. Available online: https://www.happi.com/issues/2013-10/view_features/protect-skin-reduce-discomfort (accessed on 15 May 2021).
258. Farage, M.A.; Miller, K.W.; Elsner, P .; Maibach, H.I. Characteristics of the Aging Skin. Adv. Wound Care 2012 ,2, 5–10. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]259. Makrantonaki, E.; Zouboulis, C.C. Molecular Mechanisms of Skin Aging. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2007 ,1119 , 40–50. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 71 of 80260. Fang, J.-Y.; Wang, P .-W.; Huang, C.-H.; Chen, M.-H.; Wu, Y.-R.; Pan, T.-L. Skin aging caused by intrinsic or extrinsic processescharacterized with functional proteomics. Proteomics 2016 ,16, 2718–2731. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]261. Tobin, D.J. Introduction to skin aging. J. Tissue Viability 2017 ,26, 37–46. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]262. Farage, M.A.; Miller, K.W.; Elsner, P .; Maibach, H.I. Functional and physiological characteristics of the aging skin. Aging Clin. Exp.Res. 2008 ,20, 195–200. [ CrossRef ]263. Zhang, S.; Duan, E. Fighting against Skin Aging: The Way from Bench to Bedside. Cell Transplant. 2018 ,27, 729–738. [ CrossRef ]264. Gu, Y.; Han, J.; Jiang, C.; Zhang, Y. Biomarkers, oxidative stress and autophagy in skin aging. Ageing Res. Rev. 2020 ,59, 101036.[CrossRef ]265. Bălas,a, A.F.; Chircov, C.; Grumezescu, A.M. Marine Biocompounds for Neuroprotection—A Review. Mar. Drugs 2020 ,18, 290.[CrossRef ]
[CrossRef ]266. Boland, B.; Yu, W.H.; Corti, O.; Mollereau, B.; Henriques, A.; Bezard, E.; Pastores, G.M.; Rubinsztein, D.C.; Nixon, R.A.; Duchen,M.R.; et al. Promoting the clearance of neurotoxic proteins in neurodegenerative disorders of ageing. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2018 ,17, 660–688. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]267. Allan Butterﬁeld, D. Amyloid β-peptide (1-42)-induced Oxidative Stress and Neurotoxicity: Implications for Neurodegenerationin Alzheimer’s Disease Brain. A Review. Free Radic. Res. 2002 ,36, 1307–1313. [ CrossRef ]268. Ho, Y.-S.; So, K.-F.; Chang, R.C.-C. Anti-aging herbal medicine—How and why can they be used in aging-associated neurodegen-erative diseases? Ageing Res. Rev. 2010 ,9, 354–362. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]269. Kostomoiri, M.; Fragkouli, A.; Sagnou, M.; Skaltsounis, L.A.; Pelecanou, M.; Tsilibary, E.C.; Tzinia, A.K. Oleuropein, an Anti-oxidant Polyphenol Constituent of Olive Promotes α-Secretase Cleavage of the Amyloid Precursor Protein (A βPP). Cell. Mol.
Neurobiol. 2013 ,33, 147–154. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]270. Sankaranarayanan, S.; Price, E.A.; Wu, G.; Crouthamel, M.-C.; Shi, X.-P .; Tugusheva, K.; Tyler, K.X.; Kahana, J.; Ellis, J.; Jin, L.;et al. In Vivo β-Secretase 1 Inhibition Leads to Brain A βLowering and Increased α-Secretase Processing of Amyloid PrecursorProtein without Effect on Neuregulin-1. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 2008 ,324, 957–969. [ CrossRef ]271. Fukumoto, H.; Rosene, D.L.; Moss, M.B.; Raju, S.; Hyman, B.T.; Irizarry, M.C. β-Secretase Activity Increases with Aging inHuman, Monkey, and Mouse Brain. Am. J. Pathol. 2004 ,164, 719–725. [ CrossRef ]272. Del Crdenas-Aguayo, M.C.; Del Silva-Lucero, M.C.; Cortes-Ortiz, M.; Jimnez-Ramos, B.; Gmez-Virgilio, L.; Ramrez-Rodrguez, G.;Vera- Arroyo, E.; Fiorentino-Prez, R.; Garca, U.; Luna-Muoz, J.; et al. Physiological Role of Amyloid Beta in Neural Cells: TheCellular Trophic Activity. In Neurochemistry ; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2014.
273. Codif Technologie Naturelle; Codif STOECHIOL. Available online: https://cosmetics.specialchem.com/product/i-codif-stoechiol (accessed on 17 May 2021).274. Yankner, B.A.; Duffy, L.K.; Kirschner, D.A. Neurotrophic and neurotoxic effects of amyloid beta protein: Reversal by tachykininneuropeptides. Science 1990 ,250, 279–282. [ CrossRef ]275. CODIF R&N Neuroguard The New Science of Aging. Available online: https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjfoYiB58bwAhVODOwKHZ1rC-UQFjAAegQIAxAD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.codif-tn.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F02%2FNEUROGUARD-BROCHURE-GB.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0gbO4Tbd7Lg6SSJinuahoC (accessed on 17 May 2021).276. Codif Technologie Naturelle Neuroguard. Available online: http://www.codif-tn.com/en/principesactifs/neuroguard/ (ac-cessed on 17 May 2021).277. Men éndez-Gonz ález, M.; P érez-Pinera, P .; Mart ínez-Rivera, M.; Calatayud, M.T.; Bl ázquez Menes, B. APP Processing and the
APP-KPI Domain Involvement in the Amyloid Cascade. Neurodegener. Dis. 2005 ,2, 277–283. [ CrossRef ]
APP-KPI Domain Involvement in the Amyloid Cascade. Neurodegener. Dis. 2005 ,2, 277–283. [ CrossRef ]278. Barbalace, M.C.; Malaguti, M.; Giusti, L.; Lucacchini, A.; Hrelia, S.; Angeloni, C. Anti-Inﬂammatory Activities of Marine Algae inNeurodegenerative Diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 3061. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]279. Codif Advanced Skin Care—Neurocosmetics—New Public 60+. Available online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiHztyVrsbwAhVOhv0HHWqgBP8QFjABegQIBhAD&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.codif-tn.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F02%2FSTOECHIOL-TENDANCE-MARCHE.pdf&usg=AOvVaw1I4oHtceOwACmdIvUw9kZS (accessed on 17 May 2021).280. Tajima, S.; Inoue, H.; Kawada, A.; Ishibashi, A.; Takahara, H.; Hiura, N. Alginate oligosaccharides modulate cell morphology, cellproliferation and collagen expression in human skin ﬁbroblasts in vitro. Arch. Dermatol. Res. 1999 ,291, 432–436. [ CrossRef ]
281. Park, R.-M.; Ahn, J.-Y.; Kim, S.Y.; Wee, J.-H.; Kim, Y.-H.; Min, J. Effect of Alginate Oligosaccharides on Collagen Expression in HS27 Human Dermal Fibroblasts. Toxicol. Environ. Health Sci. 2019 ,11, 327–334. [ CrossRef ]282. Alaca, S.; Gedik, G. Evaluation of the effect of anti-pollution anti-aging eye cream on the collagen contraction. J. Pharm. Technol.2020 ,1, 13–17. [ CrossRef ]283. Szekalska, M.; Puciłowska, A.; Szyma´ nska, E.; Ciosek, P .; Winnicka, K. Alginate: Current Use and Future Perspectives inPharmaceutical and Biomedical Applications. Int. J. Polym. Sci. 2016 ,2016 , 7697031. [ CrossRef ]284. Xing, M.; Cao, Q.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, H.; Zhao, J.; Zhang, Q.; Ji, A.; Song, S. Advances in Research on the Bioactivity of AlginateOligosaccharides. Mar. Drugs 2020 ,18, 144. [ CrossRef ]285. Eftekharzadeh, B.; Khodagholi, F.; Abdi, A.; Maghsoudi, N. Alginate protects NT2 neurons against H2O2-induced neurotoxicity.Carbohydr. Polym. 2010 ,79, 1063–1072. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 72 of 80286. Priyan Shanura Fernando, I.; Kim, K.-N.; Kim, D.; Jeon, Y.-J. Algal polysaccharides: Potential bioactive substances for cosmeceuti-cal applications. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2019 ,39, 99–113. [ CrossRef ]287. Vieira, T.F.; Corr êa, R.C.G.; Peralta, R.A.; Peralta-Muniz-Moreira, R.F.; Bracht, A.; Peralta, R.M. An Overview of Structural Aspectsand Health Beneﬁcial Effects of Antioxidant Oligosaccharides. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2020 ,26, 1759–1777. [ CrossRef ]288. Biosil Technologies Glistin. Available online: http://www.biosiltech.com/glistin/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).289. Kang, C.K.; Lim, H.J.; Kim, J.H.Y.; Cho, S.A.; Kim, J.H.Y.; Park, N.H.; Kim, Y.J.; Cho, J.C.; Han, S.H. Anti-Aging CosmeticComposition Containing Glutamylamidoethyl Indole. 2010. Available online: https://patents.google.com/patent/KR101520333B1/en (accessed on 19 May 2021).
B1/en (accessed on 19 May 2021).290. Exsymol Neurocosmetics. Available online: https://www.exsymol.com/en/dossier/neuro-cosmetique/ (accessed on 17 May2021).291. Exsymol Biosil Technologies Glutrapeptide. Available online: http://www.biosiltech.com/glutrapeptide/ (accessed on 17 May2021).292. Prouheze, P .; Morand, B.; Nicolaÿ, J.-F.; Fr échet, M. Preservation of Sympathetic Neuron-Adipocyte Crosstalk May Limit ChronicEmotional Stress-Mediated Fat Accu-mulation. IFSCC Mag. 2014 ,17, 17–21.293. Wang, A.S.; Dreesen, O. Biomarkers of Cellular Senescence and Skin Aging. Front. Genet. 2018 ,9, 247. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]294. Gruber, F.; Kremslehner, C.; Eckhart, L.; Tschachler, E. Cell aging and cellular senescence in skin aging—Recent advances inﬁbroblast and keratinocyte biology. Exp. Gerontol. 2020 ,130, 110780. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]295. Wlaschek, M.; Maity, P .; Makrantonaki, E.; Scharffetter-Kochanek, K. Connective Tissue and Fibroblast Senescence in Skin Aging.
J. Investig. Dermatol. 2021 . [CrossRef ] [PubMed ]296. Gragnani, A.; Cornick, S.; Chominski, V .; Ribeiro de Noronha, S.; Alves Corr êa de Noronha, S.; Ferreira, L. Review of MajorTheories of Skin Aging. Adv. Aging Res. 2014 ,3, 49375. [ CrossRef ]297. Skoczy ´ nska, A.; Budzisz, E.; Dana, A.; Rotsztejn, H. New look at the role of progerin in skin aging. Prz. Menopauzalny MenopauseRev. 2015 ,14, 53–58. [ CrossRef ]298. Cao, K.; Blair, C.D.; Faddah, D.A.; Kieckhaefer, J.E.; Olive, M.; Erdos, M.R.; Nabel, E.G.; Collins, F.S. Progerin and telomeredysfunction collaborate to trigger cellular senescence in normal human ﬁbroblasts. J. Clin. Investig. 2011 ,121, 2833–2844.[CrossRef ]299. Takeuchi, H.; Rünger, T.M. Longwave UV Light Induces the Aging-Associated Progerin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 2013 ,133, 1857–1862.[CrossRef ]300. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics Biomimetic Peptide Derived from Elaﬁn. Available online: https://www.lucasmeyercosmetics.com/en/node/677 (accessed on 17 May 2021).
node/677 (accessed on 17 May 2021).301. Schagen, S. Topical Peptide Treatments with Effective Anti-Aging Results. Cosmetics 2017 ,4, 16. [ CrossRef ]302. Loing, E.; Suere, T.; Lamarque, E. Triﬂuoroacetyl-Tripeptide-2 to Target Senescence for Anti-aging Beneﬁts. Available online:https://www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/formulating/category/skincare/premium-Triﬂuoroacetyl-Tripeptide-2-to-Target-Senescence-for-Anti-aging-Beneﬁts-227412651.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).303. Ferreira, M.S.; Magalh ães, M.C.; Sousa-Lobo, J.M.; Almeida, I.F. Trending Anti-Aging Peptides. Cosmetics 2020 ,7, 91. [ CrossRef ]304. Pain, S.; Nakajima, S.; Altobelli, C.; Boher, A.; Cittadini, L.; Favre-Mercuret, M.; Sohm, B.; Vogelgesang, B.; Andre-Frei, V . Achilleamillefolium extract: An innovative anti-aging neuro-cosmetic ingredient. J. Dermatol. Sci. 2013 ,69, e52. [ CrossRef ]
305. Pain, S.; Altobelli, C.; Boher, A.; Cittadini, L.; Favre-Mercuret, M.; Gaillard, C.; Sohm, B.; Vogelgesang, B.; Andr é-Frei, V . Surfacerejuvenating effect of Achillea millefolium extract. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,33, 535–542. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
rejuvenating effect of Achillea millefolium extract. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,33, 535–542. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]306. BASF NEUROBIOX®BC10097 The Ultimate Biological Skin Imperfections Blurring Solution. Available online: https://www.carecreations.basf.com/product-formulations/product-highlights/product-highlights-detail/NEUROBIOXBC10097/30715899 (accessed on 17 May 2021).307. BASF Care Creations NeurobioxTMThe Skin Biosurfacer. Available online: https://docplayer.net/63928594-Neurobiox-tm-by-beauty-creations-the-skin-biosurfacer.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).308. Lana, J.; Ascenso, A. New Trends in Anti-Aging Skin Care. In Carrier-Mediated Dermal Delivery: Applications in the Prevention andTreatment of Skin Disorders ; Ascenso, A., Sim ões, S., Ribeiro, H., Eds.; Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.: Singapore, 2017; pp. 3–41,ISBN 978-1-315-36447-6.309. Codif Technologie Naturelle Neurolight. Available online: http://www.codif-tn.com/en/principesactifs/neurolight/ (accessed
on 17 May 2021).310. Legat, F.J.; Wolf, P . Photodamage to the cutaneous sensory nerves: Role in photoaging and carcinogenesis of the skin? Photochem.Photobiol. Sci. 2006 ,5, 170–176. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]311. Pietsch, E.C.; Sykes, S.M.; McMahon, S.B.; Murphy, M.E. The p53 family and programmed cell death. Oncogene 2008 ,27, 6507–6521.[CrossRef ]312. Gritsenko, D.A.; Orlova, O.A.; Linkova, N.S.; Khavinson, V .K. Transcription factor p53 and skin aging. Adv. Gerontol. 2017 ,7,114–119. [ CrossRef ]313. Brady, C.A.; Attardi, L.D. p53 at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 2010 ,123, 2527–2532. [ CrossRef ]314. Rachmin, I.; Ostrowski, S.M.; Weng, Q.Y.; Fisher, D.E. Topical treatment strategies to manipulate human skin pigmentation. Adv.Drug Deliv. Rev. 2020 ,153, 65–71. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 73 of 80315. Murase, D.; Hachiya, A.; Amano, Y.; Ohuchi, A.; Kitahara, T.; Takema, Y. The Essential Role of p53 in Hyperpigmentation ofthe Skin via Regulation of Paracrine Melanogenic Cytokine Receptor Signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 2009 ,284, 4343–4353. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]316. Elewa, R.; Makrantonaki, E.; Zouboulis, C.C. Neuropeptides and skin aging. Horm. Mol. Biol. Clin. Investig. 2013 ,16, 29–33.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]317. Tuteja, G.; Kaestner, K.H. SnapShot: Forkhead Transcription Factors I. Cell2007 ,130, 1160.e1–1160.e2. [ CrossRef ]318. Calissi, G.; Lam, E.W.-F.; Link, W. Therapeutic strategies targeting FOXO transcription factors. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2021 ,20,21–38. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]319. Calnan, D.R.; Brunet, A. The FoxO code. Oncogene 2008 ,27, 2276–2288. [ CrossRef ]320. Yamamoto, M.; Clark, J.D.; Pastor, J.V .; Gurnani, P .; Nandi, A.; Kurosu, H.; Miyoshi, M.; Ogawa, Y.; Castrillon, D.H.; Rosenblatt,
K.P .; et al. Regulation of Oxidative Stress by the Anti-aging Hormone Klotho. J. Biol. Chem. 2005 ,280, 38029–38034. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]321. Kuro-o, M. Klotho and aging. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj. 2009 ,1790 , 1049–1058. [ CrossRef ]322. Xu, Y.; Sun, Z. Molecular Basis of Klotho: From Gene to Function in Aging. Endocr. Rev. 2015 ,36, 174–193. [ CrossRef ]323. Wang, Y.; Sun, Z. Current understanding of klotho. Ageing Res. Rev. 2009 ,8, 43–51. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]324. Banerjee, I.; Jaiswal, K.K. The role of the Klotho protein in the function of aging and neurodegenerative disorders. Octa J. Biosci.2019 ,7, 113–118.325. Sotiropoulou, G.; Zingkou, E.; Pampalakis, G. Redirecting drug repositioning to discover innovative cosmeceuticals. Exp.Dermatol. 2021 ,30, 628–644. [ CrossRef ]326. Moeini, R.; Memariani, Z.; Asadi, F.; Bozorgi, M.; Gorji, N. Pistacia Genus as a Potential Source of Neuroprotective Natural
Products. Planta Med 2019 ,85, 1326–1350. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]327. Codif Technologie Naturelle LAKESIS. Available online: http://www.codif-tn.com/en/principesactifs/lakesis/ (accessed on 17May 2021).328. Zeldich, E.; Chen, C.-D.; Colvin, T.A.; Bove-Fenderson, E.A.; Liang, J.; Tucker Zhou, T.B.; Harris, D.A.; Abraham, C.R. TheNeuroprotective Effect of Klotho is Mediated via Regulation of Members of the Redox System. J. Biol. Chem. 2014 ,289,24700–24715. [ CrossRef ]329. Yodoi, J.; Matsuo, Y.; Tian, H.; Masutani, H.; Inamoto, T. Anti-Inﬂammatory Thioredoxin Family Proteins for Medicare, Healthcareand Aging Care. Nutrients 2017 ,9, 1081. [ CrossRef ]330. Bachem Cosmetic Peptides. Available online: https://www.bachem.com/knowledge-center/white-papers/ (accessed on 10 May2021).331. Rodan, K.; Fields, K.; Falla, T. Bioactive Peptide. In Cosmeceuticals and Cosmetic Practice ; Farris, P .K., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd:Oxford, UK, 2014; pp. 142–152, ISBN 978-1-118-38483-1.
332. Fields, K.; Falla, T.J.; Rodan, K.; Bush, L. Bioactive peptides: Signaling the future. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2009 ,8, 8–13. [ CrossRef ]333. Aguilar-Toal á, J.E.; Hern ández-Mendoza, A.; Gonz ález-C órdova, A.F.; Vallejo-Cordoba, B.; Liceaga, A.M. Potential role of naturalbioactive peptides for development of cosmeceutical skin products. Peptides 2019 ,122, 170170. [ CrossRef ]334. Carli, B. Stop the Clock: Botox Alternatives. HPC Today Househ. Pers. Care Today 2017 ,12, 52–54.335. Gorouhi, F.; Maibach, H.I. Role of topical peptides in preventing or treating aged skin. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2009 ,31, 327–345.[CrossRef ]336. Khalid, F.; Gorouhi, F.; Maibach, H.I. Anti-Aging Topical Peptides and Proteins. In Cosmeceuticals and Active Cosmetics ; Sivamani,R.K., Jagdeo, J.R., Elsner, P ., Maibach, H.I., Eds.; CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2016; pp. 127–161,ISBN 978-1-4822-1417-8.
ISBN 978-1-4822-1417-8.337. Łubkowska, B.; Grobelna, B.; Ma´ ckiewicz, Z. The use of synthetic polypeptides in cosmetics. Copernic. Lett. 2010 ,1, 75–82.[CrossRef ]
ISBN 978-1-4822-1417-8.337. Łubkowska, B.; Grobelna, B.; Ma´ ckiewicz, Z. The use of synthetic polypeptides in cosmetics. Copernic. Lett. 2010 ,1, 75–82.[CrossRef ]338. Apone, F.; Barbulova, A.; Colucci, M.G. Plant and Microalgae Derived Peptides Are Advantageously Employed as BioactiveCompounds in Cosmetics. Front. Plant Sci. 2019 ,10, 756. [ CrossRef ]339. Hajfathalian, M.; Ghelichi, S.; Garc ía-Moreno, P .J.; Moltke Sørensen, A.-D.; Jacobsen, C. Peptides: Production, bioactivity,functionality, and applications. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2018 ,58, 3097–3129. [ CrossRef ]340. Oshimura, E.; Sakamoto, K. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins. In Cosmetic Science and Technology: Theoretical Principles andApplications ; Sakamoto, K., Lochhead, R.Y., Maibach, H.I., Yamashita, Y., Eds.; Elsevier Inc.: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017;pp. 285–304, ISBN 978-0-12-802005-0.
pp. 285–304, ISBN 978-0-12-802005-0.341. Goldstein, M.; Lintner, K. Cosmetics & Toiletries®Magazine. 2007. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/(accessed on 10 June 2021).342. Najaﬁ, H.; Jafari, M.; Abolmaali, S. Recent Approaches in the Treatment of Skin Ageing by Synthetic Bioactive Peptides. SadraMed. J. 2019 ,7, 317–334. [ CrossRef ]343. Agyei, D.; Ongkudon, C.M.; Wei, C.Y.; Chan, A.S.; Danquah, M.K. Bioprocess challenges to the isolation and puriﬁcation ofbioactive peptides. Food Bioprod. Process. 2016 ,98, 244–256. [ CrossRef ]344. Gomes, C.; Silva, A.C.; Marques, A.C.; Sousa Lobo, J.; Amaral, M.H. Biotechnology Applied to Cosmetics and Aesthetic Medicines.Cosmetics 2020 ,7, 33. [ CrossRef ]345. Zhang, L.; Falla, T.J. Cosmeceuticals and peptides. Clin. Dermatol. 2009 ,27, 485–494. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 74 of 80346. Lupo, M.P .; Cole, A.L. Cosmeceutical Peptides. Dermatol. Ther. 2007 ,20, 343–349. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]347. Aldag, C.; Nogueira Teixeira, D.; Leventhal, P .S. Skin rejuvenation using cosmetic products containing growth factors, cytokines,and matrikines: A review of the literature. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2016 ,9, 411–419. [ CrossRef ]348. Errante, F.; Ledwo´ n, P .; Latajka, R.; Rovero, P .; Papini, A.M. Cosmeceutical Peptides in the Framework of Sustainable WellnessEconomy. Front. Chem. 2020 ,8, 572923. [ CrossRef ]349. Ledwo´ n, P .; Errante, F.; Papini, A.M.; Rovero, P .; Latajka, R. Peptides as Active Ingredients: A Challenge for CosmeceuticalIndustry. Chem. Biodivers. 2021 ,18, e2000833. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]350. Pillaiyar, T.; Manickam, M.; Namasivayam, V . Skin whitening agents: Medicinal chemistry perspective of tyrosinase inhibitors. J.Enzym. Inhib. Med. Chem. 2017 ,32, 403–425. [ CrossRef ]
351. Lupo, M.P . Cosmeceutical Peptides. Dermatol. Surg. 2005 ,31, 832–836. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]352. Tadini, K.A.; Mercurio, D.G.; Campos, P .M.B.G.M. Acetyl hexapeptide-3 in a cosmetic formulation acts on skin mechanicalproperties—Clinical study. Braz. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,51, 901–909. [ CrossRef ]353. Kraeling, M.E.K.; Zhou, W.; Wang, P .; Ogunsola, O.A. In vitro skin penetration of acetyl hexapeptide-8 from a cosmetic formula-tion. Cutan. Ocul. Toxicol. 2015 ,34, 46–52. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]354. Wisniewski, J.D.; Ellis, D.L.; Lupo, M.P . Facial Rejuvenation: Combining Cosmeceuticals With Cosmetic Procedures. Cutis 2014 ,94, 122–126. [ PubMed ]355. Benson, H.A.E.; Namjoshi, S. Proteins and peptides: Strategies for delivery to and across the skin. J. Pharm. Sci. 2008 ,97,3591–3610. [ CrossRef ]356. Abu Samah, N.H.; Heard, C.M. Topically applied KTTKS: A review. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,33, 483–490. [ CrossRef ]
357. Naﬁsi, S.; Maibach, H.I. Nanotechnology in Cosmetics. In Cosmetic Science and Technology: Theoretical Principles and Applications ;Sakamoto, K., Lochhead, R.Y., Maibach, H.I., Yamashita, Y., Eds.; Elsevier Inc.: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017; pp. 337–369,ISBN 978-0-12-802005-0.358. Long, L.; Zhang, J.; Yang, Z.; Guo, Y.; Hu, X.; Wang, Y. Transdermal delivery of peptide and protein drugs: Strategies, advantagesand disadvantages. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 2020 ,60, 102007. [ CrossRef ]359. Pillai, S.; Singh, S.; Oresajo, C. Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to the Skin. In Cosmetic Dermatology: Products andProcedures ; Draelos, Z.D., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 65–74, ISBN 978-1-118-65558-0.360. Sugibayashi, K. Skin. In Skin Permeation and Disposition of Therapeutic and Cosmeceutical Compounds ; Sugibayashi, K., Ed.; SpringerJapan KK: Tokyo, Japan, 2017; pp. 3–11, ISBN 978-4-431-56526-0.
361. Förster, M.; Bolzinger, M.-A.; Fessi, H. Topical delivery of cosmetics and drugs. Molecular aspects of percutaneous absorptionand delivery. Eur. J. Dermatol. 2009 ,19, 309–323. [ CrossRef ]362. Kim, B.; Cho, H.-E.; Moon, S.H.; Ahn, H.-J.; Bae, S.; Cho, H.-D.; An, S. Transdermal delivery systems in cosmetics. Biomed.Dermatol. 2020 ,4, 10. [ CrossRef ]363. Benson, H.A.E. Skin Structure, Function, and Permeation. In Transdermal and Topical Drug Delivery: Principles and Practice ; Benson,H.A.E., Adam, C.W., Eds.; John Wiley and Sons Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2012; pp. 3–22, ISBN 978-0-470-45029-1.364. Patel, V .; Sharma, O.P .; Mehta, T. Nanocrystal: A novel approach to overcome skin barriers for improved topical drug delivery.Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 2018 ,15, 351–368. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]365. Ooi, K. Related Topic: Chemical Permeation Through Impaired Skin. In Skin Permeation and Disposition of Therapeutic and
Cosmeceutical Compounds ; Sugibayashi, K., Ed.; Springer Japan KK: Tokyo, Japan, 2017; pp. 87–91, ISBN 978-4-431-56526-0.
Cosmeceutical Compounds ; Sugibayashi, K., Ed.; Springer Japan KK: Tokyo, Japan, 2017; pp. 87–91, ISBN 978-4-431-56526-0.366. Ham, S.W.; Kang, M.J.; Park, Y.-M.; Oh, I.-Y.; Kim, B.K.; Im, T.-J.; Kim, S.-H.; Choi, Y.W.; Lee, J. Transdermal Penetration ofSynthetic Peptides and Their Penetration Enhancement Caused by Some Terpene Compounds. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 2007 ,28,1535–1538. [ CrossRef ]367. Tadwee, I.K.; Gore, S.; Giradkar, P . Advances in Topical Drug Delivery System: A Review. Int. J. Pharm. Res. Allied Sci. 2012 ,1,14–23.368. Thong, H.-Y.; Zhai, H.; Maibach, H.I. Percutaneous Penetration Enhancers: An Overview. Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 2007 ,20,272–282. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]369. Ahmadi Ashtiani, H.R.; Bishe, P .; Lashgari, N.; Nilforoushzadeh, M.A.; Zare, S. Liposomes in Cosmetics. J. Ski. Stem Cell 2016 ,3,e65815. [ CrossRef ]370. Eskens, O.; Amin, S. Challenges and effective routes for formulating and delivery of epidermal growth factors in skin care. Int. J.
Cosmet. Sci. 2020 ,43, 123–130. [ CrossRef ]371. Kathe, K.; Kathpalia, H. Film forming systems for topical and transdermal drug delivery. Asian J. Pharm. Sci. 2017 ,12, 487–497.[CrossRef ]372. Gad, S.; Desoqi, M.; El-Sawy, H.; Khafagy, E.; Ghourab, M. Drug Delivery Systems for Topical treatment of Inﬂammatory SkinDiseases. Rec. Pharm. Biomed. Sci. 2021 ,5, 59–64. [ CrossRef ]373. Peña-Ju árez, M.C.; Guadarrama-Escobar, O.R.; Escobar-Ch ávez, J.J. Transdermal Delivery Systems for Biomolecules. J. Pharm.Innov. 2021 , 1–14. [ CrossRef ]374. Castelletto, V .; Hamley, I.W.; Whitehouse, C.; Matts, P .J.; Osborne, R.; Baker, E.S. Self-Assembly of Palmitoyl Lipopeptides Used inSkin Care Products. Langmuir 2013 ,29, 9149–9155. [ CrossRef ]375. Reissmann, S. Cell penetration: Scope and limitations by the application of cell-penetrating peptides. J. Pept. Sci. 2014 ,20, 760–784.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 75 of 80376. Fu, T.-K.; Kuo, P .-H.; Lu, Y.-C.; Lin, H.-N.; Wang, L.H.-C.; Lin, Y.-C.; Kao, Y.-C.; Lai, H.-M.; Chang, M.D.-T. Cell PenetratingPeptide as a High Safety Anti-Inﬂammation Ingredient for Cosmetic Applications. Biomolecules 2020 ,10, 101. [ CrossRef ]377. Ookubo, N.; Michiue, H.; Kitamatsu, M.; Kamamura, M.; Nishiki, T.; Ohmori, I.; Matsui, H. The transdermal inhibition ofmelanogenesis by a cell-membrane-permeable peptide delivery system based on poly-arginine. Biomaterials 2014 ,35, 4508–4516.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]378. Kumar, S.; Zakrewsky, M.; Chen, M.; Menegatti, S.; Muraski, J.A.; Mitragotri, S. Peptides as skin penetration enhancers:Mechanisms of action. J. Control. Release 2015 ,199, 168–178. [ CrossRef ]379. Chen, M.; Gupta, V .; Anselmo, A.C.; Muraski, J.A.; Mitragotri, S. Topical delivery of hyaluronic acid into skin using SPACE-peptidecarriers. J. Control. Release 2014 ,173, 67–74. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
380. Pan, Q.; Yu, Y.; Chen, D.; Jiao, G.; Liu, X. Enhanced penetration strategies for transdermal delivery. Front. Chem. Sci. Eng. 2020 ,14,378–388. [ CrossRef ]381. Yang, J.-A.; Kim, E.-S.; Kwon, J.H.; Kim, H.; Shin, J.H.; Yun, S.H.; Choi, K.Y.; Hahn, S.K. Transdermal delivery of hyaluronicacid—Human growth hormone conjugate. Biomaterials 2012 ,33, 5947–5954. [ CrossRef ]382. Patravale, V .B.; Mandawgade, S.D. Novel cosmetic delivery systems: An application update. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2008 ,30, 19–33.[CrossRef ]383. Bakshi, P .; Vora, D.; Hemmady, K.; Banga, A.K. Iontophoretic skin delivery systems: Success and failures. Int. J. Pharm. 2020 ,586,119584. [ CrossRef ]384. Karimipour, D.J.; Karimipour, G.; Orringer, J.S. Microdermabrasion: An Evidence-Based Review. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 2010 ,125,372–377. [ CrossRef ]385. Zhou, Y.; Banga, A.K. Enhanced delivery of cosmeceuticals by microdermabrasion. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2011 ,10, 179–184.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]386. Ahsan, H. Immunopharmacology and immunopathology of peptides and proteins in personal products. J. Immunoass. Im-munochem. 2019 ,40, 439–447. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]387. Slaga, T.J.; Snyder, P .W. Safety Assessment of Acetyl Hexapeptide-8 and Acetyl Hexapeptide-8 Amide as Used in Cosmetics. 2020.Available online: https://www.cir-safety.org/sites/default/ﬁles/acetyl122020revTR.pdf (accessed on 17 April 2021).388. Faria-Silva, C.; Ascenso, A.; Costa, A.M.; Marto, J.; Carvalheiro, M.; Ribeiro, H.M.; Sim ões, S. Feeding the skin: A new trend infood and cosmetics convergence. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2020 ,95, 21–32. [ CrossRef ]389. Kim, S.-K. Marine cosmeceuticals. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2014 ,13, 56–67. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]390. Pimentel, F.B.; Alves, R.C.; Rodrigues, F.; Oliveira, M.B.P .P . Macroalgae-Derived Ingredients for Cosmetic Industry—An Update.Cosmetics 2018 ,5, 2. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2018 ,5, 2. [ CrossRef ]391. Kang, N.J.; Jin, H.-S.; Lee, S.-E.; Kim, H.J.; Koh, H.; Lee, D.-W. New approaches towards the discovery and evaluation of bioactivepeptides from natural resources. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2020 ,50, 72–103. [ CrossRef ]392. Rona, C.; Vailati, F.; Berardesca, E. The cosmetic treatment of wrinkles. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2004 ,3, 26–34. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]393. Campiche, R.; Pascucci, F.; Jiang, L.; Vergne, T.; Cherel, M.; Gougeon, S.; Pr éstat-Marquis, E.; François, G.; Laurent, G.; Gempeler,M. Facial Expression Wrinkles and Their Relaxation by a Synthetic Peptide. Int. J. Pept. Res. Ther. 2020 . [CrossRef ]394. Limbert, G.; Kuhl, E. On skin microrelief and the emergence of expression micro-wrinkles. Soft Matter 2018 ,14, 1292–1300.[CrossRef ]395. Wang, Y.; Wang, M.; Xiao, X.S.; Huo, J.; Zhang, W.D. The anti-wrinkle efﬁcacy of Argireline. J. Cosmet. Laser Ther. 2013 ,15,237–241. [ CrossRef ]
237–241. [ CrossRef ]396. Wang, Y.; Wang, M.; Xiao, S.; Pan, P .; Li, P .; Huo, J. The Anti-Wrinkle Efﬁcacy of Argireline, a Synthetic Hexapeptide, in ChineseSubjects. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 2013 ,14, 147–153. [ CrossRef ]
Subjects. Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 2013 ,14, 147–153. [ CrossRef ]397. Sanders, L. Anti-ageing actives and technologies behind them. Pers. Care Eur. 2019 , 85–89.398. Wongrattanakamon, P .; Nimmanpipug, P .; Sirithunyalug, B.; Jiranusornkul, S. Molecular modeling elucidates the cellularmechanism of synaptotagmin-SNARE inhibition: A novel plausible route to anti-wrinkle activity of botox-like cosmetic activemolecules. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2018 ,442, 97–109. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]399. Li, Y.C.; Kavalali, E.T. Synaptic Vesicle-Recycling Machinery Components as Potential Therapeutic Targets. Pharmacol. Rev. 2017 ,69, 141–160. [ CrossRef ]400. Pohanka, M. Alpha7 Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Is a Target in Pharmacology and Toxicology. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2012 ,13,2219–2238. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]401. Thomas, J.R.; Dixon, T.K.; Bhattacharyya, T.K. Effects of Topicals on the Aging Skin Process. Facial Plast. Surg. Clin. N. Am. 2013 ,21, 55–60. [ CrossRef ]
21, 55–60. [ CrossRef ]402. Mitchell, S. Best Peptide Face Creams. Available online: https://lumeskin.com/best-peptide-cream/ (accessed on 5 May 2021).403. Prokopowicz, M.; R ó˙zycki, K.M. Innovation in cosmetics. World Sci. News 2017 ,72, 448–456.404. Lipotec VANISTRYL®Functional Ingredient. Available online: https://cosmetics.specialchem.com/product/i-lipotec-vanistryl-functional-ingredient (accessed on 5 May 2021).405. Diehl, C. Peptides in cosmeceuticals. Ukr. J. Dermatol. Venereol. Cosmetol. 2019 , 28–35. [ CrossRef ]406. RobelynLabs ElastinMD Stretch Mark Repair. Available online: https://www.robelynlabs.com/shop/product_detail/elastinmd-stretch-mark-repair-therapy# (accessed on 5 May 2021).407. Cheng, C.M. Cosmetic use of botulinum toxin type A in the elderly. Clin. Interv. Aging 2007 ,2, 81–83. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 76 of 80408. Jensen, J.D.; Freeman, S.R.; Cohen, J.L. Botulinum Toxins. In Cosmetic Dermatology Products and Procedures ; Draelos, Z.D., Ed.; JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd.: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 364–374, ISBN 978-1-118-65558-0.409. Satriyasa, B.K. Botulinum toxin (Botox) A for reducing the appearance of facial wrinkles: A literature review of clinical use andpharmacological aspect. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2019 ,12, 223–228. [ CrossRef ]410. Rasetti-Escargueil, C.; Popoff, M.R. Engineering Botulinum Neurotoxins for Enhanced Therapeutic Applications and VaccineDevelopment. Toxins 2021 ,13, 1. [ CrossRef ]411. Carruthers, A.; Carruthers, J. Botulinum Toxin Products Overview. Available online: https://www.skintherapyletter.com/aging-skin/botulinum-toxin-overview/?amp=1 (accessed on 17 May 2021).412. França, K.; Kumar, A.; Fioranelli, M.; Lotti, T.; Tirant, M.; Roccia, M.G. The history of Botulinum toxin: From poison to beauty.
Wien. Med. Wochenschr. 2017 ,167, 46–48. [ CrossRef ]413. Ganceviciene, R.; Liakou, A.I.; Theodoridis, A.; Makrantonaki, E.; Zouboulis, C.C. Skin anti-aging strategies. Dermatoendocrinol.2012 ,4, 308–319. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]414. Shanbhag, S.; Nayak, A.; Narayan, R.; Nayak, U.Y. Anti-aging and Sunscreens: Paradigm Shift in Cosmetics. Adv. Pharm. Bull.2019 ,9, 348–359. [ CrossRef ]415. Coleman, W.P ., III. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology , 3rd ed.; Barel, A.O., Paye, M., Maibach, H.I., Eds.; InformaHealthcare USA, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2009; ISBN 978-1-4200-6963-1.416. Nigam, P .K.; Nigam, A. Botulinum toxin. Indian J. Dermatol. 2010 ,55, 8–14. [ CrossRef ]417. Gallagher, C.J.; Ackerman, A. Botulinum Toxin: From Molecule to Medicine. In BotulinumToxins Cosmetic and Clinical Applications ;Cohen, J.L., Ozog, D.M., Eds.; JohnWiley & Sons Ltd.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 37–51, ISBN 9781118661864.
418. Samizadeh, S.; De Boulle, K. Botulinum neurotoxin formulations: Overcoming the confusion. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol.2018 ,11, 273–287. [ CrossRef ]419. Aoki, K.R. Review of a Proposed Mechanism for the Antinociceptive Action of Botulinum Toxin Type A. Neurotoxicology 2005 ,26,785–793. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]420. Grando, S.A.; Zachary, C.B. The non-neuronal and nonmuscular effects of botulinum toxin: An opportunity for a deadly moleculeto treat disease in the skin and beyond. Br. J. Dermatol. 2018 ,178, 1011–1019. [ CrossRef ]421. Sethi, N.; Singh, S.; DeBoulle, K.; Rahman, E. A Review of Complications Due to the Use of Botulinum Toxin A for CosmeticIndications. Aesthetic Plast. Surg. 2020 ,45, 1210–1220. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]422. Small, R. Botulinum Toxin Injection for Facial Wrinkles. Am. Fam. Physician 2014 ,90, 168–175.423. Lim, S.H.; Sun, Y.; Thiruvallur Madanagopal, T.; Rosa, V .; Kang, L. Enhanced Skin Permeation of Anti-wrinkle Peptides via
Molecular Modiﬁcation. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 1596. [ CrossRef ]424. Lourith, N.; Kanlayavattanakul, M. Biopolymeric agents for skin wrinkle treatment. J. Cosmet. Laser Ther. 2016 ,18, 301–310.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]425. Lipotec ARGIRELINE®Peptide. Available online: https://www.lipotec.com/en/products/argireline-reg-peptide/# (accessedon 17 May 2021).426. Lipotec Argireline®Ampliﬁed Peptide. Available online: https://www.lipotec.com/en/products/argireline-reg-ampliﬁed-peptide/# (accessed on 17 May 2021).427. Grosicki, M.; Latacz, G.; Szopa, A.; Cukier, A.; Kie´ c-Kononowicz, K. The study of cellular cytotoxicity of argireline®—Ananti-aging peptide. Acta Biochim. Pol. 2014 ,61, 29–32. [ CrossRef ]428. Lipotec INYLINE®Peptide. Available online: https://www.lipotec.com/en/products/inyline-reg-peptide/# (accessed on 17May 2021).429. Glass, D.J.; Bowen, D.C.; Stitt, T.N.; Radziejewski, C.; Bruno, J.; Ryan, T.E.; Gies, D.R.; Shah, S.; Mattsson, K.; Burden, S.J.; et al.
Agrin Acts via a MuSK Receptor Complex. Cell1996 ,85, 513–523. [ CrossRef ]
Agrin Acts via a MuSK Receptor Complex. Cell1996 ,85, 513–523. [ CrossRef ]430. Zong, Y.; Jin, R. Structural mechanisms of the agrin–LRP4–MuSK signaling pathway in neuromuscular junction differentiation.Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2013 ,70, 3077–3088. [ CrossRef ]431. Zong, Y.; Zhang, B.; Gu, S.; Lee, K.; Zhou, J.; Yao, G.; Figueiredo, D.; Perry, K.; Mei, L.; Jin, R. Structural basis of agrin–LRP4–MuSKsignaling. Genes Dev. 2012 ,26, 247–258. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]432. McCarthy, K.J. Chapter Eight—The Basement Membrane Proteoglycans Perlecan and Agrin: Something Old, Something New. InBasement Membranes ; Miner, J.H.B.T.-C.T. in M., Ed.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015; Volume 76, pp. 255–303, ISBN1063-5823.433. Bezakova, G.; Ruegg, M.A. New insights into the roles of agrin. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2003 ,4, 295–309. [ CrossRef ]434. Miner, J.H.; Abrahamson, D.R. Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Glomerular Capillary Development. In Seldin and Giebisch’s
The Kidney Physiology and Pathophysiology ; Alpern, R.J., Hebert, S.C.B.T.-S. and G.T.K. Fourth E., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego,CL, USA, 2008; pp. 691–707, ISBN 978-0-12-088488-9.435. Bezakova, G.; Helm, J.P .; Francolini, M.; Lømo, T. Effects of Puriﬁed Recombinant Neural and Muscle Agrin on Skeletal MuscleFibers in Vivo. J. Cell Biol. 2001 ,153, 1441–1452. [ CrossRef ]436. Kim, N.; Stiegler, A.L.; Cameron, T.O.; Hallock, P .T.; Gomez, A.M.; Huang, J.H.; Hubbard, S.R.; Dustin, M.L.; Burden, S.J. Lrp4 Isa Receptor for Agrin and Forms a Complex with MuSK. Cell2008 ,135, 334–342. [ CrossRef ]
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 77 of 80437. Lipotec Inyline Peptide. A New Strategy to Escape from Expression Lines. Available online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiertvooMfwAhXihv0HHf8vCpMQFjABegQIAxAD&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.quickbox.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F04%2FInyline.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3-6gl45MNLAmepiZqL6v9i(accessed on 17 May 2021).438. Prospector BONT-L Peptide Solution (PF). Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/eu/PersonalCare/Detail/19323/601512/BONT-L-Peptide-Solution-PF (accessed on 5 May 2021).439. TAOS Inc. BoNT-L Peptide. Available online: https://www.technicalartofscience.com/product/bont-l-peptide/ (accessed on 10May 2021).440. Shahi, S.; Athawale, R.B. Development and evaluation of Cosmeceutical Nanolipogel. Res. J. Top. Cosmet. Sci. 2010 ,1, 18–24.441. Lipotec SNAP-8TMPeptide. Available online: https://www.lipotec.com/en/products/snap-8-trade-peptide/ (accessed on 17May 2021).
May 2021).442. Avcil, M.; Akman, G.; Klokkers, J.; Jeong, D.; Çelik, A. Efﬁcacy of bioactive peptides loaded on hyaluronic acid microneedlepatches: A monocentric clinical study. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,19, 328–337. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]443. LIPOTEC. A GMP Peptide for Cosmetic Applications ; LIPOTEC: Barcelona, Spain, 2005.444. Inﬁnitec X50®Myocept Lines of Expression: The Best Performance at Lowest Dose. Available online: https://inﬁnitec.es/technology/x50-myocept/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).445. Dragomirescu, A.O.; Andoni, M.; Ionescu, D.; Andrei, F. The Efﬁciency and Safety of Leuphasyl—A Botox-Like Peptide. Cosmetics2014 ,1, 75–81. [ CrossRef ]446. Park, J.; Jung, H.; Jang, B.; Song, H.-K.; Han, I.-O.; Oh, E.-S. D-tyrosine adds an anti-melanogenic effect to cosmetic peptides. Sci.Rep. 2020 ,10, 262. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]447. Sederma Prospector CalmosensineTMSP . Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/na/PersonalCare/Detail/1240/4
4014/Calmosensine-SP (accessed on 17 May 2021).448. Sederma Calmosensine. Available online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiGgL6misnwAhUEKuwKHfJQBuAQFjABegQIAhAD&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.bio-therapeutic.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F08%2FCHROMATIC_SERUM_WHITE_PAPERS.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0eY9TgKPNJeXcR9JdpYhM (accessed on 29 April 2021).449. Khmaladze, I.; Österlund, C.; Smiljanic, S.; Hrapovic, N.; Lafon-Kolb, V .; Amini, N.; Xi, L.; Fabre, S. A novel multifunctional skincare formulation with a unique blend of antipollution, brightening and antiaging active complexes. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 2020 ,19,1415–1425. [ CrossRef ]450. BASF Care Creations; BASF Myoxinol®LS 9736. Available online: https://carecreations.basf.us/products/myoxinol-ls-9736(accessed on 17 May 2021).451. Renzi, A.; Brillantino, A.; Di Sarno, G.; D’Aniello, F.; Ziccardi, S.; Paladino, F.; Iacobellis, F. Myoxinol (Hydrolyzed Hibiscus
esculentus Extract) in the Cure of Chronic Anal Fissure: Early Clinical and Functional Outcomes. Gastroenterol. Res. Pract. 2015 ,2015 , 567920. [ CrossRef ]452. Benoit, I.; Danoux, L.; Gillon, V .; Moussou, P .; Pauly, G. Oligopeptides from Hibiscus esculentus seeds to smooth expression lines.SOFW J. 2004 ,130, 64–71.453. Prospector MyoxinolTMLS 9736. Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/na/PersonalCare/Detail/75/109267/Myoxinol-LS-9736 (accessed on 17 May 2021).454. Alqasoumi, S.I. ‘Okra’ Hibiscus esculentus L.: A study of its hepatoprotective activity. Saudi Pharm. J. 2012 ,20, 135–141. [ CrossRef ][PubMed ]455. BASF Anti-wrinkle Eye Care Serum. Available online: https://www.carecreations.basf.com/product-formulations/formulations/formulations-detail/Anti-wrinkleEyecareSerum/sc-de-12-108-9 (accessed on 17 May 2021).456. A Natural Alternative to Botulinum Toxin. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsdesign.com/Article/2004/03/10/A-natural-
alternative-to-botulinum-toxin (accessed on 17 May 2021).
456. A Natural Alternative to Botulinum Toxin. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsdesign.com/Article/2004/03/10/A-natural-alternative-to-botulinum-toxin (accessed on 17 May 2021).457. BASF Care Creations Myoxinol The Vegetal Answer to Smooth Expression Lines. Available online: https://www.google.it/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved =2ahUKEwiO5ryehJ_wAhUNM-wKHbbACWEQFnoECAIQAA&url=https%253A%252F%252Fbiakhim.com.ua%252Findex.ph p%253Foption%253Dcom_k2%2526Itemid%253D1173%2526id% 253D668_30edae9b008c91727b8d (accessed on 17 May 2021).458. Barbosa, A.F.; De Carvalhoa, M.G.; Smith, R.E.; Sabaa-Srur, A.U.O. Spilanthol: Occurrence, extraction, chemistry and biologicalactivities. Rev. Bras. Farmacogn. 2016 ,26, 128–133. [ CrossRef ]459. Silveira, N.; Sandjo, L.P .; Biavatti, M.W. Spilanthol-containing products: A patent review (1996–2016). Trends Food Sci. Technol.2018 ,74, 107–111. [ CrossRef ]
2018 ,74, 107–111. [ CrossRef ]460. Sabitha Rani, A.; Sana, H.; Sulakshana, G.; Keerti, E.; Shravya Puri, M. Spilanthes acmella- an important medicinal plant. Int. J.Minor Fruits Med. Aromat. Plants 2019 ,5, 15–26.461. Artaria, C.; Maramaldi, G.; Bonﬁgli, A.; Rigano, L.; Appendino, G. Lifting properties of the alkamide fraction from the fruit husksof Zanthoxylum bungeanum. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 2011 ,33, 328–333. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]462. Demarne, F.; Passaro, G. Use of an Acmella oleracea extract for the botulinum toxin-like effect thereof in an anti-wrinkle cosmeticcomposition. U.S. Patent No 7,531,193, 12 May 2009.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 78 of 80463. Yang, D.; Li, W.; Fang, L.; Liu, C. Investigation of Controlled Release Molecular Mechanism of Oil Phase in Spilanthol Emulsion:Development and In Vitro, In Vivo Characterization. AAPS PharmSciTech 2019 ,20, 227. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]464. Boonen, J.; Baert, B.; Roche, N.; Burvenich, C.; De Spiegeleer, B. Transdermal behaviour of the N-alkylamide spilanthol (afﬁnin)from Spilanthes acmella (Compositae) extracts. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010 ,127, 77–84. [ CrossRef ]465. Surianarayanan, R.; Bhaskar, J.P . Herbal Cosmeceuticals. In Plant Metabolites: Methods, Applications and Prospects ; Sukumaran, S.T.,Sugathan, S., Abdulhameed, S., Eds.; Springer Nature: Singapore, 2020; pp. 217–238, ISBN 978-981-15-5136-9.466. Santana, M.; Oliveira, G.; Yoshida, V .; Sabha, M.; Oshima-Franco, Y. Naturally occurring ingredients as potential antiagingcosmetics. Lat. Am. J. Pharm. 2011 ,30, 1531–1535.
467. Muszy ´ nska, B.; Fijałkowska, A.; Sułkowska-Ziaja, K.; Włodarczyk, A.; Kaczmarczyk, P .; Nogaj, E.; Pi˛ etka, J. Fomitopsis ofﬁcinalis:A Species of Arboreal Mushroom with Promising Biological and Medicinal Properties. Chem. Biodivers. 2020 ,17, e2000213.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]468. Widowati, W.; Fauziah, N.; Herdiman, H.; Afni, M.; Aﬁfah, E.; Sari, H.W.K.; Nufus, H.; Arumwardana, S.; Rihibiha, D.D.Antioxidant and Anti Aging Assays of Oryza Sativa Extracts, Vanillin and Coumaric Acid. J. Nat. Remedies 2016 ,16, 88–99.[CrossRef ]469. Apostolopoulos, V .; Bojarska, J.; Chai, T.-T.; Elnagdy, S.; Kaczmarek, K.; Matsoukas, J.; New, R.; Parang, K.; Lopez, O.P .; Parhiz, H.;et al. A Global Review on Short Peptides: Frontiers and Perspectives. Molecules 2021 ,26, 430. [ CrossRef ]470. Ctpa Cosmetic Product Claims Regulatory Framework. Available online: https://www.ctpa.org.uk/resources-claims (accessedon 17 May 2021).
on 17 May 2021).471. Ctpa NEW—CTPA Guide to Advertising Claims. Available online: https://www.ctpa.org.uk/news/new-ctpa-guide-to-advertising-claims-4080 (accessed on 17 May 2021).472. Nohynek, G.J.; Antignac, E.; Re, T.; Toutain, H. Safety assessment of personal care products/cosmetics and their ingredients.Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2010 ,243, 239–259. [ CrossRef ]473. Dent, M.; Amaral, R.T.; Da Silva, P .A.; Ansell, J.; Boisleve, F.; Hatao, M.; Hirose, A.; Kasai, Y.; Kern, P .; Kreiling, R.; et al. Principlesunderpinning the use of new methodologies in the risk assessment of cosmetic ingredients. Comput. Toxicol. 2018 ,7, 20–26.[CrossRef ]474. Juncan, A.M. Packaging Evaluation and Safety Assessment of a Cosmetic Product. Mater. Plast. 2018 ,55, 644. [ CrossRef ]475. Juncan, A.M.; Rus, L.L. Inﬂuence of Packaging and Stability Test Assessment of an Anti-aging Cosmetic Cream. Mater. Plast.2018 ,55, 426. [ CrossRef ]
2018 ,55, 426. [ CrossRef ]476. Lionetti, N.; Rigano, L. Labeling of Cosmetic Products. Cosmetics 2018 ,5, 22. [ CrossRef ]477. ARKANA. ARKANA Advanced Beauty Care. Available online: https://arkanacosmetics.com/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).478. ARKANA Bo2Look Elixir 20 ml. Available online: https://www.shop-arkana.com/b2c_en/bo2look-elixir-20-ml.html (accessedon 17 May 2021).479. Turner, A.; Kaas, Q.; Craik, D.J. Hormone-like conopeptides—New tools for pharmaceutical design. RSC Med. Chem. 2020 ,11,1235–1251. [ CrossRef ]480. BCR Biocomponent Research Activen XEPTM-018. Available online: https://www.bcringredients.com/activen-xep-018/ (ac-cessed on 17 May 2021).481. Pennington, M.W.; Czerwinski, A.; Norton, R.S. Peptide therapeutics from venom: Current status and potential. Bioorg. Med.Chem. 2018 ,26, 2738–2758. [ CrossRef ]482. Schroeder, C.I.; Craik, D.J. Therapeutic potential of conopeptides. Future Med. Chem. 2012 ,4, 1243–1255. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
483. Activen Discover Cone Snail Peptidomimetic, the Revolutionary Anti-Wrinkles. Instant Line Relaxer. Available online: http://www.activen.ch/?page=xep (accessed on 17 May 2021).
483. Activen Discover Cone Snail Peptidomimetic, the Revolutionary Anti-Wrinkles. Instant Line Relaxer. Available online: http://www.activen.ch/?page=xep (accessed on 17 May 2021).484. Favreau, P .; Benoit, E.; Hocking, H.G.; Carlier, L.; D’hoedt, D.; Leipold, E.; Markgraf, R.; Schlumberger, S.; C órdova, M.A.;Gaertner, H.; et al. A novel µ-conopeptide, CnIIIC, exerts potent and preferential inhibition of NaV1.2/1.4 channels and blocksneuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2012 ,166, 1654–1668. [ CrossRef ]485. Bjørn-Yoshimoto, W.E.; Ramiro, I.B.L.; Yandell, M.; McIntosh, J.M.; Olivera, B.M.; Ellgaard, L.; Safavi-Hemami, H. Curses orCures: A Review of the Numerous Beneﬁts Versus the Biosecurity Concerns of Conotoxin Research. Biomedicines 2020 ,8, 235.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]486. Del R ío-Sancho, S.; Cros, C.; Coutaz, B.; Cuendet, M.; Kalia, Y.N. Cutaneous iontophoresis of µ-conotoxin CnIIIC—A potent
NaV1.4 antagonist with analgesic, anaesthetic and myorelaxant properties. Int. J. Pharm. 2017 ,518, 59–65. [ CrossRef ]487. Elixseri Cone Snail Peptide/XEPTM- 018. Available online: https://www.elixseri.com/pta-cone-snail-peptide (accessed on 17May 2021).488. ARKANA Neuro GABA & NANA Therapy. Available online: https://arkanacosmetics.com/md/neuro-gabanana-therapy/(accessed on 17 May 2021).489. ARKANA Neuro GABA Therapy. Available online: https://www.shop-arkana.com/b2b_en/linie-arkana/neuro-gaba-nana-therapy.html (accessed on 17 May 2021).490. Ferrillo, M.; Vastarella, M.; Cantelli, M.; Mazzella, C.; Fabbrocini, G. Instrumental, clinical and subjective evaluation of the efﬁcacyof a cosmetic treatment for home use. J. Cosmet. Laser Ther. 2019 ,21, 190–195. [ CrossRef ]491. Mittapally, S.; Afnan, A.A. A review on nanotechnology in cosmetics. Pharma Innov. J. 2019 ,8, 668–671.
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 79 of 80492. Chan, G.; Wong, Z.; Lam, K.; Cheng, L.; Zhang, L.; Lin, H.; Dong, T.; Tsim, K. Edible Bird’s Nest, an Asian Health FoodSupplement, Possesses Skin Lightening Activities: Identiﬁcation of N-Acetylneuraminic Acid as Active Ingredient. J. Cosmet.Dermatol. Sci. Appl. 2015 ,5, 262–274. [ CrossRef ]493. Lodén, M. Moisturizers: Treatment of Dry Skin Syndrome and Barrier Defects. In Cosmeceuticals and Active Cosmetics ; Sivamani,R.K., Jagdeo, J.R., Elsner, P ., Maibach, H.I., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2016; pp. 235–259, ISBN 9780429192388.494. Green, B.A.; Van Scott, E.J.; Yu, R.J. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids. In Cosmetic Dermatology Products and Procedures ; Draelos, Z.D.,Ed.; Wiley-Blackwell: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2016; pp. 346–356, ISBN 978-1-118-65558-0.495. ARKANA Professional CARBO V RECONSTRUCTOR. Available online: https://arkanaukprof.com/product/carbo-v-reconstructor/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).
reconstructor/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).496. Sparavigna, A.; Tenconi, B.; De Ponti, I.; Guglielmini, G. Evaluation of the Activity and Tolerability of a Cosmetic Treatment forthe Periocular Area on the Aging Face: Controlled Clinical and Instrumental Evaluation vs. Placebo. Cosmetics 2014 ,1, 105–116.[CrossRef ]497. Prospector Ximilene®. Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/eu/PersonalCare/Detail/2736/90649/Ximilene(accessed on 17 May 2021).498. Satoto, G.; Fernandes, A.S.; Saraiva, N.; Santos, F.; Neng, N.; Nogueira, J.M.; Santos de Almeida, T.; Araujo, M.E. An Overview onthe Properties of Ximenia Oil Used as Cosmetic in Angola. Biomolecules 2020 ,10, 18. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]499. Belcaro, G.; Dugall, M.; Maramaldi, G.; Togni, S.; Giacomelli, L. Evaluation of the efﬁcacy of a new escin-based, multi-componentformulation in reducing eyelid edema. Minerva Oftalmol. 2016 ,58, 65–69.
500. Vermaak, I.; Kamatou, G.P .P .; Komane-Mofokeng, B.; Viljoen, A.M.; Beckett, K. African seed oils of commercial importance—Cosmetic applications. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2011 ,77, 920–933. [ CrossRef ]501. Shivatare, R.S.; Musale, R.; Lohakare, P .; Patil, D.; Choudhary, D.; Ganu, G.; Nagore, D.H.; Kewatkar, S.M. Isolation, Identiﬁcationand Characterization of Ximenynic Acid with Anti-Aging Activity from Santalum Album. Int. J. Res. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,11,1394–1399. [ CrossRef ]502. The Derm Review Amino Acids In Skincare: Arginine. Available online: https://thedermreview.com/arginine/ (accessed on 17May 2021).503. BE BEAUTIFUL. What Is the Role of Arginine in Skincare. Available online: https://www.bebeautiful.in/all-things-skin/everyday/arginine-in-skincare (accessed on 17 May 2021).504. ARKANA Biomimetic Therapy—The Way to Regain Youth. Available online: https://arkanacosmetics.com/news/biomimetic-therapy-the-way-to-regain-youth/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).
505. Prospector Adipoﬁll’inTM. Available online: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/eu/PersonalCare/Detail/4499/215014/Adipoﬁllin (accessed on 17 May 2021).506. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics L-Ornithine Vectorized in a IonosomeTM. Available online: https://www.lucasmeyercosmetics.com/en/node/578 (accessed on 10 May 2021).507. DeJohn, A. Volumizing Anti-aging Skin Care Ingredient. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsdesign.com/Article/2012/06/13/Volumizing-anti-aging-skin-care-ingredient (accessed on 10 May 2021).508. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics. Adipoﬁll Bio-controlled Lipoﬁlling. LucasMeyer-Cosmetics. Available online: www.lucasmeyercosmetics.com (accessed on 6 May 2021).509. Harada, D.; Nagamachi, S.; Aso, K.; Ikeda, K.; Takahashi, Y.; Furuse, M. Oral administration of l-ornithine increases the contentof both collagen constituting amino acids and polyamines in mouse skin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2019 ,512, 712–715.[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]
[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]510. Loing, E.; Belhaj, N.; Ollier, V .; Bezivin, C. New generation of resistant delivery system for a better skin bioavailability and
[CrossRef ] [PubMed ]510. Loing, E.; Belhaj, N.; Ollier, V .; Bezivin, C. New generation of resistant delivery system for a better skin bioavailability andanti-aging targeted action. Available online: https://www.scconline.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Loing.pdf (accessed on10 June 2021).511. Stanek, J.; Wochner, M.; Gupta, S. Current and Future ‘Body-sculpting’Cosmetics. CoValence Lab. Res. CT 2015 ,130, 20–31.512. Rattan, S.I.S. Hormetic Mechanisms of Anti-Aging and Rejuvenating Effects of Repeated Mild Heat Stress on Human Fibroblastsin Vitro. Rejuvenation Res. 2004 ,7, 40–48. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]513. Hu, S.; Han, M.; Rezaei, A.; Li, D.; Wu, G.; Ma, X. L-Arginine Modulates Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in Obesity and Diabetes.Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 2017 ,18, 599–608. [ CrossRef ] [PubMed ]514. Rattan, S.I.S.; Kryzch, V .; Schnebert, S.; Perrier, E.; Nizard, C. Hormesis-Based Anti-Aging Products: A Case Study of a NovelCosmetic. Dose Response 2012 ,11. [CrossRef ]
Cosmetic. Dose Response 2012 ,11. [CrossRef ]515. Rattan, S.I.S. Hormetins as Novel Components of Cosmeceuticals and Aging Interventions. Cosmetics 2015 ,2, 11–20. [ CrossRef ]516. Does the Beauty Industry Need to Become More Transparent with Consumers? Available online: https://uk.fashionnetwork.com/news/Does-the-beauty-industry-need-to-become-more-transparent-with-consumers-,992826.html (accessed on 17 May2021).517. The Provenance Team Transparency in Beauty & Wellness: Why 2020 Will be a Breakthrough Year. Available online: https://www.provenance.org/news/movement/transparency-in-beauty-wellness-why-2020-will-be-a-breakthrough-year (accessedon 10 May 2021).
Cosmetics 2021 ,8, 66 80 of 80518. Rachel Brown Consumers Are Demanding Greater Transparency From Beauty Brands. What Does That Really Mean? Availableonline: https://www.beautyindependent.com/consumers-are-demanding-greater-transparency-from-beauty-brands-what-does-that-really-mean/ (accessed on 10 May 2021).519. Optel Transparency and Quality Guarantee for the Cosmetics Industry. Consumer Expectations: More Than Skin Deep. Availableonline: https://www.optelgroup.com/cosmetic-industry/ (accessed on 10 May 2021).520. Manteghi, M. European Cosmetics Industry: Main Aspects and Regulation. SSRN 2017 , 21. [ CrossRef ]521. U.S. Food & Drug Administration Summary of Cosmetics Labeling Requirements. Available online: https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetics-labeling-regulations/summary-cosmetics-labeling-requirements (accessed on 17 May 2021).522. Cosmetics Europe Understanding the Label. Available online: https://cosmeticseurope.eu/cosmetic-products/understanding-
label/ (accessed on 17 May 2021).523. Canada, G. of Industry Guide for the Labelling of Cosmetics. Available online: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/labelling-cosmetics.html (accessed on 10 May2021).524. European Commission Cosmetic Products—Speciﬁc Topics. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics/products_en (accessed on 17 May 2021).525. Dorato, S. Chapter 1—General Concepts: Current Legislation on Cosmetics in Various Countries ; Salvador, A., Chisvert, A.B.T.-A., Eds.;Elsevier: Boston, MA, USA, 2018; pp. 3–37, ISBN 978-0-444-63508-2.526. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Commission Regulation (EU) No 655/2013 of 10 July 2013 Laying Down CommonCriteria for the Justiﬁcation of Claims Used in Relation to Cosmetic Products Text with EEA Relevance. Available online:https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32013R0655 (accessed on 17 May 2021).
527. European Commission Technical Document on Cosmetic Claims. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/24847 (accessed on 17 May 2021).528. Ctpa Cosmetic Product Deﬁnition. Available online: https://www.ctpa.org.uk/deﬁnition-ofa-cosmetic (accessed on 17 May2021).529. European Commission Cosmetics. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics_en (accessed on 17 May2021).530. European Commission Legislation. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics/legislation_en (accessedon 17 May 2021).531. European Commission Manual of the Working Group on Cosmetic Products (Sub-Group on Borderline Products) on theScope of Application of the Cosmetics Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 (ART. 2(1)(A)) Version 3.1. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/29002 (accessed on 17 May 2021).532. Parliament, E. Question Reference: E-000056/2016. Available online: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/E-8-
2016-000056-ASW_EN.html?redirect (accessed on 12 May 2021).533. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Consolidated text: Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of theCouncil of 6 November 2001 on the Community Code Relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use. Available online:https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2001/83/2019-07-26 (accessed on 17 May 2021).534. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Consolidated text: Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of theCouncil of 22 May 2012 Concerning the Making Available on the Market and Use of Biocidal Products (Text with EEA relevance)Text with EEA Relevance. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02012R0528-20210329 (accessed on 17 May 2021).535. EUR-Lex Access to European Union Law Consolidated text: Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 5 April 2017 on Medical Devices, Amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC)
Council of 5 April 2017 on Medical Devices, Amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC)No 1223/2009 and Repealing Council Directives 90/3. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A02017R0745-20200424 (accessed on 17 May 2021).536. European Commission Borderline Products. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics/products/borderline-products_en (accessed on 17 May 2021).
Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  https://doi.org/10.1007/s13659-022-00363-yREVIEWNatural products in cosmeticsJi‑Kai Liu1,2*   Abstract The global cosmetics market reached US$500 billion in 2017 and is expected to exceed US$800 billion by 2023, at around a 7% annual growth rate. The cosmetics industry is emerging as one of the fastest ‑growing industries of the past decade. Data shows that the Chinese cosmetics market was US$60 billion in 2021. It is expected to be the world’s number one consumer cosmetics market by 2050, with a size of approximately US$450 billion. The influence of social media and the internet has raised awareness of the risks associated with the usage of many chemicals in cosmetics and the health benefits of natural products derived from plants and other natural resources. As a result, the cosmetic industry is now paying more attention to natural products. The present review focus on the possible applications of
natural products from various biological sources in skin care cosmetics, including topical care products, fragrances, moisturizers, UV protective, and anti‑ wrinkle products. In addition, the mechanisms of targets for evaluation of active ingredients in cosmetics and the possible benefits of these bioactive compounds in rejuvenation and health, and their potential role in cosmetics are also discussed.Keywords: Natural products, Cosmetics, Skin whitening agents, Skin anti‑aging agents, Moisturizers© The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.1 IntroductionThe global cosmetics market reached US$500 billion in 2017 and is expected to exceed US$800 billion by 2023, at around a 7% annual growth rate [1]. The cosmetics industry is emerging as one of the fastest-growing indus -tries of the past decade. With economic development, the disposable income of Chinese residents is increasing, the awareness of skincare is growing, and the concept of healthy skin is gradually taking shape. Unlike a few
decades ago, in the current era of the "value economy", sophistication has become the pursuit of more and more Chinese women and even men. Against this backdrop, the cosmetics industry is gaining momentum, and the Chinese cosmetics market is booming like never before. Data shows that the retail sales of cosmetics were US$60 billion in 2021, an increase of 14% compared to the same period last year. China is expected to be the world’s number one consumer cosmetics market by 2050, with a size of approximately US$450 billion.Around cosmetics, a series of regulations have been issued in recent years in China, proposing to improve the legal system and technical standards and strengthen the construction of the inspection system, regulating cosmetics production and operation activities and their supervision and management. A high entry threshold for the cosmetics industry has been raised, and the industry is facing a certain degree of concentration.
is facing a certain degree of concentration.As baby boomers enter their later years, the desire to look healthier and younger has created huge market demands and opportunities and has become a global
As baby boomers enter their later years, the desire to look healthier and younger has created huge market demands and opportunities and has become a global priority. The impact of social media and the internet has raised awareness of the risks associated with the usage of many chemicals in cosmetics and the health benefits of natural products derived from plants and other natural resources. As a result, the cosmetic industry is now pay -ing more attention to natural products [2].The term ’cosmetic’ originates from the Greek word ’Kosm tikos’ , defined as ’capable of arrangement, skilled in decoration’ , giving ’kosmein’ to decoration, and ’kos -mos’ to order, harmony [3 ]. In general, cosmetics are used to directly treat the external surfaces of the human Open AccessNatural Products and Bioprospecting*Correspondence:  jkliu@mail.kib.ac.cn1 Wuhan Institute of Health, Shenzhen Moore Vaporization Health & Medical
Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan 430074, People’s Republic of ChinaFull list of author information is available at the end of the article
Page 2 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 body to fulfill four functions: (1) to maintain good con -dition; (2) to modify appearance; (3) to protect; and (4) to correct body odor [4 , 5]. A more appropriate classifi -cation is as follows: (1) cosmetics for personal cleansing (shampoos, deodorants, soaps); (2) cosmetics for skin and hair care (toothpaste, topical care products); (3) cosmetics for embellishment (lip colors, perfumes); (4) protective cosmetics (sunscreen and anti-wrinkle prod -ucts); (5) corrective cosmetics (hair dyes, face masks); (6) maintenance cosmetics (moisturizers, shaving creams); and (7) active cosmetics (antiseptics, fluoride toothpaste) [6 ].For thousands of years, women around the world have been using liquids, powders, potions, abrasives, and cosmetics to apply to their facial skin to maintain their youthful beauty and hide their advancing age. In ancient Egypt, women would bathe in sour milk. Sour
milk is lactic acid, an α-hydroxy acid, found in many of today’s light chemical peeling solutions. A mixture of crocodile dung with pearl powder and herbs was used on the face. They also used abrasives contain -ing substances such as animal oil, lime, and chalk. In Indonesia, women use ground coffee beans as an abra -sive. Coffee contains the antioxidant caffeic acid, which tightens collagen fibers and stimulates the production of new collagen. Indian women use pumice mixed with urine as a facial scrub. Pumice is an abrasive, while urine contains urea, which is hydrophilic and is used today in the preparation of some cosmetics. Camel urine was used by women of the desert peoples of the Middle East to beautify their hair. Women around the world long ago experimented with oils, exfoliants, moisturizers, and acids to lighten and rejuvenate their skin [7 , 8]. In ancient China, the purpose and focus of makeup for women were slightly different from today.
However, "a man dies for a man who knows him and a woman dolls up for him who loves her."The present review will focus on the possible applica -tions of natural products from various biological sources in skin care cosmetics, including topical care products, fragrances, moisturizers, UV protective, and anti-wrinkle products, concentrating on work that has appeared in the literature up to May 2022. In addition, the mechanisms of targets for the evaluation of active ingredients in cos -metics and the possible benefits of these bioactive com -pounds in rejuvenation and health, and their potential role in cosmetics are also discussed. The natural prod -ucts in cosmetics have been reviewed comprehensively [2, 11, 13, 105, 115, 131, 171, 179]. All these reviews are only about one aspect, such as plant extracts and natural products, or mushroom extracts and natural products, or marine products, or skin lighteners, or tyrosinase inhibi -
tors. This review incorporates some of these reviews and systematically summarizes and classifies them according to the type of natural product structures and functional activities.2  Natural products as skin whitening agentsThe skin is the largest organ in our body and the first bar -rier to the invasion of microorganisms. It protects our body from external invasions while maintaining ther -mal adjustment and transmitting the sense of touch [9]. Increased skin pigmentation occurs secondary to various factors, including age, endocrine disorders, hormone lev -els, inflammation, and environmental exposures, includ -ing dermatologic conditions caused by ultraviolet (UV) and infrared radiation. The pigmentation is generated by increased production and deposition of melanin in the epidermis [10].Melanocytes are located in the basal layer of the skin that separates the dermis and the epidermis. Approxi -mately 36 keratinocytes surround one melanocyte [11].
In response to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation, melano -
that separates the dermis and the epidermis. Approxi -mately 36 keratinocytes surround one melanocyte [11]. In response to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation, melano -cytes synthesize melanin through a course called mel -anogenesis. The melanin synthesized in the melanosomes is carried to neighboring keratinocytes in the epidermis [12]. There are two main types of melanin, red/yellow pheomelanin and brown/black eumelanin, which differ not only in color but also in shape, size, and particle pack -ing. The biosynthesis of melanin can begin with either l-tyrosine or l-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA), which is oxidized to dopaquinone and is the common pathway for the production of eumelanin and pheomela -nin (Fig.  1) [13]. The first step in the melanogenesis pro -cess is catalyzed by the key tyrosinase enzyme, which oxidizes l-tyrosine to dopaquinone. The resulting qui -none is used to synthesize eumelanin and pheomelanin. This step, the production of dopaquinone, is the rate-
limiting step in melanin synthesis, as all other sequential reactions can proceed automatically at physiological pH. Due to the importance of tyrosinase in melanin synthesis, direct inhibition of tyrosinase catalytic activity becomes the most prominent and successful target of melanogen -esis inhibitors. Most commercially available cosmetic or skin-whitening agents are tyrosinase inhibitors [12].2.1  Well‑known tyrosinase inhibitors as skin whitening agents: hydroquinone (1), arbutin (2), aloesin (3), ellagic acid (4), l‑ascorbic acid (5), kojic acid (6), azelaic acid (7), ferulic acid (8), morachalcone A (9), rhododendrol (10), (−)‑N‑formylanonaine (11), tranexamic acid (12), 4‑n‑butylresorcinol (13), and thiamidol (14)Hydroquinone (1) is a very simple phenolic structure (Fig.  2). It is widely distributed in nature and has been universally used as an effective lightener in cosmetic
Page 3 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  formulations. Hydroquinone acts by reversibly inhibit -ing tyrosinase, which has a selective melanotoxic effect and therefore prevents new melanin synthesis [14]. In animal tests, hydroquinone showed to decrease melano -some formation, change the internal structure of mela -nosomes, increase melanosome degradation, and destroy membranous organelles in melanocytes [15]. Hydroqui -none was, for a long time, considered the standard of care in the treatment of hyperpigmentation. However, the semiquinone free radicals formed during the enzy -matic reaction permanently impair the melanosome and melanocytes [16]. It was also understood that this sub -stance is rapidly transported from the epidermis to the vascular system and detoxified in the liver [17]. Most countries have banned the use of hydroquinone in cos -metics due to its side effects, such as carcinogenesis,
long-lasting depigmentation, and the increased incidence of ochronosis with long-term use [13]. However, a recent review presented the strongest evidence in support of the use of hydroquinone with the most effective and accepta -ble formulations combining hydroquinone, retinoic acid, and corticosteroids (the modified Kligman formulation or ’triple cream’). The risk of exogenous ochronosis is low if a concentration of ≤ 5% is prescribed for a limited period and monitored regularly. Dermatologists should restore confidence to patients that hydroquinone is well tolerated and safe for all conditions of hyperpigmentation when used in a controlled manner [18].Arbutin is a compound that structurally consists of one molecule of d-glucose bound to one molecule of hydroquinone. d-glucose has three isomers in aqueous solution: α, β, or γ, of which the β-isomer is the predomi -nant form. β-Arbutin (2, Fig.  2), in which the β-isomer of
d-glucose is bound to hydroquinone, is found in plants, such as bearberry. Now it is one of the most ordinary components in skin whitening creams worldwide [19]. Arbutin is structurally similar to l-tyrosine and binds to the active site of tyrosinase, acting with a competi -tive inhibitory effect. When lacking a substrate, arbutin can irreversibly inactivate tyrosinase by binding to the enzyme. Thus, the mechanism by which arbutin inhib -its intracellular melanin synthesis is generally consid -ered to be the inhibition of the catalytic activity of an already expressed tyrosinase or its irreversible inacti -vation rather than the inhibition of a new synthesis of tyrosinase [20–23]. In addition, arbutin can scavenge ROS, such as hydroxyl radicals, and activate the nuclear factor erythroid 2 (Nrf2)-antioxidant response element
Fig. 1 The pathway for the production of melanin: tyrosinase ‑related protein 1(TRP ‑1); tyrosinase ‑related protein 2 (TRP ‑2); 5,6‑ dihydroxyindol (DHI); indole ‑5,6‑ quinone (IQ); 5,6‑ dihydroindole ‑2 (DHICA); indole ‑2‑carboxylic acid‑5,6‑ quinone (ICAQ); 5‑S‑ cysteinyldopa (5‑S‑ CD); 2‑S‑cysteinyldopa (2‑S‑ CD)
Page 4 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 (ARE) pathway, enhancing the antioxidant capacity of cells. Mechanisms based on antioxidant action and those based on tyrosinase inhibition are not mutually exclusive and are thought to act together to inhibit the synthesis of eumelanin [24, 25]. Dermatitis from the use of arbu -tin is rare, but caution is advised in the use of products containing arbutin from the point of view of the possi -ble production of hydroquinone during product use. The degree to which arbutin exhibits toxicity depends on the cell type and duration of exposure, and usually, one mM is considered to be a bounding concentration between safety and cytotoxicity. The concentration in contact with cells must be kept at one mM or lower in order to not cause serious side effects and to obtain beneficial efficacy [19].Arbutin has been clinically evaluated for its skin whit -
ening efficacy alone or in combination with other active components. A human study evaluated the skin whiten -ing efficacy of aloesin (3) and arbutin. After irradiation of the skin area of the forearm with UV light, a 10% solution of each substance was treated individually or together four times a day for 15 days. The results were that aloesin, arbutin, and their co-treatment reduced UVR-induced hyperpigmentation by 34%, 43.5%, and 63.3%, respec -tively, compared to the control group [26]. In female patients aged 26–50 years with epidermal or mixed mel -asma, a randomized, prospective, open-label study evalu -ated the skin lightening effects of arbutin and ellagic acid (4). A gel formulation containing 1% arbutin and 1% ellagic acid (4) was applied to the face twice daily for 6 months, and the skin melanin index was measured before and after the application of the product. The two gel for -mulations mentioned above reduced the melanin index to
71% and 79% of baseline levels, respectively [27]. A rand -omized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial involving 102 women aged 26–55  years with melasma and solar pigmentation evaluated the depigmentation efficacy of a cream containing 2.51% arbutin from Serratulae Fig. 2 Structures of well‑known tyrosinase inhibitors as skin whitening agents
Page 5 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  quinquefoliae (twice daily for 8 weeks). Clinical improve -ment was observed in 75.86% of female patients with melasma and 56.00% of female patients with solar pig -mentation [28]. Studies have demonstrated that the com -bination of arbutin with L-ascorbic acid (5) enhanced its tyrosinase inhibitory activity [29]. In another study, good or excellent clearance of melasma was observed in 66.67% of patients treated with the Nd:YAG laser and a 7% topical solution of α-arbutin [30].Several studies comparing the inhibitory effects of α-arbutin and β-arbutin on tyrosinase activity in in vitro experiments have shown conflicting results. The reasons for the inconsistent results of these studies are unclear, and it can only be assumed that the experimental pro -cess may have been due to the differences in the source and purity of the enzyme, the conformational state of
the enzyme, the type and concentration of the substrate, oxygen concentration, pH, temperature, the purity of α-arbutin and β-arbutin, and the contamination of hydro -quinone during their production [19]. Several derivatives of arbutin or analogs have been studied and developed for their inhibitory effects on melanin formation. The tyrosinase inhibitor deoxyarbutin is a synthetic derivative of arbutin that inhibits melanin production in a dose-dependent manner, hence its use in hyperpigmentation and skin lightening [31, 32]. A number of formulations have been developed to enhance the dermal absorption of arbutin, improve its stability, and increase its transder -mal delivery and release. Studies have shown that arbutin is stable in lipid aggregates [33]. Encapsulation of arbutin in hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin increases the thermal stability and water solubility of arbutin [34]. Encapsula -tion of arbutin in micelles or liposomes enhances skin
deposition and transdermal delivery [35, 36].Aloesin (3, Fig.  2), a hydroxychromone glucoside, is one of the well-known natural tyrosinase inhibitors. It was isolated from the plant Aloe vera. It did not exhibit any cytotoxicity in cellular assays, genotoxicity or mutagen -icity in the Ames test, and skin irritation in preliminary human studies [37]. Aloesin inhibited hyperpigmentation following UV radiation in a dose-dependent manner and displayed synergistic effects when used in conjunction with arbutin. Aloesin inhibited mouse tyrosinase more strongly than mushroom-derived tyrosinase. Due to its multiple activities in skin care, its excellent performance, and its natural origin, aloesin is frequently used in topical cosmetics [26].Gallic acid (4, Fig.  2) from many plants exhibits tyrosi -nase inhibiting activity. Similar to ascorbic acid, this compound has another role in reducing dopaquinone to L-DOPA via the redox cycle, and it also acts as a sub -
strate itself, being slowly oxidized even in the absence of L-DOPA. However, the addition of this cofactor significantly increases the rate of oxidation [13]. Ellagic acid was reported to be an efficient, reversible, com -petitive-noncompetitive hybrid tyrosinase inhibitor. It altered the conformation of the tyrosinase. Ellagic acid was found to show a good inhibitory effect on the pro -liferation of B16 mouse melanoma cells and induced apoptosis [38]. It was recently demonstrated that the anti-melanogenic mechanism of ellagic acid in melano -genic B16F10 cells is through autophagy, the role of the Nrf2, and UVA-activated α melanocyte-stimulating hor -mone (α-MSH) pathways in keratinocyte HaCaT cells. The experiments in vivo model using the zebrafish con -firmed that ellagic acid inhibited tyrosinase activity and endogenous hyperpigmentation [39].Humans rely solely on external supplementation to obtain l-ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (5, Fig.  2), e.g., by oral
administration or by topical application in cosmeceuti -
Humans rely solely on external supplementation to obtain l-ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (5, Fig.  2), e.g., by oral administration or by topical application in cosmeceuti -cal products [40]. Ascorbic acid reduces the oxidation of dopaquinone and 5,6-dihydroindole-2 (DHICA) [41]. In addition, it inhibits tyrosinase activity, promotes collagen synthesis, has photoprotective and antioxidant effects, decreases skin damage, and thus reduces hyperpigmenta -tion. Ascorbic acid is considered to inhibit tyrosinase and reduce melanogenesis by acting with copper ions at the active site of tyrosinase. In a separate study, 16 women with melasma were compared to 5% ascorbic acid versus 4% hydroquinone cream. Hydroquinone was superior to ascorbic acid on subjective measures (good and excel -lent effects of 93% and 62.5%, respectively). There was no statistical difference in colorimetric measurements, but the side effects were much greater in the hydroquinone
group [42]. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-con -trolled trial, a combination of procyanidin (24  mg) and vitamins A (6 mg), C (60 mg), and E (15 IU) were found to be safe and effective in 80 women with melasma [43].One of the main problems with ascorbic acid products is that they are unstable. The most stable formulations of ascorbic acid are those with a pH of 3.5, as the acid -ity improves its permeability and stability. Ascorbic acid is most effective at concentrations greater than 8%, while it has been found to cause irritation at concentrations greater than 20% [40].Kojic acid (6 , Fig.  2) is a natural organic acid that is a by-product of certain species of fungi, such as Asper -gillus  and Penicillium  [44]. It inhibits tyrosinase by capturing copper ions in the active site of tyrosinase, thereby preventing melanin synthesis. In addition to this action, it also has antioxidant properties [45]. The
side effects of hydroquinone make kojic acid a desirable alternative. Kojic acid has been found to be irritating at higher doses, and a topical concentration of 1.0% is currently recommended. It has been used at concentra -tions, often ranging from 1 to 4%. Kojic acid has proven
Page 6 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 to be effective in the treatment of photodamage, hyper -pigmented scars, and lentigines. Its application should be considered in terms of adverse effects, the main side effect being contact dermatitis and an raised risk of sunburn in people with sensitive skin. There is some evidence in experimental animal studies that systemic absorption and ingestion of kojic acid may be carcino -genic, but no toxicity has been reported to date for top -ical preparations; it is more prudent to avoid the use of kojic acid on broken skin [44].Azelaic acid (7, Fig.  2) is a saturated dicarboxylic acid with nine carbons. It was extracted from the fun -gus Pityrosporum ovale. Azelaic acid is also present in wheat, barley, and rye. It inhibits tyrosinase and mito -chondrial oxidoreductase, interferes with DNA synthe -sis, and reduces free radical formation. The compound
preferentially targets highly active and abnormal mel -anocytes on uninvolved skin with minimal effect [46, 47]. In most clinical trials, azelaic acid has been inves -tigated as a treatment for acne. However, a two-month open-label clinical trial compared 20% azelaic acid with 4% hydroquinone cream in 29 patients with melasma lately. Based on the MASI (Melasma Area Severity Index) score, which is used to evaluate treatment response, the investigators confirmed that melasma pigmentation was raised more in the azelaic acid group than in the hydro -quinone group during the second month of treatment [47]. In a 16-week baseline-controlled trial, 20 patients with Fitzpatrick skin type IV–VI were treated twice daily with 15% azelaic acid gel showing reduced pigmentation following acne and inflammation [48]. According to the researcher’s global assessment score, the patient expe -rienced 2 points of improvement. A controlled study in
India studied 60 patients lately with epidermal melasma. 50% of the participants received glycolic acid peel every 3 weeks and cream (20% azelaic acid) twice daily; the other half were treated with azelaic acid alone. MASI score of azelaic acid/glycolic acid group decreased significantly after 12 weeks compared with azelaic acid control group [47]. In Poland, another controlled trial found that skin cosmetics containing azelaic acid improved skin pigmen -tation. Despite these trials, more well-designed clini -cal studies are needed. In addition, there is still a lack of objective methods for quantifying pigmentation, which makes it difficult to evaluate many natural and plant components.Ferulic acid (8, Fig.  2) is a cinnamic acid derivative belonging to plant phenolic acids. It is commonly found in spinach, grapes, apples, grains, rhubarb, oats, parsley, rye, and barley. Ferulic acid shows antioxidant activ -ity and low irritation. Because it inhibits tyrosinase and
inhibits melanocyte proliferation, it is used in skin whit -ening formulations. At low metabolism, ferulic acid can maintain a high local concentration and penetrate deep into the skin. Its high penetration may be due to the com -pound’s good lipophilic properties. A cosmeceutical con -centration of 0.5–1% is recommended [49].A series of prenylated chalcones and flavonoids were isolated from the wood of Artocarpus heterophyllus. Sev -eral compounds showed perfect tyrosinase inhibitory activity, with the most active, morachalcone A (9, TMBC) (Fig.  2), being 3000-fold more active  (IC50 13  nM) than kojic acid  (IC50 45 μM) [50].The most notable case reported is rhododendrol (10, Fig.  2), 4-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-2-butanol. The compound was isolated from Acer nikoense, and it has been added to cosmetics as a skin-whitening ingredient for many years. The products were eventually recalled in 2013. Rhododendrol produces leukoderma toxicity, but the
underlying mechanism is still unclear. It is thought that rhododendrol depletes intracellular GSH by producing a
Rhododendrol produces leukoderma toxicity, but the underlying mechanism is still unclear. It is thought that rhododendrol depletes intracellular GSH by producing a series of electrophilic o-quinones which then bind to key proteins in the cell via sulfhydryl groups [51].Quinone metabolites are often considered toxic because this Michael receptor may undergo additive reactions with many endogenous nucleophiles in the body. Although not all quinone compounds have the same level of cytotoxicity, many types of phenolic com -pounds are highly likely to yield quinone metabolites through tyrosinase-catalyzed oxidation. Therefore, new tyrosinase inhibitors should inhibit the activity of the enzyme rather than act as substrates or co-substrates for the enzyme. Some progress has been made in this regard. For example, the isolation of (−)-N-formylanonaine (11, Fig.  2) from the Magnoliaceae plant Michelia alba as an antioxidant and human tyrosinase inhibitor was
reported. In experiments to inhibit mushroom tyrosi -nase, (−)-N-formylanonaine showed activity comparable to that of kojic acid, but the compound inhibited human tyrosinase to a greater extent than kojic acid, while its cytotoxicity was much lower than that of kojic acid. In the homology model, by coordinating Cu.2+ (−)-N-for -mylanonaine binds to the active site of tyrosinase [52].In addition to natural tyrosinase inhibitors, many syn -thetic tyrosinase inhibitors are also used. Tranexamic acid (12, Fig.  2) is a fibrinolytic agent with antiplasmin activities. It is hypothesized that tranexamic acid inhib -its the release of paracrine melanogenic factors, which normally stimulate melanocytes. Various formulations of tranexamic acid have been evaluated over the years as a means of treating melasma. Although topical and intradermal treatments have not exhibited significant results, oral tranexamic acid showed excellent results [53,
54]. 4-n-Butylresorcinol (13, Fig.  2), a derivative of res -orcinol, is an effective tyrosinase inhibitor and has been used in depigmentation therapy. 4-n-Butylresorcinol
Page 7 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  was reported to inhibit melanin production by directly inhibiting tyrosinase activity and synthesis [55]. In the follow-up studies, melasma patients treated with a cream containing 0.1–0.3% 4-n-butylresorcinol had significantly lower pigmentation scores [56, 57]. Many tyrosinase inhibitors target mushroom tyrosinase. The newly dis -covered thiamidol (14, Fig.  2) is a powerful competitive inhibitor of human tyrosinase that effectively but revers -ibly inhibits melanin production both in vivo and in vitro. Of 50,000 possible tyrosinase inhibitors, thiazidol was identified to be the most effective inhibitor of human tyrosinase [58]. Thiamidol was noticed to be effective in subsequent double-blind, randomized, and controlled trials [59, 60]. Although many synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors show very good mushroom tyrosinase inhibi -tory activity, only a few inhibitors show melanogenesis
inhibitory activity in cellular or skin models. Therefore, the main objective of synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors is to demonstrate their inhibitory activity in cellular assays.Another important aspect is that although the inhibi -tory intensity of tyrosinase inhibitors is usually given as the values of their  IC50 (half-inhibitory concentration), we cannot directly compare the inhibitory activity of different compounds from the  IC50 values reported in the literature due to differences in experimental condi -tions such as substrate concentration, incubation time, and measurement methods using commercial batches of tyrosinase. To avoid this discrepancy, most studies evalu -ating new tyrosinase inhibitors use the standard tyrosi -nase inhibitor kojic acid as a positive control [61].Tyrosinase inhibitors are not only valuable whitening agents in cosmetics, but they can also be used to treat some skin diseases related to melanosis in the clinic. It
is, therefore, very important to describe the term "tyrosi -nase inhibitor" correctly. In general, the name "tyrosi -nase inhibitors" is not always clear, as some authors use the same term to refer to melanin-producing inhibitors, which primarily interfere with melanin formation but do not have any direct effect on tyrosinase. Therefore, only specific tyrosinase inactivators and/or specific tyrosi -nase inhibitors that bind directly to the enzyme and inhibit its activity are considered to be "true inhibitors". These "true inhibitors" of tyrosinase are further divided into two main groups: (1) specific tyrosinase inhibitors, which reversibly bind to the enzyme, thereby reduc -ing its catalytic capacity, [61] and (2) specific tyrosinase inactivation agents, also known as irreversible inhibitors or "suicide substrates", which form covalent bonds with tyrosinase, thereby changing the active site of tyrosinase and irreversibly inactivating the enzyme (e.g., catechol
and L-DOPA) during the catalytic process. Of particular importance is the fact that these compounds are usually tyrosinase-specific and do not inactivate other proteins [2, 13].2.2  Phenolic compounds and stilbenes: oleuropein (15), salidroside (16), resveratrol (17), oxyresveratrol (18), chlorophorin (19), 4‑ethylphenol (20)Oleuropein (15, Fig.  3) is a phenolic compound extracted from olive leaves and olive oil. The compound has free radical scavenging and antioxidant activities. A gel and Fig. 3 Structures of phenolic compounds and stilbenes in cosmetics
Page 8 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 emulsion containing oleuropein were prepared and eval -uated on healthy volunteers exposed to UVB to study their protective and lenitive activity. The protective effect was observed by topical application of the preparation prior to irradiation, while the lenitive effect was observed after the induction of erythema. Vitamin E was used as a control compound in this trial. The results clearly showed that oleuropein preparations showed a lenitive effect on trans-epidermal water loss, reducing erythema, and blood flow by approximately 35%, 22%, and 30%, respec -tively [62]. The mechanism of oleuropein’s lenitive effect is not actually fully understood. It is possible that this activity is related to the properties of oleuropein, which exhibits inhibition of "reactive nitrogen species" includ -ing the free radical nitric oxide (NO·), the production of
which in excess is also associated with inflammation as well as other pathological conditions. In addition, ole -uropein also inhibits IL-1β-induced secretion of IL-6, MCP-1, and sICAM-1, and increases the expression of anti-inflammatory  HO−1 by inhibiting JNK1/2-pP38 MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways [63].Salidroside (16, Fig.  3) is a phenylethanoid from Rho -diola rosea growing at high altitudes. Due to its beneficial effects on a variety of pathological processes, salidro -side has long been used in China as an active ingredient in traditional Chinese medicine. The anti-photoaging properties of human dermal fibroblasts were studied by UVB irradiation [64]. Salidroside inhibited UVB-induced cell cycle arrest and reduced the expression of senes -cence-related factors p16, p21, and p53. In addition, salidroside protected cells from UVB-induced synthe -sis of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-αand IL-6 and MMP-1 [64]. Yuan et al. reported that salidroside treat -
ment also protected HaCaT keratinocytes from UVB-induced decreases in cell viability in a dose-dependent manner [65]. Salidroside has recently been reported to inhibit melanin production and inflammation in volun -teers. It also had a certain protective effect on Kunming mice after ultraviolet irradiation. Salidroside inhibited tyrosinase activity and mRNA expression of tyrosinase in A375 cells. By targeting prolyl 4-hydroxylase β polypep -tide (P4HB), it regulated the ubiquitination degradation of IRF1 (interferon regulatory factor 1) [66].Resveratrol (17, Fig.  3) is a polyphenol phytoalexin. It is formed biosynthetically in response to external stress and fungal infections by plants. This compound has two isomers, cis and trans , of which the latter is biologi -cally active. Abundant natural sources of resveratrol are some Polygonum plants, berries, red grapes, and pea -nuts. As an anti-inflammatory and antioxidant active
ingredient, resveratrol is often used in cosmetics, some -times in concentrations of up to 5% pure resveratrol and sometimes in grape extracts containing resveratrol [67, 68]. Resveratrol protects skin from photoaging. In  vivo experiments of hairless mice, a single application of res -veratrol prior to UVB exposure can significantly reduce skin edema, reduce UVB-induced  H2O2 production, limit lipid peroxidation, and reduce leukocyte infiltra -tion [69]. In a 12-week clinical trial of 55 women aged 40–60 years, it was observed that a night cream contain -ing resveratrol (1%), vitamin E (1%), and baicalin (0.5%) improved their skin conditions, with a marked improve -ment in skin firmness and elasticity, smooth fine lines, and reduced pigmentation. These work by reducing the changes caused by photoaging [70]. Its structure is simi -lar to synthetic estrogen (diethylstilbestrol), and it also exhibits estrogen-like effects. The ability to bind to estro -
gen receptors (estrogen receptor α and estrogen receptor β) is also important in anti-aging beauty treatments. In
exhibits estrogen-like effects. The ability to bind to estro -gen receptors (estrogen receptor α and estrogen receptor β) is also important in anti-aging beauty treatments. In addition, resveratrol has the ability to regulate tyrosinase activity. [67] Oxyresveratrol (18) [71] and chlorophorin (19) (Fig.  3) have been reported to have tyrosinase inhibi -tory activity [72]. Oxyresveratrol is the most promising inhibitor, with an inhibitory activity 32 times higher than kojic acid. Piceatannol is a potent antioxidant found in the seeds of passion fruit (Passiflora edulis). The phenolic compound 4-ethylphenol (20) (Fig.  3) from the Chinese herb Angelica sinensis was active in the melanin assay with  IC50 3.6 μM [73].2.3  Flavonoids: apigenin (21), catechin (22), eupafolin (23), genistein (24), kaempferol (25), liquirtin (26), morin (27), neorauflavane (28), quercetin (29), rhamnetin (30), steppogenin (31)Apigenin (21, Fig.  4) is a widely distributed plant flavo -
noid that is found in aromatic herbs, grains, and fruits. It showed the activity of scavenging free radicals and anti-inflammatory effects. It was reported that apigenin pre -vents UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis through intrinsic and extrinsic pathways and enhances UVB-induced cell apoptosis in SKH-1 mice. Protective effect on UVB radi -ation-induced cyclobutane dimer formation and apopto -sis of human dermal fibroblasts [74]. The study showed that apigenin enhanced UVB-induced apoptosis and prevented UVB-induced oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage by protecting skin keratinocytes from malignant transformation [75, 76].In principle, the structures of flavonoids are com -patible with the roles of inhibitors of tyrosinase and substrates. Some flavonoids, such as kaempferol (25), morin (27), and quercetin (29) (Fig.  4), show tyrosinase inhibitory activities, while others, such as catechin (22), and rhamnetin (30) (Fig.  4) act as substrates and inhibit
tyrosinase either as a free radical scavenger (rhamnetin) or as a cofactor (catechin) [77–81]. Steppogenin (31, Fig.  4) was isolated from the twigs of the plant Cudrania
Page 9 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  tricuspidata, and showed the10-fold higher tyrosinase inhibitory activity than kojic acid [82]. Neorauflavane (28, Fig.  4), another potent tyrosinase inhibitor, was isolated from the extracts of Camylotropis hirtella with  IC50 values of 500 and 30  nM against diphenolase and monophenolase activity of tyrosinase. It has a 400-fold higher against monophenolase activity of tyrosinase compared to kojic acid (13.2 μM) [83].Phyla nodiflora is a common herbal tea in China. The above-ground parts of this herbal tea were macerated with MeOH and then separated by partition and chro -matography to obtain the pure flavonoid compound eupafolin (23). The compound was non-cytotoxic to B16F10 melanoma cells (20–80  μM, 70–90% cell viabil -ity). At 5–10 μM, cell viability was over 90%; in this con -centration range, eupafolin (23) significantly reduced cellular melanin production and TYR and MITF activi -
ties. TRP-1 was also considerably inhibited at 10  μM, and TRP-2 and p-CREB protein expression was also sig -nificantly reduced at 0.1, 1, and 10  μM. In addition, at 10 μM, this component was able to inhibit melanogenesis by modulating MAPK signaling [84, 85].Genistein (24) is an isoflavone present in soybeans that was reported to exhibit anti-photoaging and Fig. 4 Structures of flavonoids in cosmetics
Page 10 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 anti-photocarcinogenic activities [86]. In hairless mice, it inhibited UVB-induced  ONOO− formation and showed anti-nitrosative activity. In this model, the compound protects the skin and promotes cell proliferation by decreasing p53 expression and reducing apoptosis levels [87]. Liquirtin (26) whitens the skin by dispersing mela -nin. 20% Liquirtin ointment is effective for melasma [88].2.4  Chalcons: kuraridin (32), kuraridinol (33), licochalcone A (34), morachalcone A (35), phlorizin (36), xanthohumol (37)Chalcones are generally considered to be precursors of flavonoids and isoflavonoids, which show a wide range of biological activities. Some chalcones display tyrosinase inhibitory activity. Kuraridin (32, Fig.  5) [89] and kurari -dinol (33, Fig.  5) [90] have tyrosinase inhibitory activities that are 34 and 18 times stronger than kojic acid, respec -
tively. Licochalcone A (34, Fig.  5), isolated from the roots of the Glycyrrhize species, had a monophenolase inhibi -tory activity of mushroom tyrosinase five times higher than that of kojic acid [91].The isolation of a range of prenylated chalcones and flavonoids from the wood of the plant Artocarpus het -erophyllus has been reported. Some of these compounds showed very good tyrosinase inhibitory activity, with the most active, morachalcone A (35), having an activ -ity 3000-fold higher  (IC50 13 nM) than that of kojic acid  (IC50 45 μM) [50]. In the presence of copper ions, the cat -echol on the A ring acts as a metal chelator, and in the presence of tyrosinase, it acts as a competitive inhibi -tor. In the presence of both copper ions and tyrosinase, the catechol on the B ring is oxidized to o-quinone. Jun et  al. synthesized a series of chalcone derivatives and investigated their tyrosinase inhibitory activity. Among
them, 2,4,2′,4′,6′-pentahydroxychalcone (36) was found to be the most active [92].Xanthohumol (37, Fig.  5) is a prenylated flavonoid compound that is most abundant in the hop plant (Humulus lupulus  L.). Xanthohumol significantly inhib -ited MMP-9 and elastase activities from very low con -centrations, while at higher concentration, it inhibited MMP-1 and MMP-2, which implies a greater protective effect on elastin. It forcefully inproved the expression of types I, III, and V collagens, as well as elastin, fibronec -tin-1, and -2 in dermal fibroblasts. Its effect was compa -rable to those of ascorbic acid [93]. Xanthohumol at low concentrations is expected to be an effective inhibitor of human hyperpigmentation. It mainly targets melanin export in human melanocytes and melanin degradation in keratinocytes [94].Four chalcones from Morus australis were investigated for tyrosinase inhibitory activity. All four compounds
showed extremely potent activity. One of the compounds has 700 times the inhibitory activity of arbutin [95].2.5  Phenylpropanoids and coumarins: caffeic acid (38), p‑coumaric acid (39), (+)‑lyoniresinol (40), rosmarinic acid (41), verbascoside (42), 8′‑epi‑cleomiscosin (43), umbelliferone (44)Caffeic acid (38) and p-coumaric acid (39), which are natural products of phenylpropanoid, showed good effects in the determination of mushroom tyrosinase inhibitory activity, which were 3 times and 10 times of kojic acid, respectively [96]. Vitex negundo contains many lignans, and their tyrosinase inhibitory activity is higher than that of kojic acid, the most active being Fig. 5 Structures of chalcones in cosmetics
Page 11 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  (+)-lyoniresinol (40), which is 5 times that of kojic acid [97]  (Fig.  6). Another study confirmed that romarinic acid (41) has multiple properties, including the ability to prevent and/or limit UVB-induced damage, increase cell viability and reduce inflammatory responses by reduc -ing multiple pro-inflammatory mediators and enhanc -ing protective IL-10 [98]. Other studies have found that verbascoside (42) is a good photoprotective compound, and its protective effect on cell death and SPF value are greater than other compounds obtained from the extract of Buddleja scordioides. It could make a good sunscreen because it has an SPF higher than 15 and has antioxidant and wound-healing properties [99]. 8′-epi-Cleomiscosin A (43) is a phenylpropanoid isolated from Rhododendron collettianum. Its inhibitory activity against mushroom tyrosinase was 13 times that of kojic acid [100] (Fig.  6).
Umbelliferone (44), a coumarin with a high SPF, substan -tially prevented UVB-induced cytotoxicity of the cells when 30  μM umbelliferone was treated to human skin fibroblasts before a single acute UVB treatment. Umbel -liferone has a photoprotective effect through its ability to recover antioxidant activity after UVB exposure by ajust -ing the expression of inflammatory molecules such as NFκB, and by reducing mRNA expression of matrix met -alloproteinases (MMP-1 and MMP-9) [101].2.6  Alkaloids: diacetyl boldine (45), l‑ergothioneine (46), glutathione (47), niacinamide (nicotinamide, 48), porphyra‑334 (49), shinorin (50)The combination of a night cream containing diacetyl boldine (45, Fig.  7) at night and diacetyl boldine/TGF-β1 biomimetic oligopeptide-68/sunscreen cream dur -ing the day was effective and safe for facial melasma. Thirty-eight subjects have completed this study. Their melasma exhibited significant improvement at weeks 6
and 12 compared to the baseline value. Most subjects had mild and short-term skin reactions, and none had severe reactions. Approximately 2.6% of subjects had a signifi -cant improvement, 76.3% had a modest improvement, and 21.1% had a slight improvement. Each formulation was shown to be more effective than hydroquinone or to work faster in reducing pigmentation [102]. Revitol’s product “Skin Brightener” contains Lumiskin with some patented ingredients, namely diacetyl boldine, that affect the expression of tyrosinase [11].l-Ergothioneine (46, Fig.  7) is a sulfur-containing derivative of the amino acid histidine, which is available in mammals primarily through dietary sources. l-Ergot -hioneine is commonly found in tissues and cells that are continually exposed to oxidative stress, and its cytopro -tective and antioxidant effects have been reported [103]. Obayashi et al. evaluated the activity of l-ergothioneine to inhibit the expression of MMP-1 in dermal fibro -
blasts and its free radical scavenging effects, as well as an anti-inflammatory ability based on its inhibition of Fig. 6 Structures of phenylpropanoids and coumarins in cosmetics
Page 12 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 TNF-α expression [104]. It was observed that 2  mg/ml of l-ergothioneine decreased expression of MMP-1 by 52% in dermal fibroblasts after exposure to UVA and also showed excellent scavenging of ROS and inhibition of TNF-α. l-ergothioneine is now an important ingredient in anti-aging cosmetics [105].Glutathione (47, Fig.  7) is a tripeptide. It is composed of glycine, glutamic acid, and l-cysteine and is synthe -sized intracellularly. Its skin-lightening activity was an accidental discovery, and its popularity has since risen rapidly as topical applications have entered the market. The proposed skin-lightening mechanism is attributed to its tyrosinase inhibitory activity, leading to a transition from eumelanin to pheomelanin color and its action as an antioxidant [106]. Although intravenous glutathione is popular, there is no evidence of its efficacy and insuf -
ficient data on its safety, dosage, and duration of use. Additional randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials with larger sample sizes, long-term follow-up, and definitive efficacy results are needed to determine the rel -evance of this molecule in pigmentation and skin-light -ening disorders [107, 108].Niacinamide (nicotinamide, 48, Fig.  7) is the active form of vitamin B3/niacin. In addition to its antioxi -dant activities, it inhibits the transfer and interaction of melanosomes from melanocytes to keratinocytes. A study conducted to test the efficacy of a combination cream containing niacinamide, vitamin E, and panthe -nol displayed a marked improvement in skin texture and hyperpigmentation in test subjects over a 10-week period. The reported side effects were mild, the most common being a temporal burning sensation [109]. At present, there is no convincing evidence that niacinamide has a specific molecular target for controlling skin aging
and pigmentation. It is hypothesized that this substance contributes to the maintenance of homeostasis in the skin by regulating the redox state of cells and the various metabolites produced by it. Therefore, it is thought that niacinamide as a cosmeceutical ingredient would help to reduce skin aging and hyperpigmentation, particularly in patients with reduced  NAD+ pools in the skin due to external or internal stress or in the elderly [110].Porphyra-334 (49, Fig.  7) was obtained from sea cucumbers. Sunscreen preparations containing por -phyra-334 liposomes can reduce skin lipid oxidation and improve skin aging parameters such as wrinkle depth, low elasticity, and roughness. After irradiation, por -phyra-334 (49) did not produce reactive intermediates, indicating that this molecule converts absorbed UV radi -ation into harmless thermal energy [111].Since the beginning of life on Earth, cyanobacteria have been exposed to natural UV-A radiation (315–400  nm)
and UV-B radiation (280–315  nm), which affect cellu -lar biomolecules. These photoautotrophs need to evolve in order to survive and have therefore developed dif -ferent mechanisms to counteract UV radiation. These mechanisms include DNA repair, avoidance of UV radia -tion, and protection of cells through the production of Fig. 7 Structures of alkaloids in cosmetics
Page 13 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  photoprotective compounds such as carotenoids and mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) [112]. MAAs are highly stable over a wide range of temperature and pH values. Their antioxidant properties in aqueous and lipid solutions and photoprotective ability to avoid the adverse effects of UVA and UVB radiation make them excellent cosmeceutical molecules that have been growing expo -nentially over the years. In  vitro data strongly suggest that shinorin (50), as a naturally safe UV absorbing and antioxidant compound, has a high protective capacity against the various harmful effects of solar UV radiation [113].2.7  Sesquiterpenoids, Diterpenoids, and Triterpenoids: cedrol (51), widdrol (52), gagunin D (53), arjunilic acid (54), floralginsenoside A (55), ginsenoside F1 (56), ginsenoside Rd (57), ginsenoside Re (58), α‑hydroperoxy‑20(30)‑taraxastene (59)
xy‑20(30)‑taraxastene (59)The methanolic extract obtained from the plant Junipe -rus chinensis  (Cupressaceae) showed antioxidant (DPPH,  IC50 9.45  μg/mL) and anti-tyrosinase activity  (IC50 55.18 μg/mL). This was also evident in the α-MSH inhibi -tion of B16F10 melanoma cells  (IC50 13.67  μg/mL), and further examination of this extract led to the isolation of two anti-melanogenic sesquiterpenes, cedrol (51) and widdrol (52) (Fig.  8). In pure form (10 µg/ml), each agent inhibited tyrosinase and protein expression more mark -edly than arbutin (100 µg/ml) [114, 115].Gagunin D (53, Fig.  8), a highly oxygenated diterpene, was isolated from the marine sponge Phorbas sp. It was found to display anti-melanogenic activity by inhibiting the expression of tyrosinase and increasing the degrada -tion of tyrosinase in a reconstructed human skin model and mouse melana cells. In addition, gagunin D (53) inhibited the expression of proteins related to melano -
some metastasis. Due to its multifunctional properties, gagunin D (53) and its analogs can be considered poten -tial candidates for skin-lightening cosmeceuticals [2, 116].Triterpenoids are an important type of natural prod -ucts. Some of these triterpenoids have tyrosinase inhibi -tory activity, for example, arjunilic acid (54, Fig.  8), from Rhododendron collettianum, which exhibited 17 times higher inhibitory activity of tyrosinase than that of kojic acid [117]. Floralginsenoside A (55), ginsenoside Rd (57), and ginsenoside Re (58) (Fig.  8) isolated from the Panax ginseng berry also inhibited melanin production and the protein expression of microphthalmia-associated tran -scription factor (MITF) in melan-A cells [118]. In addi -tion, ginsenoside F1 (56), the main active component of P. ginseng, displayed the inhibition of melanin trans -fer on 3D human skin equivalent and MNT-1/HaCaT
fer on 3D human skin equivalent and MNT-1/HaCaT coculture system [119]. The flowers of Arnica montana (Asteraceae) were soaked in 80% ethanol, then parti -tioned with ethyl acetate and chromatographed to give pure 3β,16β-dihydroxy-21 α-hydroperoxy-20 (30)-tarax -astene (59, Fig.  8). It is a potent inhibitor of melanogen -esis in B16 melanoma cells with an  IC50 of 0.02  μg/mL compared to 0.25 μg/mL for 4-methoxyphenol (positive control). Its inhibitory activity is associated with the inhi -bition of TRP-1 (tyrosinase-related protein-1) and the suppression of MATF (microphthalmia-associated tran -scription factor) [120].2.8  Fatty acids: oleic acid (60), linoleic acid (61), linolenic acid (62)Fatty acids can also be used to treat hyperpigmented skin. Oleic acid (60), linoleic acid (61), and linolenic acid (62) (Fig.  9) can reduce melanin synthesis and tyrosinase activity levels. When treated with 25 μM oleic, linoleic, or
linolenic acid, the melanin content of B16 melanoma cells reduced to 62.4, 28.0, and 16.4% of initial levels, respec -tively. Tyrosinase activity was also significantly inhibited (87.0%, 31.9%, and 19.5% of initial levels, respectively).
reduced to 62.4, 28.0, and 16.4% of initial levels, respec -tively. Tyrosinase activity was also significantly inhibited (87.0%, 31.9%, and 19.5% of initial levels, respectively). Oleic, linoleic, and linolenic acids (0.5% ethanol, 0.01 ml/cm2) were applied topically daily for 3 weeks to guinea pigs exhibiting UVB-induced hyperpigmentation. A sig -nificant decrease in hyperpigmentation was noted after 2 weeks, with lighter skin tones following linoleic acid (61) treatment than linolenic acid (62). The linoleic acid (61) treatment led to almost complete removal of pigmenta -tion, leaving the skin color close to the original color. In addition, linoleic and linolenic acids were found to accel -erate the turnover of cells in the pigmented stratum cor -neum [121].It was shown that linoleic acid (61) and palmitic acid had different consequences on melanogenesis in B16F10 melanoma cells, with linoleic acid promoting a decrease
in cellular melanin levels (30%), while palmitic acid enhanced melanogenesis (150%). These effects were adjusted by the enzyme activity: linoleic acid inhibited 50% of the tyrosinase activity, while palmitic acid pro -moted the overexpression of tyrosinase (up to 190%). However, TRP-1 and TRP-2 activities were unaffected, suggesting that the activities should play a role in the post-transcriptional actions of enzymes for melanogen -esis. The mechanisms in the cells further showed that linoleic acid (61) reduced the amount of tyrosinase to 30% of initial levels, while palmitic acid led to a signifi -cant increment (up to 130% of initial levels). Radiolabe -ling assays showed that linoleic acid greatly accelerated the proteolytic degradation of tyrosinase compared to palmitic acid [122]. Linoleic acid selectively degrades a melanogenic enzyme via the ubiquitin–proteasome path -way, effectively regulating the proteasomal degradation of tyrosinase [123].
Page 14 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 2.9  Polysaccharides: Chitosan (63), fucoidan (64), Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide, Tremella polysaccharide, enzymatically hydrolyzed Cuscuta chinensis polysaccharide, Punica granatum polysaccharideChitosan (63, Fig.  9) is a natural polysaccharide from the marine. It inhibits the synthesis of melanogenesis-related proteins and the transfer of melanosomes. The interference of chitosan with melanosome transfer was assessed using human keratinocyte cells and human melanocyte. The results confirmed that the inhibitory activity of chitosan on melanocyte-keratinocyte was moderated by PAR-2, which is associated with melano -some transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes. Chi -tosan inhibited melanosome release from melanocytes and melanosome uptake by keratinocytes [124, 125]. Fucoidan (64, Fig.  9) is a complicated sulfated poly -
saccharide derived from brown seaweed with a wide Fig. 8 Structures of terpenoids in cosmetics
Page 15 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  range of biological activities. It competitively inhibited tyrosinase [125, 126]. The study provided substantial evidence that fucoidan inhibited the proliferation and tyrosinase activity of B16 melanoma cells. It would be useful in the treatment of hyperpigmentation and as a skin-lightening agent in the cosmetic industry [127].As a non-toxic natural antioxidant, Ganoderma luci -dum  polysaccharide can antagonize UVB-induced photoaging of fibroblasts. In UVB-induced skin pig -mentation experiments in zebrafish, Ganoderma luci -dum  polysaccharide was found to inhibit UVB-induced skin pigmentation. At the same time, it greatly alleviated the erythematous skin reaction induced by high-dose UVB irradiation in guinea pigs. In conclusion, this study showed that Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide can inhibit UVB-induced melanogenesis by antagonizing the
cAMP/PKA and ROS/MAPK signaling pathways and is a potential natural and safe whitening agent [128].The polysaccharide isolated from the hot water extract of a mushroom of the genus Tremella showed inhibition of the melanin formation and lightened the spots when applied to the skin [129, 130]. In addition, the polysac -charide of Tremella displayed good moisturizing effects. Another study showed that cosmetic products with 0.05% Tremella polysaccharides had better moisturizing capac -ity than those with 0.02% hyaluronic acid [131]. Recently, Tremella fuciformis polysaccharide has also been shown to be effective in inhibit melanogenesis and promoting wound healing in  vitro. It is potential as a novel skin-lightening agent was confirmed [132].Extracted Cuscuta chinensis with hot water, the poly -saccharide is hydrolyzed by mannase to produce enzy -matic Cuscuta chinensis polysaccharide (ECPS). ECPS exhibits anti-melanogenic activity by reducing the
expression of tyrosinase, TRP-1, and MITF in B16F10 melanoma cells but has no cytotoxic effect. It is expected to be a skin-lightening product [133].A polysaccharide from pomegranate (Punica grana -tum) peel was found to inhibit DPPH and ABTS radical activity by 69% and 88%, respectively, at a concentra -tion of 4 μg/ml. The polysaccharide at a concentration of 10 μg/ml inhibited mushroom tyrosinase by 43%, which strongly suggests its efficacy as a possible skin whitening agent [134].2.10  Carotenoids and Retinoids: astaxanthin (65), fucoxanthin (66), lutein (67), zeaxanthin (68), tretinoin (69, retinoic acid), retinol (70), retinaldehyde (71, retinal)Astaxanthin (65) and fucoxanthin (66) (Fig.  10) are nat -ural products belonging to the carotenoid family. It was reported that oral and topical administration of asta -xanthin (65) inhibited skin pigmentation, suppressed Fig. 9 Structures of fatty acids and polysaccharides in cosmetics
Page 16 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 melanin synthesis, and improved skin conditions [135]. Fucoxanthin (66) was found to inhibit tyrosinase activity in UVB-irradiated guinea pigs and UVB-induced mel -anogenesis in mice. It was also reported that oral admin -istration of fucoxanthin reduced the mRNA levels of proteins associated with melanogenesis in skin cells. This suggests that astaxanthin can negatively modulate mela -nogenic factors at the transcriptional level [136].One study supplemented 50 healthy subjects with mild to moderately dry skin with 10 mg of lutein (67) and 2 mg of zeaxanthin (68) daily (Fig.  10) or placebo for 12 weeks. The researchers noted significant improvements in skin tone and brightness in the treatment group [137]. Given that carotenoids are naturally occurring substances and are present in the diet, side effects are minimal. At high concentrations of about 20  mg/day, carotenoids may
cause a yellow to orange skin tone, which is reversible when carotenoids are discontinued [138]. Based on the evidence obtained so far, carotenoid-containing supple -ments are effective in skin lightening and are relatively safe to use; however, further studies need to be com -pleted to determine if there are any adverse effects with long-term use and the rate of pigmentation recurrence after cessation of treatment [10].Retinoids are analogs of vitamin A and are often used in combination with other agents such as hydroquinone Fig. 10 Structures of carotenoids and retinoids in cosmetics
Page 17 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  or steroids to promote their penetration or decrease their side effects. They act in a variety of ways—inhibit -ing tyrosinase, interfering with the transfer of melanin to keratinocytes, and accelerating pigment loss by stimulat -ing epidermal turnover. It often leads to irritating reac -tions such as erythema and flaking, and can sometimes cause undesirable hyperpigmentation. The most com -mon retinoid in skin whitening creams is tretinoin (69, retinoic acid, Fig.  10) [139, 140]. In addition, retinoids regulate keratinocyte differentiation and help to accel -erate exfoliation, thereby affecting the amount of mela -nin in the epidermis. By thinning the stratum corneum with retinoids, permeability can be increased, thereby increasing the penetration of depigmentation products in the epidermis and improving their bioavailability, thus
facilitating depigmentation [141]. Retinol (70, Fig.  10) is an alcohol, a precursor of retinaldehyde; this molecule exhibits depigmentation. Retinaldehyde (71, retinal, Fig. 10) is a precursor of retinoic acid that has been found to show depigmenting effects. Retinaldehyde is also used in anti-aging treatments for wrinkle reduction at a con -centration of 0.05% and appears to be more active, better tolerated, and less irritating than tretinoin [141].2.11  Miscellaneous: paeoniflorin (72), paeonol (73), 1‑deoxynojirimycin (DNJ, 74), mulberroside F (75), betulinic acid (76), 3,6‑anhydro‑ l‑galactose (77), hinokitiol (γ‑thujaplicin) (78), isoliquiritigenin (79), linderanolide B (80), subamolide A (81), origanoside (82), picrionoside A (83), salacinol (84), sweroside (85), urolithin A (86), urolithin B (87), vitamin E (88)The extract of Paeonia lactiflora (containing 53% paeoni -florin) and paeoniflorin (72) (Fig.  11) were used topically
on reconstructed pigmented human epidermal models, a 3D human skin equivalent that showed functional and morphological characteristics similar to those of human skin in  vivo. A significant reduction in melanin content was observed after topical application in both cases com -pared to the vehicle (DMSO) [142]. The ethanol extract of the Chinese herb Paeonia suffruticosa also showed decreases in melanin content, and paeonol (73, Fig.  11) inhibited the synthesis of melanin in a dose-dependent manner in human melanoma cells. These compounds have also been identified as the main ingredients in sun -screen and skin-lightening cosmetics [143].Notably, 1-deoxynojirimycin (DNJ, 74) (Fig.  11), a glycosidase inhibitor, is one of the major components of Morus alba leaves [144]. Three other molecules oxy -resveratrol 18, mulberroside F 75, and betulinic acid 76 were isolated from Morus alba (Fig.  11). The three compounds all showed tyrosinase inhibitory activities,
but 1-deoxynojirimycin could also have the effect of inhibiting melanin synthesis by affecting lipid glycosyla -tion [145–147].AHG (3,6-Anhydro-l-galactose, 77) (Fig.  11) is the main constituent of red macroalgae (Rhodophyta). 3,6-Anhydro-L-galactose showed potent skin whiten -ing activity in both human epidermal melanocytes and murine B16 melanoma cells. The activity was modulated by inhibiting melanogenesis [148].In search of new inhibitors targeting human tyrosinase, Yoshimori et  al. demonstrated the inhibition of mush -room tyrosinase and human tyrosinase by three isomers (α, β, γ) of thujaplicin and compared them. The results showed that γ-thujaplicin (78,  IC50 0.07  μM) (Fig.  11), was remarkably superior to kojic acid  (IC50 53.7  μM). SAR studies showed that the isopropyl position on the tropolone skeleton was the determining factor in the efficacy of thujaplicines. The potency of thujaplicines was ranked in the following order: γ > β > α-thujaplicines
[149].Isoliquiritigenin (79, Fig.  11) is a hydrolysis product of
efficacy of thujaplicines. The potency of thujaplicines was ranked in the following order: γ > β > α-thujaplicines [149].Isoliquiritigenin (79, Fig.  11) is a hydrolysis product of Glycyrrhiza glabra root. Isoliquiritigenin inhibited mela -nin production by activating the ERK signaling pathway to degrade MITF and reducing the expression of tyrosi -nase, DCT (dopachrome tautomerase), and TRP-1in SK-MEL-2 cells. Furthermore, isoliquiritigenin suppressed the transport of melanin in SK-MEL-2 cells and HaCaT co-cultured melanocytes by inhibiting Rab27a and Cdc42 protein expression [150].Wang et  al. recently found that linderanolide B (80) and subamolide A (81), natural products isolated from Cinnamomum  stems (Fig.  11), were shown to have good inhibition of mushroom tyrosinase in vitro at low doses. Treatments at low doses (0.01–1.0  μM) did not display significant cytotoxicity to human skin cells. Both com -pounds were shown to reduce human tyrosinase activity
by 50% and effectively inhibit (reduce by 40%) melanin formation in HEMn-MP cells after 48  h treatment at 1  μM. 80 and 81 both showed significant inhibitory potential for pigmentation in zebrafish without observ -able toxicity [151].A new phenolic glucoside, origanoside (82, Fig.  11), was isolated from the plant Origanum vulgare . Origano -side has anti-melanogenic effect. This compound sub -stantially diminished expressions of tyrosinase, MITF (microphthalmia-associated transcription factor), and TRP-2 (tyrosinase-related protein 2) in vitro and in vivo. Lightening of the skin was observed after 10  days of application of origanoside-gel samples on 12 mice [152].Picrionoside A (83, Fig.  11) was isolated from the leaves of Korean ginseng (Panax ginseng). Picriono -side A was found to inhibit mushrooms tyrosinase with an  IC50 value of 9.8  μM, approximately 10 to 6.8 times higher than that of arbutin and kojic acid, respectively.
Page 18 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 In melan-Ab cells, it decreased the content of melanin by 17.1% in a dose-dependent manner without affecting cell viability. Furthermore, picrionoside A-treated zebrafish displayed a significant inhibition of pigmentation. These results suggest that picrionoside A is an effective skin-lightening agent [153].Salacia, a medicinal plant, is widely used in India and Sri Lanka for the treatment of diabetes. Salacia extract is reported to contain components that inhibit α glucosi -dase activity. Salacinol (84, Fig.  11) is the active com -ponent of Salacia extract and has a unique structure of thiosuger sulfonium inner salt. Salacinol inhibited glu -cosidases I / II, which are involved in the initial stages of Fig. 11 Structures of miscellaneous in cosmetics
Page 19 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  N-linked glycosylation. Due to its potent activity, high hydrophilicity, and low cytotoxicity, salacinol is a poten -tial candidate for use as a skin-lightening agent for topi -cal application [154].Sweroside (85, Fig.  11) was isolated from the plant Lonicera japonica and was tested to reduce melanogene -sis in Melan-A cells by inhibiting the expression of tyrosi -nase, TRP-1, and TRP-2. This effect has been shown to occur in a dose-dependent manner by accelerating the Akt and ERK signaling pathways. In addition, sweroside was shown to be effective in  vivo by reducing melanin spotting in zebrafish embryos [155].Urolithin A (86) and urolithin B (87) (Fig.  11) are the major metabolites of ellagic acid found in human plasma. The tyrosinase inhibitory effects of UA and UB and cytotoxicity were evaluated in B16F10 melanoma cells. B16F10 cells remained viable and unaffected at concen -
trations up to 10 μM UA, but their melanin content was reduced to 56.5%, comparable to that of kojic acid (posi -tive control). The results showed that although neither urolithin A (86) nor urolithin B (87) affected tyrosinase mRNA expression, they inhibited tyrosinase activity competitively [156].Vitamin E (88, Fig.  11) exerts its skin lightening effects by inhibiting tyrosinase, interfering with lipid peroxida -tion in melanocyte membranes, and increasing intracel -lular glutathione levels. It is a mild skin lightener and is often used in conjunction with vitamin C with minimal side effects [157].3  Natural products as skin anti‑aging agentsThe skin is the protective layer of the body of all animals (including humans). As we age, the skin undergoes some changes influenced by certain external and internal fac -tors. The changes in the skin are one of the most obvious signs of aging and include sagging skin, wrinkles, dry -
ness, and age spots, accompanied by loss of fat and loss of natural smoothness of the skin. The skin is made up of three main structural layers, the outer layer being the epi -dermis, the middle part being the dermis, and the inner -most being the subcutaneous layer. As a person ages, the epidermis slowly becomes thinner, and the skin’s inherent ability to repair itself decreases. In addition, the number of melanocytes decreases, and aging skin becomes thin -ner, paler, and clearer with large pigmented spots, liver spots, or age spots. All these signs point to the need for anti-aging treatments as our bodies produce less collagen and elastin and lose their elasticity as we age. Through the use of anti-aging products or treatments, collagen production can be boosted, or its natural loss slowed. Anti-aging treatments are also necessary to reduce fine lines, wrinkles, and acne, and it also helps to firm up the
skin [158].Skin aging is a complex biological process involving a variety of factors. The underlying mechanisms of skin aging are not yet fully understood. The decline in physi -ological hormones is probably the most important fac -tor contributing to skin aging [159]. Others include UV radiation and the loss of the skin’s ability to repair itself (Fig.  12) [160]. There are several approaches that can be used to prevent and delay skin aging. In contrast to intrinsic aging, extrinsic aging is, to a large extent, pre -ventable. For example, skin aging can be prevented by avoiding harmful radiation from the sun, thus reducing the process of skin aging. Antioxidants such as ascorbic acid, tocopherols, polyphenols, and other natural prod -ucts act as free radical scavengers and help prevent and treat both intrinsic and extrinsic skin aging, thereby pre -venting cell damage. Phytochemicals such as green tea extract, quercetin, and resveratrol are also effective in
slowing down the progression of the aging process. In addition, topical treatments using cell regulators such as
extract, quercetin, and resveratrol are also effective in slowing down the progression of the aging process. In addition, topical treatments using cell regulators such as botanicals, polyphenols, and vitamin A derivatives also help to prevent aging. They act on collagen metabolism and thus stimulate the production of elastic fibers and collagen [161–163].The study reported that 14-deoxyandrographolide (89, Fig. 13) treatments reduced ROS production and pro-col -lagen type I secretion in dermal fibroblasts under oxida -tive stress conditions. Additionally, andrographolide (90, Fig.  13) treatments reduced TNF-α expression and IL-6 secretion under inflammatory conditions [164]. Andro -grapholide sodium bisulfate (91, Fig.  13) is a water-sol -uble compound. It was made from andrographolide by the sulfonating reaction. The results showed that topical application of 91 inhibited the UV-induced skin thick -ness, wrinkles, elasticity, and water content, while 91,
particularly at a dose of 3.6  mg/mouse, increased the skin collagen content by approximately 53%, decreased the epidermal thickness by approximately 41%, and pre -vented the UV-induced damage of elastic fibers and collagen fibers. In addition, andrographolide sodium bisulfate (91) reduced MDA levels by approximately 40% and upregulated SOD and CAT activities, and down-reg -ulated TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-10 production in UV-irradiated mice [165].The Japanese red pine (Pinus densiflora) is one of the more popular ornamental species and has long been widely cultivated in Asian countries. The tree’s green needle-like leaves have a tradition of culinary use, mainly for coloring and flavoring, and are also used as a tradi -tional medicine to combat inflammation. Chopped pine leaves remain green for up to 2 years, after which they gradually turn brown, a process that results in the pro -duction of large quantities of trans-communic acid (92,
Fig.  13). Trans -communic acid is a diterpenoid natural
Page 20 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 product with anti-microbial, anti-tumor, and antioxi -dant activities. Huh et  al. investigated the protective effects of its leaf extract and trans -communic acid against UVB irradiation in HaCaT keratinocytes and in a human reconstructed skin model. Treatment of HaCaT keratino -cytes with the leaf extract and trans-communic acid before UVB irradiation promoted inhibition of UVB-induced AP-1 transactivation and MMP-1 expression in a dose-dependent manner. Overall, these results suggest that trans -communic acid is a promising constituent for cosmeceutical preparations [166].Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) grows throughout the world and has long been widely used as a traditional medicinal herb. Glycyrrhizic acid (93, glycyrrhizin) and Glycyrrhetinic acid (94) (Fig.  13) are specific compounds isolated from licorice. Dipotassium glycyrrhizinate (95)
is the dipotassium salt of glycyrrhizic acid and is a widely used anti-inflammatory agent. Dipotassium glycyrrhiz -inate is chemically stable, water-soluble, and is used as an ingredient in cosmetics, with no reported side effects, even with continuous use [167–169].Piceatannol (96) (Fig.  13) treatment reduced UVB-induced MMP-1 activity, suggesting that it might be used in photoprotective cosmetic preparations [170]. Delphi -nidin (97) (Fig.  13) is a major plant pigment that gives some fruits and flowers their blue color and has antioxi -dant properties. This aglycone form of anthocyanins has been reported to have an effective inhibitory effect on UVB-induced skin damage and oxidative stress [171]. In a later study, the effects of delphinidin on keratinocyte properties under UVB treatment were investigated. The results showed that delphinidin at non-cytotoxic concen -trations (5 or 10 μM) could eliminate the harmful effects
of UVB irradiation on cell elasticity and restore the Fig. 12 Cause of aging [158]
Page 21 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  metabolic activity of HaCaT keratinocytes. The recovery of delphinidin-treated cells was more pronounced after UVB irradiation, proposing that the regeneration effect of this molecule may be due to inhibition of MMPs acti -vation and its antioxidant property [172].Phloretin (98) (Fig.  13) is a water-insoluble dihydro -chalcone that presents in apples. Treatment of HaCaT keratinocytes with phloretin disulfonate within 12  h of UVB exposure restored cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. In human skin exposed to minimal erythema -tous UVB dose, pre-treatment with phloretin was able to decrease the area of erythema, suggesting a potential application of this compound in skin photoprotection [173]. Phlorizin (99) (Fig.  13) affects epidermal cell pro -liferation through microenvironmental changes follow -ing miR135b downregulation and increased expression of type IV collagen [173].
type IV collagen [173].Sclareol (100) (Fig.  13) is a diterpene isolated from the plant Salvia officinalis, which has been widely used as a natural fragrance. This natural compound displays a variety of biological activities such as antioxidant, anti -microbial, anticholinesterase, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activities. Park et  al. applied reconstructed human skin and human dermal fibroblasts to assess the Fig. 13 Structures of natural products as anti‑aging agents
Page 22 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 protective effects of sclareol against the damage caused by UVB exposure and conducted a clinical trial to deter -mine its ability to improve the signs of photoaging of human skin. They observed that sclareol enhanced the proliferation of UVB-treated Hs68 cells while it inhibited the UVB-induced expression of MMPs by modulating the AP-1 component. Reconstructed human skin mod -els exposed to three UVB irradiations and subsequently treated with two different concentrations of sclareol (1 and 10  μM) showed reduced epidermal thickness and restored cell proliferation capacity compared to UVB irradiated 3D models not treated with this compound. In addition, in another clinical trial, researchers investigated the effect of a cosmetic formulation containing 0.02% sclareol on facial wrinkles. After 12 weeks of treatment, total wrinkle area, total wrinkle length, and percentage
of wrinkle area were significantly decreased in the test group compared to the control group, suggesting that sclareol may be an effective cosmetic constituent that helps reduce UVB-induced photoaging [174].Polysaccharides (EPS) were prepared from submerged mycelial cultures of the mushroom Grifola frondosa. This fungus produced a large amount of biomass, including abundant polysaccharides (7.2  g/L) after four days. The polysaccharide is proven to be a proteoglycan, consisting of 85.6% carbohydrates (mainly glucose) and 7.3% pro -teins. The photoprotective activity of EPS was evaluated in HDF (human dermal fibroblasts) exposed to ultravio -let-A. The results showed that EPS significantly inhibited the expression of human interstitial collagenase (MMP-1, matrix metalloproteinase) in UVA-irradiated HDF but did not show any significant cytotoxicity. The treatment of UVA-irradiated HDF with EPS resulted in a decrease in MMP-1 mRNA expression (maximum decrease of 61%
at 250  μg EPS/ml) in a dose-dependent manner. These results suggested that EPS obtained from G. frondose mycelial cultures may contribute to the inhibition of skin photoaging by reducing the MMP 1-related matrix deg -radation system [175].Oxidative stress is a major cause of skin damage associated with aging. The accumulation of hydrogen peroxide-related ROS triggers an increase in matrix metalloproteinases and elevated collagen degradation, a feature of skin aging. It has been shown that Poria cocos aqueous extract reduces levels of ROS and production of MMPs, inflammatory markers, and MAPK kinases while also increasing type I and III, TGF-beta, and also anti-oxidant activity in  H2O2 induced skin aging human der -mal fibroblast cells [176]. A number of potential cosmetic products have been developed from fungi for skin care, hair, and anti-oxidant products. Among fungi, mush -rooms are rich in secondary metabolites that are known
to have various medicinal properties. Schizophyllan, extracted from Schizophyllum commune , has a protective effect on the skin against UV radiation and also reduces inflammation of the skin [177].Cocoa beans (Theobroma cacao) contain approximately 50% of lipids, mainly triglyceride compounds such as linoleic acid, oleic acid, palmitic acid, and stearic acid, and a relevant flavonoid concentration including epicat -echin, catechin, procyanidin-B1, -B2, and procyanidin C1. Another important component theobromine (101, Fig.  13) from cocoa beans, exhibited the protection of photodamage in hairless mice exposed to UV irradia -tion by reducing wrinkles, alteration of dermal connec -tive tissue, and accumulation of collagen. A study has shown that theobromine in coco plays a key role in skin protection. The seed extract of cocoa (Theobroma cacao) has appeared in anti-aging products in recent years due to its anti-blue light effect. The extract contains cocoa
peptides, which have been shown in studies in vitro to act
has appeared in anti-aging products in recent years due to its anti-blue light effect. The extract contains cocoa peptides, which have been shown in studies in vitro to act during blue light stress by reducing ROS and maintain -ing opsin photoreceptors while increasing fibrillin-1, col -lagen I, and syndecan-4 [178, 179].The flower extract of Calendula officinalis is abundant in active compounds, including terpenoids, flavonoids, and volatile oils, such as carotenoids, rutin, quercetin, isorhamnetin, narcissin, kaempferol. A placebo-control, single-blind study was conducted using the extract for an 8-week application. The formulation showed increased skin hydration and tightness, with little effect on skin elasticity. Another placebo-controlled, single-blinded study showed that the extract was also able to reduce skin erythema and decrease trans-epidermal water loss, a parameter related to skin barrier function. It has been
recommended as an anti-pollution ingredient [180, 181].Several cosmeceutical products have been using natu -ral extracts such as snail secretions (Cryptomphalus (Helix) aspersa), starfish powder (Acanthaster planci), and various plant-based additives such as bamboo, green tea ( Camellia sinensis), red ginseng (Panax ginseng), and Chrysanthemum indicum [182]. There has been an increase in the application of botanicals with proven anti-aging effects. Other botanical extracts are often applied as cosmetics in anti-aging products, such as Butyrosper -mum parkii  (shea) butter, Glycine soja (soybean) oil, Heli -anthus annuus  seed oil, Simmondsia chinensis (jojoba) oil, and esters, etc. In recent years, the share of botani -cal preparations on the shelves of anti-aging products has gradually increased, and a preference for their use has developed [179].4  Natural products as moisturizersIn addition to acting as a powerful barrier to prevent
toxic substances or allergens from entering the body, the outermost stratum corneum (SC) of the skin has another
Page 23 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  essential function: to bind water molecules. The binding of water molecules provided by the deeper tissues of the skin and the atmosphere thus ensures the hydrated state of the skin [183–185]. The hydration of the skin is impor -tant for maintaining the barrier function of the epider -mis, the activity of various enzymes, and normal cellular activities such as desquamation and differentiation of the skin tissue. The hygroscopic components contained within the stratum corneum, collectively known as the NMF (natural moisturizing factor), inhibit TEWL (trans-epidermal water loss) [185].In order to improve the skin’s ability to absorb and redistribute water molecules and maintain the moisture balance of the SC, moisturizers improve skin hydration in two main ways: (a) by the formation of an occlusive film on the skin’s surface that limits the evaporation of water
molecules; and (b) by delivering hygroscopic substances that bind and retain water to the SC [186]. However, the complicated structure of the skin barrier controls the access of moisturizers to the deep epidermis [187]. Col -loidal delivery systems, such as micro-emulsions and nano-emulsions, as well as lipid and polymer-based par -ticulate systems, are effective in delivering moisturizers into the skin [188].The structure of SC can be expressed in terms of a ’brick and mortar model’ , where the keratinocytes repre -sent the ’bricks’ and the surrounding lipid bilayer is the ’mortar’ [189]. This physical arrangement of keratino -cytes and SC lipids is essential to prevent the skin surface from drying out and to maintain water content. Adequate levels of moisture in the skin are kept through the com -plex physiological and anatomical systems of the skin.It is well known that the pH of the normal skin surface is about 5, which is maintained primarily through the
filaggrin-histidine-urocanic acid pathway [190, 191]. The acidic environment of SC facilitates the synthesis of lipids that make up the skin barrier by hydrolytic enzymes and reduces TEWL, thereby promoting skin moisturization. In addition, an acidic environment reduces the activity of endogenous proteases and prevents the degradation of corneodesmosomes, thus maintaining the integrity and barrier function of the stratum corneum [192].Intercellular lipids of SC play an important role in pre -venting water loss from the skin’s surface. The intercel -lular lamellar lipids are arranged in an orthorhombic gel phase. It provides a compact and circuitous pathway that effectively controls the diffusion of water within the various layers of the SC, impeding evaporation to the external environment. SC lipids can be divided into free fatty acids, free sterols, and ceramides with a molar ratio of approximately 1:1:1. The lamellar lipids can
bind to water molecules through hydrogen bonding and allow the residing water molecules to remain within the corneocytes. Lipids are also applicated as specific types of moisturizers such as emollients and occlusives [193].Although every lipid plays an important role in the function of the epidermal barrier, ceramides are par -ticularly important because of their enormous contribu -tion. In addition, the polar groups of ceramides provide binding sites for water molecules. In a variety of patho -logical conditions, such as atopic dermatitis or aged dry skin, the lipid content of the SC decreases, and ceramides are drastically reduced [194]. An in  vitro investigation showed that equimolar ratios of the three essential SC lipids (ceramide, cholesterol, and free fatty acids) pro -mote barrier recovery. Incomplete ratios of barrier lipids led to abnormalities in the lamellar membrane, inhibiting skin barrier restoration at the lamellar level. These find -
ings suggest that exogenous application of physiological
led to abnormalities in the lamellar membrane, inhibiting skin barrier restoration at the lamellar level. These find -ings suggest that exogenous application of physiological lipids in appropriate molar ratios can be effective in treat -ing skin barrier dysfunction [193].A steep water gradient exists in the lower epidermis, suggesting that barriers to water loss are not evenly dis -tributed throughout the SC, but are located mainly at the junction between the SC and stratum granulosum (SG). These junctions are also known as tight junctions (TJ) or corneo-epidermal junctions. The structure of the TJ system consists of 40 transmembrane proteins, such as claudins, JAMs (junctional adhesion molecules), and occludins, as well as plaque proteins. Water diffusion into the space between epidermal cells is mainly regu -lated by claudins, JAMs, and occludins [195]. An animal model study showed that mice lacking claudin-1 died
shortly after birth due to excessive TEWL [196]. Lately, it has been suggested that the presence of TRPV4 con -trols the influx of water through the TJ. It appears that the function and structure of the TJ system are critical in maintaining SC water homeostasis. Furthermore, the regulation and enhancement of TJ proteins by key nutri -ents may be a novel way to improve skin moisture [193].Skin cleansing and moisturizing are two of the most fundamental aspects of human hygiene, and having an impact on the health and disease of the skin. Cleansing is the process of removing substances from the surface of the skin, while in some ways, moisturizing is the process of putting back in place what has been wrongly removed. Unfortunately, cleansers cannot distinguish between intercellular lipids and sebum, removing them all effec -tively. Moisturizers were therefore developed to put lipids back on the skin’s surface after cleansing and have
now evolved into vehicles for delivering active cosmetic ingredients. Moisturizers must satisfy four basic needs, namely: to smooth and soften the skin, to add moisture to the skin, to improve the appearance, and probably to bring ingredients to the skin surface. Moisturizers that
Page 24 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 do not satisfy these four attributes are hardly likely to be successful in the marketplace.All moisturizers currently on the market smooth and soften the skin; however, better formulations are more permanent. The smoothness and softness of the skin are an assessment of the keratinocyte tissue. As intercellu -lar lipids are cleared away, the edges of the keratinocytes fold. Moisturizers are used to create smooth, soft skin. Moisturizers are oily, thin substances that deposit tempo -rarily between the peeling cuticles until the next cleans -ing, at which point they must be reapplied.Moisturizers add moisture to the skin by delaying the loss of water from the skin’s surface, also known as trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL). This is achieved by form -ing an impermeable film on the skin. Increased hydration of the skin is the mechanism of action of most moistur -
izers. Moisturizers reduce the appearance of dehydrated fine lines, especially around the eyes where the skin is thin. Delayed TEWL will temporarily hydrate the skin. The reduction of wrinkles is a functional benefit and is the result of increased skin hydration, but it is only temporary.In addition, moisturizers improve the appearance of the skin, i.e., shine or brightness. These properties refer to the amount of light reflected from the skin’s sur -face to the observer’s eye, which is directly related to the smoothness of the skin’s surface. As the skin ages, the distribution of melanin, collagen, and hemoglobin becomes more uneven. Moisturizers can improve the optical appearance of the skin by providing a lightly pig -mented film that enhances the reflection of light from the skin’s surface. Pigments, such as iron oxide, and optically reflective materials, such as fish scales or mica, can be added to the moisturizer to generate an anti-aging effect.
All moisturizers restore skin water content through four basic mechanisms: occlusion, hydration, hydrophilic matrix, and photoprotection [197].NMF (natural moisturizing factor) is a mixture of hygroscopic components consisting mainly of amino acids and their derivatives, such as carboxylic acids and pyrrolidone, and it is found in mature corneocytes. Other components include urea, lactic acid, and electrolytes. These hygroscopic agents act as effective humectants due to their ability to effectively bind water molecules from the external environment, helping to keep the corneo -cytes hydrated. In addition, the strong ionic interaction between hydrated NMF and keratin reduces the mobil -ity of water, causing a reduction in intermolecular forces between keratin fibers, which enhances skin elasticity [193].Many factors can affect the NMF content of SC. Cer -tain environmental conditions such as very high (over
80%) or very low (below 10%) relative humidity, harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation, and regular soap washing can damage the function of the hydrolases responsible for the proteolysis of filaggrin, resulting in reduced NMF pro -duction and a dry skin surface. In addition to NMF com -ponent, urea also facilitates the hydration of SC. Subjects with atopic dermatitis or aged skin often show a signifi -cant reduction in urea content in the SC [198]. However, topical utilization of urea or arginine, its precursor, has been shown to raise urea levels in subjects with atopic dermatitis and in aged skin [199].Aquaporins (AQPs) are integral membrane proteins that form water channels across bio-membranes. The main function of AQPs is to transport water, glycerol, and other small molecule solutes across bio-membranes. AQPs also increase the movement of water molecules within the different layers of skin tissue and control hydration in the deeper layers of the epidermis. AQP3,
as a subtype, is the most abundant one in the skin [200].
within the different layers of skin tissue and control hydration in the deeper layers of the epidermis. AQP3, as a subtype, is the most abundant one in the skin [200]. Its distribution in the epidermis coincides with the water distribution in the epidermis and parallels the steep water gradient at the junction of SC and SG [201]. A reduced level of water content was observed in the skin of AQP3-deficient mice at the same time.Hyaluronic acid (HA, 102) (Fig.  14) is a polysaccharide belonging to an anionic, non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan. It can bind large amounts of water due to its hydrophilic structure. It is one of the main components of the der -mis. HA has also been reported to be present in SC. This humectant effectively hydrates the SC and modulates its physical structure by linking its hydrophobic zone to the SC lipids. However, the mechanism by which HA binds to SC lipids is not well figured out. HA has been reported
to stimulate SC barrier formation and keratinocyte dif -ferentiation through interaction with the receptor pro -tein CD44 [193, 202].HA has a wide range of molecular weights, from 2 ×  105 to  107 Da. The average molecular weight of HA can influ -ence its physicochemical properties. The biological activ -ity and penetration of HA in the skin also depend on its molecular weight, and different molecular weights of HA have different effects on the skin, high molecular weight for hydration, medium molecular weight for cell repair and wound healing, and low molecular weight for anti-aging. HA products have been increasing in demand in recent years. The present total market of HA (personal care, beauty, and pharmaceuticals) exceeded 200 tons. The most significant growth in the HA market has been in Asia and Europe. HA accounts for only 5%, while most products over 95% represent sodium hyaluronate. Nowa -days, HA, as the active constituents, is arguably one of
the most widely applicated in cosmetic formulations. It is used in cosmetic formulations in concentrations ranging from 0.2 to 1%. HA has a multitude of utilizations based
Page 25 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  on specific properties: high hygroscopicity, biocompati -bility, viscoelastic nature, and non-immunogenicity [203].In the early stages of development, hygroscopic materi -als, or simple lipids, were used as humectants, emollients, or occlusives to enhance the hydration status of the skin by directly diminishing TEWL or keeping moisture to the skin. However, a variety of new moisturizers with differ -ent activities have recently been studied, such as desqua -mation promoters, exfoliants, lipid precursors, barrier lipids, and protein regenerators. Newly discovered mois -turizers have shown to have a moisturizing effect that conventional moisturizers cannot be achieved [193].4.1  Occlusives and emollientsLipids and oils are frequently used in skin moisturizing formulations because of their emollient and occlusive properties. They enhance skin hydration by creating
a film on the skin surface and reducing TEWL. Petro -latum is one of the universally used occlusive agents in skin moisturizing formulations. It generally consists of long-chain aliphatic hydrocarbons. Petrolatum was very effective in decreasing skin water loss (> 98%), thereby improving skin hydration [193]. Apart from its water retention effect within the SC, petrolatum activates lipid biosynthesis and improves the skin’s barrier function. Test of petrolatum patch on patients with atopic derma -titis (AD) increased the SC’s thickness and enhanced the SC’s barrier function. In addition, petrolatum can pro -mote the expression of key structural proteins in the skin, such as loricrin and filaggrin [204]. Further examples of emollients and occlusives include fatty acids, long chain esters, lanolin, beeswax, mono-, di- and triglycerides.4.2  HumectantsHygroscopic substances with high or low molecular weight, such as hyaluronic acid, glycerol (103), panthenol
(104), sorbitol, serine, and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA, 105), have been used as humectants to improve skin moisture. Their main role is to attach and hold water molecules within the SC, thus affording moisture to the skin tissue and improving skin moisture.Glycerol (103, Fig.  14) is one of the most effective humectants and has been widely used in topical moistur -izing formulations. In addition to its highly hygroscopic properties, glycerol enhances the moisturizing capac -ity of the skin by preventing the lamellar structure of SC from crystallization at very low humidity. This effect of glycerol may be due to the interaction of the glycerol molecules with the SC bilayer, which increases the flu -idity of the film. The topical application of glycerol may also stimulate the digestion of desmosomes by raising the activity of desquamatory enzymes, thereby decreasing SC’s dry and flaky appearance [205]. In addition, glycerol
has been shown to promote the recovery of skin barriers damaged by repeated use of surfactants such as sodium lauryl sulfate in repeated washes. Still, the exact mecha -nism has not been elucidated [206]. In general, glycerol is considered a very effective and safe humectant for skin care. In addition, glycerol offers significant advantages, such as low cost, broad compatibility with other materi -als, and good chemical stability.Fig. 14 Structures of natural products as moisturizers
Page 26 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 Panthenol (104, Fig.  14) contains hydroxyl functional groups in its chemical structure and is often used as a humectant in formulations. Panthenol is an alcohol con -gener of pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), which is trans -formed by the enzyme in the skin to pantothenic acid, a part of coenzyme A, which plays a key role in maintain -ing an intact skin barrier. The addition of panthenol to moisturizing lotions and creams has been shown to pro -mote wound healing by activating the proliferation of epidermal cells [193].Pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA, 105) (Fig.  14), the main component of NMF, is often considered to be a highly effective humectant. It is able to absorb water molecules that are more than 250 times its own weight. When PCA is applied topically to the skin, it remains SC hydrated by attracting water from the lower epider -
mis, dermis, and the external environment. Because of its hygroscopic properties, PCA, PCA sodium, and its deriv -atives have been used to increase skin moisturization and relieve symptoms arising from dry skin. However, as with other common moisturizers, there is a universal limita -tion of having a simple function, such as maintaining moisture in the skin or decreasing TEWL [193].4.3  Desquamation stimulatorsDesquamation is a normal physiological process that removes corneocytes from the skin’s surface. Water-dependent hydrolytic enzymes degrade the corneodes -mosomes in the skin. In low moisture conditions, these hydrolytic enzymes do not function properly. If the activ -ity of these enzymes is low, it leads to a large accumula -tion of corneocytes on the skin’s surface, which reduces the skin’s moisture. One, therefore, achieves improved skin hydration by using active substances that stimulate the desquamation process.
the desquamation process.Urea ( 106, Fig.  14) acts as a desquamation stimulant. It disrupts epidermal proteins by forming hydrogen bonds between them and can dissolve the intercellular matrix of SC. It promotes desquamation. Topical application of urea at concentrations of 20–30% has been reported to act as a mild keratolytic agent and desquamation stimu -lant, thereby improving skin hydration [207]. In addi -tion, α-hydroxy acids, such as lactic acid, can improve SC hydration by reducing the concentration of calcium ions in the epidermis and promoting corneodesmolysis.4.4  ExfoliantsThe main function of exfoliants is to get rid of the out -ermost layer of dead skin cells from the epidermis to provide a smooth and glowing appearance to the skin. Several exfoliants have been used in skin formulations, such as α-hydroxy acids (AHA), retinol, salicylic acid, and enzymes (e.g., bromelain, papain, and proteases from Bacillus ). [208] In healthy skin, they stimulate cell
renewal and reduce the formation of dry scales on the skin’s surface, thus improving the skin’s moisturizing effect. Glycolic acid (107, Fig.  14) has been reported to stimulate the synthesis of collagen, promote the prolif -eration of cells and strengthen the skin barrier. Salicylic acid (108, Fig.  14), a β-hydroxy acid, is more lipophilic than AHAs. Others, such as bromelain and papain, also promote exfoliation by disturbing cohesion between corneocytes, stimulating the formation of the skin bar -rier and keeping a healthy appearance.4.5  Barrier enhancersLipid materials that constitute or strengthen the extra -cellular lipid barrier have been studied for improving skin moisturization. One study showed that choles -terol-based SC lipid mixtures significantly improved skin barrier repair and recovery in the epidermis of aged mice and in the skin of the elderly. As cholesterol levels in the skin decline with age, SC lipid mixtures
may be used to improve skin moisturization [209]. In later work, topical application of cholesterol enhanced the UV-induced human skin barrier in  vivo, implying
may be used to improve skin moisturization [209]. In later work, topical application of cholesterol enhanced the UV-induced human skin barrier in  vivo, implying the importance of cholesterol in the repair of damaged skin barriers. Free fatty acid-rich mixtures have also been shown to reconstruct the SC barrier in the skin of young mice [210].Various natural extracts have been investigated to pro -mote the effect of the SC barrier by improving the dif -ferentiation of keratinocytes. For example, an extract of the bark of the plant Betula alba significantly improved SC hydration and reduced TEWL [211]. Another study showed that topical application of a cream contain -ing 5% extract of Piptadenia colubrine improved skin capacitation and glycerol index. The extract improved the expression of AQP3, filaggrin, and involucrin, in cul -tured human skin explants and keratinocytes [212]. An ointment containing an 0.2% aqueous extract of the bark
of the plant Simarouba amara reduced TEWL. After 4 weeks, facial skin hydration was improved in 20 volun -teers [213].Some vitamins are also reported to improve skin bar -rier function. Nicotinamide has been shown to promote the function of the skin barrier by stimulating the expres -sion of mRNA for serine palmitoyl-transferase. This is a key enzyme for the biosynthesis of sphingolipids, stimu -lating the biosynthesis of ceramide and other intercellu -lar lipids of SC [214]. Ascorbic acid, or vitamin C, is also thought to lead to increased ceramide synthesis and skin barrier formation when applied topically [215].As previously mentioned, despite the benefits of ascor -bic acid on the skin barrier, the highly hydrophilic nature
Page 27 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  of ascorbic acid limits its effective delivery to the skin. To overcome this limitation, the design of effective skin care formulations used various vitamin C derivatives such as ascorbic acid sulphate, ascorbyl-6-palmitate, and tetrai -sopalmitoyl ascorbic acid. In addition, various drug car -riers are being investigated to enhance vitamin C and its delivery efficiencies, such as multilayer emulsions and nanoparticle systems [216].4.6  OthersIt is well known that a reduction of ceramide content in SC (stratum corneum) can lead to barrier disruption and dry skin. Topical ceramide-containing preparations can improve barrier function and dry skin in patients with atopic dermatitis [217]. The synthesis of endoge -nous ceramide is the first step in barrier recovery. Nine different ceramides have been characterized and syn -thetically replicated for inclusion in moisturizer formu -
lations differentiated by their polar head structure, as well as hydrocarbon chain properties [218].Protein regenerators can promote skin hydration by supplementing necessary proteins in the skin and rebuilding the function of skin tissues. Growth factors, peptides, and cytokines have been used to enhance the biosynthesis of proteins in the skin. Providing protein biosynthesis stimulants to the skin is also a promis -ing method of enhancing the skin barrier, which can improve skin hydration.Marine environments are unique. Marine pro -vides rich resources for the cosmetic industry. It was reported that a series of meroterpenoids have been isolated from the culture of Penicillium brasilianum , a marine sponge-associated fungus [219]. Interest -ingly, brasilianoid A (109, Fig.  14) exhibited a signifi -cant effect on filaggrin. Filaggrin is an essential NMF (natural moisturizing factor) that provides the ability to modulate the skin’s moisture barrier [220] and cas -
pase-14, which is responsible for sensitivity to UVB damage and controlling TEWL [221].5  Model systems for the evaluation in cosmetics5.1  Antioxidant activityA number of biochemical reactions occur in the cells and tissues of the body that are required for the proper func -tioning of the organism. These reactions often result in the production of free radicals with unpaired electrons, such as ROS. The body usually has mechanisms to bal -ance and neutralize the production of ROS through its inherent pool of antioxidants (SOD, catalase, and glu -tathione peroxidase), but in most cases, these antioxi -dants can be depleted due to the overproduction of ROS, exposing the body’s cells to oxidative stress. The body usually requires endogenous antioxidants to meet its needs. Skin exposure to excessive UV rays can produce ROS, which can lead to photo-aging of the skin. Numer -ous studies have demonstrated the role of oxidative stress
in patients with melasma, which has prompted research into several antioxidants for melasma treatment0 [222]. The important role of antioxidants in skin health has led to a continuous search for compounds that can scavenge natural sources of ROS.5.2  Anti‑inflammatory activityInflammation is a physiological response to injury, usu -ally manifested by pain, loss of function, redness, fever, and swelling. Overproduction of inflammatory mediators such as NF-κB, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8 (interleukins), ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1), induc -ible COX-2, PGE2, 5-LOX, and iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) may contribute to inflammatory disease. Atopic dermatitis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease usually associated with rash, redness, and severe itching caused by various physiological and environmental fac -tors. Anti-inflammatory natural products or extracts are often used in cosmetic formulations [105].5.3  Anti‑tyrosinase activity
5.3  Anti‑tyrosinase activityTyrosinase is a key rate-limiting enzyme in the mela -
tors. Anti-inflammatory natural products or extracts are often used in cosmetic formulations [105].5.3  Anti‑tyrosinase activityTyrosinase is a key rate-limiting enzyme in the mela -nin biosynthetic pathway; it converts tyrosine to DOPA (dihydroxyphenylalanine), which is subsequently oxi -dized to dopaquinone. The dopaquinone is then con -verted to brown-black pigment (eumelanin) by its auto-oxidation in the presence of dopachrome tau -tomerase. Alternatively, in the presence of glutathione or cysteine, dopaquinone can be converted to cysteinyl DOPA to form yellow–red pigment (pheomelanin) [105].The signal transduction pathways are responsible for increasing melanin production by regulating the mRNA expression of tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related proteins (TRP1 and TRP2). Therefore, the regulators of mRNA expression of tyrosinase, TRP1, and TRP2 are also used as natural whitening agents along with inhibitors of these
enzymes [223]. The complex process of melanogenesis is regulated by microphthalmia-associated transcription factors (MITF). Therefore, compounds that inhibit the expression of MITF will be inhibitors of the entire mel -anogenesis process [224].5.4  Anti‑hyaluronidase activityHyaluronidases are enzymes that degrade hyaluronic acid (HA), which forms an important component of ECM (extracellular matrix). They are common in nature and have been found in many classes of organisms, including fish, snakes, insects, and mammals. In humans, six dif -ferent hyaluronidases, HYAL1-4, PH-20, and HYAL-P1,
Page 28 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 have been described [225]. HYAL-2 degrades long-chain hyaluronic acid to short-chain hyaluronic acid, which is present in the extracellular matrix. Short-chain hya -luronic acid is transported into the cell after binding to the CD44 receptor. HYAL-1 is present in the cell and is responsible for the degradation of short-chain hyaluronic acid [226].The level and amount of hyaluronic acid present in the skin declines with age, thus, causing the inability of the skin to rejuvenate and repair itself and a loss of moisture. The excessive action of hyaluronidase leads to the for -mation of wrinkles. Inhibition of degradation of HA is central to the protection of the skin’s connective tissues. These enzymes activate several signal transduction path -ways that hydrolyze ECM and are important targets for the development of anti-aging cosmetic agents [227]. The
search for selective hyaluronidase inhibitors is crucial. The discovery of selective inhibitors that target one type of hyaluronidase without affecting another is very impor -tant because different isoforms of hyaluronidase adjust different physiological processes.5.5  Anti‑collagenase and anti‑elastase activityDermal fibroblasts produce two structural proteins in the ECM (extracellular matrix): elastin and collagen. These two proteins play a variety of protective roles in the skin [228]. Elastase is a metalloprotease that degrades elastin. When continuously exposed to elastase, it causes damage to elastic fibers, which leads to a decrease in skin elastic -ity and the formation of wrinkles. The activity of elastase has been found to increase significantly with age; there -fore, screening natural elastase inhibitors is of interest in the search for new active cosmetics to reduce wrinkles and skin aging [229].Collagen is the most critical component of the skin’s
extracellular matrix and is responsible for recovering skin strength and elasticity; therefore, the degradation of collagen in response to UV light is responsible for the aging process. During aging, levels of the skin’s extracel -lular matrix components (elastin, collagen, and hyalu -ronic acid) decrease, resulting in a loss of elasticity and strength that can lead to wrinkles.MMPs (Matrix metalloproteinases) are zinc-depend -ent endopeptidases that degrade extracellular matrix associated with certain physiological and pathological conditions. MMP-1 is a membrane-anchored metallo -proteinase that degrades collagen. Skin aging is usually the result of excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation that produces large amounts of ROS. These produced ROS motivates mitogen-activated protein kinases, which excite AP-1 (activated protein factor 1), leading to uncon -trolled expression of matrix metalloproteinases, resulting
in collagen degradation and skin wrinkling. Therefore, the natural inhibitors of AP-1 and MMP can be used as cosmeceutical components [230].5.6  Anti‑microbial activityThe skin is frequently colonized by non-pathogenic microorganisms such as fungi, Staphylococcus aureus, and streptococci. The density and distribution of skin microflora depend on the age of the individual and envi -ronmental factors such as humidity, temperature, and sebum production [231]. We know that the presence of microorganisms can lead to inflammatory skin diseases such as seborrhoeic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and folliculitis [232]. It is well known that atopic dermatitis is associated with the colonization increment of micro -organisms such as Staphylococcus aureus in the skin. The cosmetic industry has constantly been searching for bioactive constituents from natural sources instead of synthetic anti-microbial agents. In fact, these micro -
organisms can also be resistant to conventional topical anti-microbial agents [233].5.7  Others: cells test (B16, nHEM),
of synthetic anti-microbial agents. In fact, these micro -organisms can also be resistant to conventional topical anti-microbial agents [233].5.7  Others: cells test (B16, nHEM), melanocyte‑keratinocyte co‑culture system (SEM), guinea pig model, and zebrafishFor whitening, tyrosinase is only one of the direct targets, and there are many other targets and pathways associated with melanogenesis. Therefore, cell tests, as well as other methods of testing, are necessary. In most cases, B16 melanoma cells are used to screen for whitening agents. Inhibition of pigmentation in the cultures of melan-a or mel-ab melanocyte of the mouse or in nHEM (normal human melanocytes). Clearly, the use of the nHEM can better mimic the situation in  vivo. On the other hand, melanocytes are difficult to maintain in culture. The mel -anin content of these cells varies considerably between donors and between cell generation succession cultures.
In many laboratories, culturing skin melanocytes has become a routine research activity. However, investiga -tions have shown that the quality and quantity of pig -ment formed in cultured cells may be very different from that of the original skin pigment cells. Different culture media also have a significant effect on pigment forma -tion. It is, therefore, advisable to analyze the melanin in the cells prior to the start of the experiment. The basic differences in melanocytes isolated from dark and light skin remain in the corresponding cultures as observed by electron microscopy [234].To investigate the effect of pigment regulators in a melanocyte-keratinocyte co-culture model from mouse or human skin, experiments with α-MSH treated mel -anocytes resulted in a significant increase in melanin synthesis, cAMP , MC1-R expression levels, and tyrosi -nase mRNA, with better behavior in co-cultured mouse
Page 29 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  cells. This study suggested that keratinocytes may play a synergistic role in melanogenesis and may influence the production of pigments. The co-culture system showed that studying the interaction between keratinocytes and melanocytes is a more physiologically appropriate condi -tion and could be used as a reliable screening model for whitening compounds [235, 236].It was concluded that keratinocytes play a significant role in melanin generation and influence the pathways of melanin production. Co-cultures of keratinocytes and melanocytes from mouse or human skin more closely resemble the in vivo situation, and ultimately, SEM (skin equivalent model) may be the preferred in  vitro system for testing skin lightening agents [237]. In this regard, commercially available SEMs have recently been used in skin lightening investigations [238]. In addition to this,
the brownish guinea pig model has been applied in a number of studies in which pigmentation is induced by UV light or α-MSH. In the case of in  vivo studies, pre -vention of pigmentation induction by whitening agents can be demonstrated using a Minolta chromameter or by histochemical studies showing a reduction in DOPA-positive cells [239, 240]. Another animal test used for whitening studies is the zebrafish, which has also proved useful in demonstrating the in vivo toxicity of whitening agents [241, 242].6  Natural fragrances and their applicationFragrance is an important part of cosmetic products. It is usually considered to be the primary factor in con -sumer choice. Fragrances also play a substantial role in masking undesirable odors produced by oils, fatty acids, and surfactants. Essential oils are an important asset to the cosmetics industry because, with emitting pleas -ant fragrances in different products, they also act as
active agents and preservatives while providing multi -ple benefits to the skin. In addition, the requirement for natural compounds has greatly contributed to the cos -metic industry’s interest in plant derivatives, particularly essential oils. Given the potential negative health risks associated with synthetic fragrance chemicals, this has prompted popular cosmetic companies to endorse natu -ral fragrances and choose minimally processed natural constituents. High-value essential oils used as fragrances include lavender, citrus, tea tree, eucalyptus, and other floral oils. Linalool, limonene, geraniol, citral, and citron -ellol are appreciated as fragrance ingredients for use in different cosmetic products [243].There are approximately 400,000 known plant spe -cies worldwide, including around 2000 essential oil plants from approximately 60 families [244]. Essential oils are widely used throughout the world, and their use
is increasing year on year due to the strong demand for pure natural ingredients in various industries. Demand comes mainly from the following markets: food and bev -erages (35%), cosmetics, fragrances, and aromatherapy (29%), households (16%), and pharmaceuticals (15%). Especially in cosmeceutical industries, essential oils such as orange have been gaining significant ground as it pro -vides a variety of health benefits such as firmness, skin elasticity, and the treatment of acne, scars, and stretch marks. Orange and lemon essential oils also have antisep -tic properties, which makes them ideal constituents for hair and skin care. Several essential oil products are pro -duced on a large scale, with over 50,000 tons of orange oil, over 30,000 tons of corn mint oil, and over 10,000 tons of lemon oil. Essential oils obtained from various fruits of the Citrus genus are very popular natural oils, accounting for the largest commercial share of natural
fragrances and flavors.It should be understood that if a substance is included in the fragrance group, it must be able to evaporate at
accounting for the largest commercial share of natural fragrances and flavors.It should be understood that if a substance is included in the fragrance group, it must be able to evaporate at room temperature (volatile) and able to bind to olfac -tory receptors. Usually, we have two olfactory routes, i.e. the orthonasal (directly through the nose) and the ret -ronasal (odor entering the nose from the mouth) [245]. Chemicals with masses less than 300 Daltons interact with proteins in ORNs (olfactory receptor neurons) on the surface of olfactory epithelial cells. Stimulation of the ORNs then produces a sensory profile in the brain that represents the chemical signatures from the external world. Some efforts have been made to collect all odor -ants and their retention times, as received in gas chro -matography–olfactometry. In other words, unlike other sensory inputs, odors go directly to the limbic system and cerebrum without being processed by the thalamus. This
means that our bodies respond emotionally and are phys -iologically aware of odors before we even think about them [246]. The olfactory receptors contain a total of 1000 different proteins encoded by 3% of human genes.Essential oils (EOS) generally consist of a mixture of many aromatic and/or aliphatic (non-aromatic) com -ponents. All of these compounds contribute to the per -ceived aroma. They are soluble in ether, alcohol, and oils but not in water. The oldest method of obtaining EOS is cold pressing. This approach dates back to ancient times and is relatively inexpensive. Another equally ancient technique is enfleurage, a method of extracting volatile compounds from plants using cold animal fats such as tallow or lard. After being left for several days, the plant material is removed and replaced with fresh material. This process is repeated several times. Finally, the fat con -taining the essential oils is mixed with alcohol, in which
the aromatic substances are dissolved out by the alcohol and separated from the fat. After the alcohol solution has evaporated, the absolute essential oil is obtained.
Page 30 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 This technique is used for flowers that are very sensitive to temperatures, such as orange, tuberose, or jasmine. It was applied in France and ancient Egypt. The process is done with hot fats (60–70  ℃). Because of the high cost, hot and cold enfleurage was abandoned and replaced by more efficient solvent extraction with low-boiling hydrocarbons, aliphatic esters, ethyl alcohol, or florasol (1,1,1,2-trifluoroethane). The disadvantage of this extrac -tion method is that organic solvent residues are left in the final product. Another modern extraction method is the use of supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) with commonly used solvents, such as butane, propane, ethylene, or car -bon dioxide, which avoids the presence of organic solvent residues [247]. Supercritical carbon dioxide has also been used to isolate EOS from various plants, such as Corian -
drum sativum, Mentha spicata, Eucalyptus globulus, or Ocimum basilicum  [248–251].The components of EOS are temperature sensitive, and direct distillation may cause them to break down, mak -ing them inapplicable. The solution is steam distillation. In the classic version, the plant material is placed in an alembic above boiling water on a perforated tray. The steam that passes through removes the volatiles. The dis -tillate is collected in a receiver, and since EOS is insoluble in water, the upper (or lower) layer of EOS is easily sepa -rated. The collected material can be fractionated and dis -tilled under reduced pressure. In hydrodistillation, the plant material and water are heated together in an alem -bic, and the evaporated essential oils and vapors are con -densed out. This process can be supported by heating the plant material/water mixture with microwaves in order to separate the aromatic substances more efficiently
[252–254]. The disadvantages of the above methods are the long extraction times, the hydrolysis of the extracted compounds (e.g., esters), and the residual solvent in the final material. Lucchesi et al. [255] developed a new tech -nique called SFME (solvent-free microwave extraction), in which fresh plant material is irradiated in a microwave oven without any solvent. The authors reported a signifi -cant reduction in time and energy compared to classical hydrodistillation procedures.Ionic liquids (ILs) are non-aqueous salt solutions that consist mainly of ions, as opposed to ordinary liquids, which consist predominantly of electrically neutral com -pounds. Ionic liquids are non-flammable due to their low vapor pressure and remain liquid between 0 and 140 °C. In green chemistry, ionic liquids have been used for a variety of purposes, including the extraction of natural products from biological resources [256]. The so-called
DESs (Deep Eutectic Solvents) constitute an alternative to ILs. They consist of mixtures of two or more solid or liquid constituents that, at a given composition, exhibit a high melting point of depression at room temperature and become liquids. NaDESs (Natural Deep Eutectic Sol -vents), when they are bio-based, i.e., their components are all plant primary metabolites (e.g., small organic acids or bases, alcohols, sugars, amino acids, and amines), form liquids at ambient temperature in different combi -nations and at specific molar ratios [257]. Conventional extraction processes usually require massive energy con -sumption. In the route of minimizing energy consump -tion, one can assist existing processes with enhanced techniques (such as ultrasound-assisted extraction, pressurized fluid extraction, and microwave-assisted extraction) to produce high-quality extracts for innova -tive fragrances [256].The chemical diversity of VOCs (volatile organic com -
pounds) exuded by plants throughout the world affords the rich olfactory experience of floral fragrances. The fra -
tive fragrances [256].The chemical diversity of VOCs (volatile organic com -pounds) exuded by plants throughout the world affords the rich olfactory experience of floral fragrances. The fra -grance components of perfumes are a complex mixture of diverse VOCs. The vast majority of these compounds are monoterpenes or sesquiterpenes (their monofunctional derivatives). Also, many aromatic and aliphatic alcohols, esters, aromatic aldehydes, ketones, phenols, ethers, and heterocycles are included. In some cases, essential oils have high aromatic content, and they can be separated by steam distillation or fractionated freezing [247].Essential oils consist of approximately 20–60 com -ponents in different concentrations, usually with two or three main constituents in fairly high concentrations (20–70%), while others are existent in trace amounts. However, the flavor input does not depend strictly on the concentration of each individual compound but on
a specific odor threshold decided by volatility and struc -ture. Thus, even minor constituents from degradation or oxidation reactions can have a big impact on flavor if their aroma value is sufficiently high. The absence of one component will likely alter the aroma. Essential oil com -ponents often have one or more asymmetrical chiral car -bons that exhibit optical activity. The chirality of these compounds can also have an impact on their aroma. Geographical factors may also influence the chemical constitution of essential oils. The chemical composition of essential oils may also be influenced by multiple fac -tors such as plant physiology (organs, ontogenesis), envi -ronment (weather conditions, soil composition), and genetics of the plant [243].Lavender oil can be extracted from Lavandula angusti -folia, whose main components are linalyl acetate (~ 35%) and linalool (~ 37%) [258]. The largest use of linalyl ace -
tate is in the perfumery industry, where it is applied in many perfume combinations, such as ylang-ylang, laven -der, and floral scents. Linalyl acetate is more volatile than linalool and is used to create fresh, top notes in perfumes.A derivative of anisic acid is methyl N-methyl anthra -nilate (110, Fig.  15), which is abundant in the Citrus
Page 31 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  reticulata. The essential oil comes from the leaves of this plant, which is also the main source of this raw mate -rial, which is used in the perfume industry for toiletries, shampoos, and household cleaning agents [247].Another naturally isolated ester is benzyl acetate (111, Fig.  15). Benzyl acetate is widely applied in the perfume industry. Although the ester is easily obtained by the reaction of acetic acid and benzyl alcohol, this natu -ral compound is far superior to its synthetic product in terms of depth of flavor. It is available by the fractional distillation of ylang-ylang oil extracted from the flowers of Cananga odorata. Its content varies between 5.5 and 17.5%. This especially charming material is the result of the fractionation of the ylang-ylang flowers, which dis -plays perfect harmony with jasmine flowers [247].2-Phenylethanol (112, Fig.  15) can be obtained in its
pure form by fractional distillation of rose essential oil or by varied synthetic routes. It has a charming rosy scent. In rose essential oil, 2-phenylethanol is accompanied by the terpene alcohol geraniol (113, Fig.  15). In addition, this molecule can also be found in other EOS, such as palmarosa, geranium, Cymbopogon martini, or Monarda fistulosa L. var. menthifolia. In the last plant, this con -stituent is present in more than 95% of the EOS [259]. The demand for this constituent is relatively high, esti -mated at over 1000 tons per year. It is widely used in the perfume industry as well as in domestic and household products [260]. Due to the high demand for geraniol, it can also be obtained by semi-synthesis.Cedrol (114, Fig.  15) is obtained from Texas cedar oil and is a precursor to other aromatic substances used in the cosmetic industry, such as cedryl acetate [247]. Due
to the overexploitation of sandalwood, its resources are being significantly reduced, especially in Indonesia and India. Sandalwood oil is obtained from trees that are at least 30 years old. The price of these oils is currently close to US$100,000 per ton. Sandalwood EOS is widely used as a fixative in the perfume industry [247].The agarwood scent is another valuable fragrance. The Aquilaria  trees (agarwood) are endangered and pro -tected. This scent has been present in Chinese, Indian, Persian, or Jewish societies for centuries and is still highly valued today. This scent cannot now be synthesized; although chemical substitutes exist, they are still far from imitating the natural product. The process occurs natu -rally (e.g., mechanical damage to the tree and as a result of insect activity) or is initiated by humans (decay by bur -ying pieces of wood in the moist ground). The oil or resin appeared afterward. Sometimes it was necessary to decay
plants (genus Aquilaria , family Thymelaeaceae) by means of mold (like ascomycetes, Phaeoacremonium parasitica) [261].The safety of essential oil use also requires attention. Photosensitization may occur when phototoxins in essen -tial oils are used to the skin in the presence of sunlight or ultraviolet A (UVA) light. For example, furanocoumarins, which are present in some plants, are phototoxins. The most common furanocoumarins are psoralen (115) and bergapten (116) (Fig.  15). When essential oils containing these phototoxic compounds are applied to the skin and exposed to UVA light, different inflammatory skin reac -tions occur, ranging from pigmentation and blistering to severe full-thickness burns [262]. Twenty-six possible allergenic fragrances have been defined [263], of which 18 may be present in essential oils so that if these aller -
genic fragrances are present in concentrations higher Fig. 15 Structures of some natural fragrances (110–114) and phototoxic compounds (115, 116)
Page 32 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 than the permitted concentration of 0.01% in shampoos and shower gels (rinse-off products) and higher than 0.001% in massage oils, body oils, and creams (leave-on products), they must be declared on the packaging or in the information brochure [264].The plant kingdom, which has served mankind for cen -turies, is a vast treasure reservoir of compounds with aromatic properties. A large number of organic chemists from industrial and academic laboratories are constantly modifying known chemical structures and synthesizing new molecules with interesting aromatic properties that do not exist in nature, so we can look forward to new olfactory experiences [247].7  Approaches for enhanced skin permeation of bioactive compoundsFrom empirical formulations developed in ancient Baby -lonian and Egyptian civilizations over 5000 years ago to leading-edge chemical, physical, and nanotechnological
methods based on modern knowledge of skin physiol -ogy, composition, and penetration ways, different strat -egies have been explored and developed to facilitate the dermal penetration of different constituents. Current approaches include (1) physical methods such as ionto -phoresis, sonophoresis, electroporation, thermophoresis, thermal ablation, laser microporation, or microneedle patches [265]; (2) encapsulation in applicable nanocar -riers (nanoparticles, ethosomes, liposomes, aquasomes, niosomes, etc.) [266]; (3) use of stimuli-responsive mate -rials (wearable devices, patches, etc.) and/or engineered controlled-release [267]; and (4) the inclusion of chemi -cal permeation enhancers (e.g., fatty alcohols, fatty acids, peptides, alcohols, glycols, surfactants) [268]. Some of these methods can be used in combination to further increase the efficiency of transdermal permeation.CPEs (chemical permeation enhancers) work mainly
CPEs (chemical permeation enhancers) work mainly by interacting with the compounds that make up the SC (stratum corneum). SC is the outermost layer of the skin and limits the penetration of the derma/transdermal. CPEs include the compounds of different chemical fami -lies such as isopropyl alcohol (alcohols), propylene glycol (diols), menthol (terpenoids), eucalyptus oil (essential oils), dimethyl sulfoxide (sulfoxides). Of more than 600 chemical permeation enhancers to date, they act through different routes, the most common of which is the disrup -tion of cell membrane phospholipid bilayers [269]. Thus, an important part of CPEs is amphiphilic compounds such as fatty alcohols, fatty acids, and their correspond -ing esters, and a number of other non-ionic, cationic, ani -onic, and zwitterionic surfactants. CPEs remain the most cost effective and simplest method for the permeation of different solutes, and their use is widely spread [270]. In
order to better understand how they work, it is necessary to develop new types of CPEs and to find more biocom -patible alternatives and greener, such as those derived from amino acids or essential oils [271, 272].ILs (Ionic liquids) have recently gained importance as an important class of CPEs. In vivo and in vitro tests have confirmed the superior performance of choline and geranic acid (CAGE) in enhancing the transdermal pen -etration and absorption of nobiletin (117, Fig.  15), with bioavailability through the transdermal route found to be 20-fold higher than that of the crystalline form of the oral drug [273]. Fang et al. prepared different ILs by acid–base binding of α-lipoic acid to a series of amines, and the ILs were consequently formulated with liquid oil mixtures to form water-in-oil nanoemulsions (NEs) [274]. Capar -ica et al. used IL-based emulsions as promising tools for enhancing the solubility and transdermal penetration of
the relevant natural antioxidants in cosmetics, namely caffeic acid, ferulic acid, p-coumaric acid, and rutin [275].
enhancing the solubility and transdermal penetration of the relevant natural antioxidants in cosmetics, namely caffeic acid, ferulic acid, p-coumaric acid, and rutin [275]. Also focusing on skin care applications, Chantereau et al. reported in 2020 that bioactive ILs were obtained by pairing choline cations with anionic forms of B vitamins, i.e., vitamin B3 (niacin), vitamin B5 (pantothenic acid), and vitamin B6 co-factor (pyridoxine) [276].Nanoemulsions (NEs) allow drug-containing droplets to be dispersed in a very high interfacial region. Their role in promoting the transdermal absorption of hydro -philic (oil-in-water NEs) or lipophilic (water-in-oil NEs) constituents has been demonstrated [9]. Nanoemulsions currently in use or being studied have different constitu -ents and complexities based on different amphiphiles, ranging from natural lipids to synthetic surfactants and combinations of them [277, 278]. The use of essential oils
in the formulation of NEs has also been mentioned. For example, an NE based on eugenol was developed that combines the anti-inflammatory and antifungal proper -ties of the main essential oil component, eugenol, with those of naftifine, a drug used to address fungal skin infections [279]. More recently, other types of liposome-inspired vesicles have also been developed, such as trans -ferosomes, ethosomes, and niosomes [9].8  Cosmetic preservation and safety assessment in cosmeticsCosmetics are a nutrient-rich medium that is very con -ducive to microorganisms’ colonization and growth. Cos -metics, like any products containing water and inorganic/organic compounds, need to be protected from micro -bial contamination to ensure safe use by consumers and extend their shelf life. The main objectives of microbial safety are to protect the consumer from potentially path -ogenic microorganisms and to protect the product from
deterioration. This is ensured by physical, chemical, or physiochemical strategies. The most common strategy is
Page 33 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  based on the application of antimicrobial agents, either through the use of natural or synthetic molecules or multifunctional constituents. The current validation of preservation systems follows the GMPs (application of Good Manufacturing Practices), the control of raw mate -rials, and the verification of the preservative effects by appropriate methods, including challenge tests. Preserva -tives described in the positive list of regulations are iso -thiazolinone, parabens, formaldehyde-releasing agents, organic acids, chlorhexidine, and triclosan. These chemi -cals have different mechanisms of antimicrobial action, which depend on their chemical structure and functional groups. Preservatives act on several targets; however, they may have toxic effects on the consumer. In fact, pre -servatives used in high concentrations are more effective
from the point of view of preservation but are toxic to the consumer, while at low concentrations, microorgan -isms can develop resistance [6]. In addition, the modifica -tion of cosmetic products may also be due to exposure to atmospheric oxygen, so antioxidant preservatives inhibit oxidative phenomena and the formation of free radicals.Studies have reported that the most common micro -organisms found in cosmetic products include Kleb -siella oxytoca, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Candida albicans, Escheri -chia coli , Serratia marcescens, and Enterobacter gergo -viae, but also other fungi, bacteria, and yeasts. Microbial contamination may occur during the production process (primary contamination) and/or during consumer use (secondary contamination) [280]. GMP must be strictly adhered to during the manufacture of cosmetics, micro -biological contamination must be avoided, and cosmetics
must be prepared under strictly aseptic conditions. The risk of contamination can be reduced by strict control in the procedures of water treatment, microbiological control of raw materials, disinfection of equipment, and qualification of personnel. The challenge tests are used in the product development process to determine the effi -cacy and stability of preservative systems over a period of time. The test involves inoculating a quantity of product with a known number of microorganisms (yeasts, bac -teria, and molds) [6]. The most commonly used antimi -crobial preservatives can be divided according to their chemical composition, namely: alcohols, organic acids, phenols, formaldehyde releasers, aldehydes, isothia -zolinones, quaternary ammonium compounds (QAC), biguanides, nitrogen compounds, inorganic compounds, and heavy metal derivatives.The widespread use of preservatives has had undesir -able and detrimental effects on consumers. After per -
fumes, preservatives are the second most common type of allergens implicated in cosmetic allergies. The cos -metic industry faces enormous challenges that require us to find new alternative molecules through appropriate standards, new systems, or improved strategies already in place. The continued search for non-toxic and effective preservatives will always be necessary.9  ACNE and axilla odorsAcne is a diverse and chronic inflammatory state that occurs within the capillary units that include the hair, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands. Non-inflammatory lesions include blackheads and whiteheads characteristic of acne, and inflammatory lesions include pustules, cysts, and nodules. Acne is primarily associated with Propioni -bacterium acnes. Approximately 94–95% of the adoles -cent population and 20–40% of adults < 25% of women suffer from acne. There are four main causes of acne: hyperactivity of the sebaceous gland (SG), aberrant depo -
sition of keratin, the proliferation of Propionibacterium acnes, irritation, and inflammation. Other factors are
hyperactivity of the sebaceous gland (SG), aberrant depo -sition of keratin, the proliferation of Propionibacterium acnes, irritation, and inflammation. Other factors are also included, such as heredity, diet, hormones, and other bacterial species [281]. In vitro acne models used for the study are SG organ culture [282], rat preputial sebocyte monolayer culture [283], follicle model [284], squalene oxidation model [285], and testosterone-induced model [286]. There are different animal and human models in  vivo available for acnegenesis, such as the rabbit ear assay, the Mexican hairless dog, and the Rhino mouse model, which bear a closely resemblance to acne occur -rence [287].It was reported that spironolactone (118) is effective in the treatment of acne on the face, back, and chest in women, and its efficacy has been maintained with long-term use. Of the 110 patients who met all eligibility requirements, 94 have improved their CASS scores, and
61 had complete clearance to 0 [288]. Olumacostat gla -saretil (119) is a well-tolerated prodrug inhibitor of fatty acid synthesis, with statistically and clinically significant reduction of lesion numbers in patients with moderate to severe acne [289]. The study reported on the clinical evaluation of the efficacy of Eladi Keram in the treatment of acne. It showed a clinically significant and statisti -cally meaningful improvement in upper body acne vul -garis under randomized and double-blinded conditions [290]. Eladi Keram is a commercially available Ayurvedic herbal formulation including over 20 medicinal herbs with a long anecdotal evidence base in India for the effec -tive treatment of various skin conditions, including acne. Studies have also been reported on the inhibitory effects of rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) extracts on inflam -mation caused by Propionbacterium acnes in vitro and in vivo. The results confirmed that the ethanolic extract
of Rosmarinus officinalis reduced the inflammation induced by P. acnes in vitro and in vivo. The mechanism of action of the rosemary extract is currently unknown,
Page 34 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 and it may inhibit NF-κB activation and TLR2 expres -sion. Rosemary’s three bioactive compounds, rosmarinic acid, carnosic acid, and carnosol, also showed varying degrees of modulation of P. acnes-induced cytokine pro -duction [291].Today, armpit odor is considered a stigma in society and is the target of what represents a multi-billion market for deodorants and antiperspirants. Axillary odor is not a simple by-product of our metabolism but is specifically the result of an intricate interaction between (1) specific glands, (2) secreted highly specific odor molecules bound to amino acids, and (3) selective enzymes present in microorganisms on our skin that provide a natural ’con -trolled release’ mechanism. Through multidisciplinary research, scientists have elucidated the structure of key body odor molecules, isolated and characterized conju -
gates of body odor molecules with secreted amino acids, identified the enzymes responsible for odor release, and developed these enzymes as screening targets for find -ing specific active compounds. This target has led to the development of deodorant actives and the market intro -duction of cosmetic actives for this specific action [292].Two odoriferous steroids, formerly defined as key odor -ants and pheromones in the pig, 5α-androst-16-en-3-on (120) and 5α-androst-16-en-3α-ol (121), were detected in human sweat firstly. Then the odorant acid 3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid (122, 3M2H) was characterized [293]. It is not the predominant odorant acid in sweat, but the jointly relevant HMHA (3-hydroxy-3-methyl-hexanoic acid) is even more abundant and quantitatively the most dominant human odorant. It has a very low detec -tion threshold, and our nose is able to detect levels as low as 0.0044  ng/L of air [294]. A diverse branched or
unbranched, saturated, unsaturated, or hydroxylated acids (123–126) were also isolated lately. The third class of odorants (different sulfanylalkanols 127–129) is only present in axilla secretions in small amounts.It was found that glutamine conjugates appear to be the key precursors for odorant acids. The glutamine conjugates as the precursors/substrates were catalyzed by an odor-releasing enzyme (AMRE) from a highly odor-forming bacterium strain, Corynebacterium sp. Ax, specifically to release free odorant acids. Using this recombinant enzyme, a high-throughput screening assay was designed, allowing the rapid screening for inhibitors for potential deodorants and antiperspirants. At the same time, two sulfanylalkanols-releasing enzymes were also encoded and cloned [292] (Fig. 16).10  Conclusion and outlookWith the development of the times, more and more con -sumers are paying more attention to safe, healthy and effective care methods. Natural products and botanicals
(Figs.  17, 18)  continue to play an important role in the development of cosmetics worldwide. New resources (including marine biological resources, microbial prod -ucts [295], bioengineered products, etc.) will continue to be explored. "Green, natural, and environmentally friendly" has become the dominant call for the global consumer goods industry. From resource utilization to research and development, from production to packag -ing, every step of the process will become greener and more environmentally friendly.The cosmetic industry worldwide has been evolv -ing over recent years. Constant product development and reformulation are required to compete and meet consumer preferences. As the baby boomer genera -tion moves into old age, the desire to look younger and healthier has become a global priority. The influence of social media on the population and the effective dissemi -nation of scientific research has raised awareness of the
risks of using many chemicals in cosmetics and the health benefits of compounds obtained from natural resources.
nation of scientific research has raised awareness of the risks of using many chemicals in cosmetics and the health benefits of compounds obtained from natural resources. Ingredients from nature are becoming increasingly pop -ular. Natural products are also abundant in nature and are sustainable. Natural products from sources such as plants  (Figs.  17, 18), fungi, and marine organisms are already being used effectively as active beauty ingredients and will play an even greater role in the future, with great prospects for development.The plant kingdom has served humankind for centuries and represents a vast library of compounds with a wide range of bioactive properties, including whitening, mois -turizing, and anti-aging, some displaying aromatic prop -erties. As mentioned earlier, much research has been carried out on the various properties exhibited by differ -ent plant extracts and isolated natural compounds. Most
of them seem to exhibit antioxidant activity, probably due to the plant’s adaptability to survive in a highly oxidative environment, but also anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, anti-cytotoxic, pro-synthetic, and proliferative activities, which have the potential to help reduce or protect the skin from the harmful effects of UVB radiation.As a traditional source of natural bioactive compounds, mushrooms are now being developed as potential ingre -dients for the cosmetic industry. Several mushrooms and their extracts are already being used as cosmetic products with antioxidant, anti-aging, anti-wrinkle, skin-lightening, and moisturizing properties. The mushroom species currently identified and utilized represent only a small proportion of the total, with many more to be dis -covered, validated, and cultivated. All of these indicate
Page 35 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  further development and promotion of the cosmetic industry. With interdisciplinary research, the molecular mechanisms of the medicinal effects of mushrooms will be revealed and more mushrooms can enter the cosmetic field in a variety of ways.As an alternative to "green technology", marine or "blue biotechnology" is gaining its turf as it offers a myriad of natural products that cannot be found in terrestrial envi -ronments and have unprecedented biological and phar -macological properties. Although a number of products of marine origin are already on the market, they are still very few in number compared to the vastness of the oceans and the discoveries to come. This suggests that there are still many marine compounds, especially small molecules, that can be utilized as medicinal and nutri -tional cosmetics. The biological material collected from
the marine environment is often in very small quanti -ties and is very difficult for further bioassays and devel -opment. It is possible to seek to farm marine organisms under optimal conditions in order to harvest bioactive metabolites for use as active ingredients, excipients, and additives. On the other hand, microbial biotechnol -ogy can be considered a promising way to obtain a large number of high-value compounds for use as medicinal and nutritional cosmetics.Fig. 16 The known key human axilla odorants
Page 36 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40 There are also a number of issues that need to be taken into account during the specific research and develop -ment of cosmetics. In recent years, the approach to skin lightening has been widely expanded. In many cases, the use of single drugs that inhibit tyrosinase has been extended to the use of complex mixtures targeting differ -ent mechanisms, such as tyrosinase expression, melano -some transfer, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory effects. It is important to encourage the application of compo -nents whose safety and biological activity have been con -firmed in cell culture, including the precise mechanism of action and the characteristic activity responsible for these activities. Based on adequate safety data and qual -ity control practices, this is a must for the production of natural products and topical products. However, the pre -cise mechanisms of action of some commercially avail -
able products remain unclear. Furthermore, screening with in vitro assays is still recommended for inclusion in the assessment of natural products in cell culture prior to evaluation in human skin models and human skin. Although in  vitro results are somewhat different from cell culture and skin models in some cases.Nanotechnology will continue to be used more and more extensively in beauty cosmetics, and formulations will be more optimized, allowing for fuller absorption of active ingredients. With the complete deciphering of the human genome, genes related to skin and aging are being elucidated one after another. In the future, more person -alized and refined products will enter the market.In short, the pursuit of zero burdens will become the most substantial change in the development of skincare!The Chinese cosmetics market has become the most promising market in the world and will become the world’s largest cosmetics market by 2050. The Chinese
cosmetics market will be further segmented in the future, becoming more specialized, such as cosmetics for chil -dren and pregnant women, men’s cosmetics, sports cos -metics, and cosmetics for the elderly.Fig. 17 Paeonia suffruticosa (“Mu Dan” , Feng Huang Mountain in Tong Ling, China)(These photos were taken by Dr. Meng Qian‑ Qian)Fig. 18 Rhodiola rosea (Yunnan, China) (These photos were taken by Dr. Wang Shuang)
Page 37 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  The Chinese cosmetics market will become more regu -lated with the recent implementation of new rules for the production and sale of cosmetics in China. In the short term, this has had a negative impact on the cosmetics industry. However, in the future, a number of cosmetic companies with world-class competitiveness will emerge in China, and the research strength will be qualitatively improved. In the long term, the Chinese cosmetics indus -try will develop healthily and rapidly. Cosmetics with Chinese characteristics (such as products of traditional Chinese medicine and folk herbal sources) will be shared.AcknowledgementsThe author would like to thank the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Numbers 21961142008, 22177138).Author contributionsJKL wrote and prepared the manuscript. The author read and approved the final manuscript.Declarations
final manuscript.DeclarationsCompeting  interestsThe author is the Editor ‑in‑Chief of Natural Products and Bioprospecting.Author details1 Wuhan Institute of Health, Shenzhen Moore Vaporization Health & Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan 430074, People’s Republic of China. 2 School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, South‑ Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, People’s Republic of China. Received: 11 September 2022   Accepted: 11 November 2022References 1. Dhapte ‑Pawar V, Kadam S, Saptarsi S, Kenjale PP . Nanocosmeceuticals: facets and aspects. Future Sci OA. 2020;6:FSO613. 2. Alves A, Sousa E, Kijjoa A, Pinto M. Marine ‑derived compounds with potential uses as cosmeceutical and nutricosmetics. Molecules. 2020;25:2536. 3. Butler H. Microbiological control of cosmetics. In: Butler H, editor. Poucher’s, perfumes cosmetics and soaps, vol. 3. Dordrecht: Springer; 1993. p. 572. 4. Siemer E. Preparations for cleansing and caring for blemished skin. In:
Umbach W, editor. Cosmetics and toiletries—development, production and use. New York: Ellis Horwood; 1991. p. 124. 5. Shai A, Baran R, Maibach HI, (Eds.) Cosmetics and cosmetic prepara‑tions: basic definitions. London: Informa UK Ltd.; 2009, 1. 6. Halla N, Fernades IP , Heleno SA, et al. Cosmetics preservation: a review on present strategies. Molecules. 2018;23:1571. 7. Truswell WH. Prescription skin care products and skin rejuvenation. Facial Plast Surg Clin N Am. 2020;28:59. 8. King BJ. The history and evolution of skin resurfacing. In: Truswell WH, editor. Lasers and light peels and abrasions—applications and tech‑niques. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 2016. p. 1. 9. Gomes A, Aguiar L, Ferraz R, et al. The emerging role of ionic liquid‑based approaches for enhanced skin permeation of bioac‑tive molecules: a snapshot of the past couple of years. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;22:11991. 10. Juhasz MLW, Levin MK. The role of systemic treatments for skin lighten‑
ing. J Cosmet Dermotol. 2018;17:1144. 11. Smit N, Vicanova J, Pavel S. The hunt for natural skin whitening agents. Int J Mol Sci. 2009;10:5326. 12. Pillaiyar T, Manickam M, Namasivayam V. Skin whitening agents: medici‑nal chemistry perspective of tyrosinase inhibitors. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2017;32:403. 13. Lee SY, Baek N, Nam TG. Natural, semisynthetic and synthetic tyrosinase inhibitors. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2016;31:1. 14. Draelos ZD. Skin lightening preparations and the hydroquinone contro ‑versy. Dermatol Ther. 2007;20:308. 15. Jimbow K, Obata H, Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB. Mechanism of depig‑mentation by hydroquinone. J Invest Dermatol. 1974;62:436. 16. Findlay GH. Ochronosis following skin bleaching with hydroquinone. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1982;6:1092. 17. Wester RC, Melendres J, Hui X, et al. Human in vivo and in vitro hydro ‑quinone topical bioavailability, metabolism, and disposition. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 1998;54:301.
Environ Health A. 1998;54:301. 18. Searle T, Al‑Niaimi F, Ali FR. Hydroquinone: myths and reality. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021;46:636.
Environ Health A. 1998;54:301. 18. Searle T, Al‑Niaimi F, Ali FR. Hydroquinone: myths and reality. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021;46:636. 19. Boo YC. Arbutin as a skin depigmenting agent with antimelanogenic and antioxidant properties. Antioxidants. 2021;10:1129. 20. Lim YJ, Lee EH, Kang TH, et al. Inhibitory effects of arbutin on melanin biosynthesis of alpha‑melanocyte stimulating hormone ‑induced hyperpigmentation in cultured brownish guinea pig skin tissues. Arch Pharm Res. 2009;32:367. 21. Maeda K, Fukuda M. Arbutin: mechanism of its depigmenting action in human melanocyte culture. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1996;276:765. 22. Chakraborty AK, Funasaka Y, Komoto M, Ichihashi M. Effect of arbutin on melanogenic proteins in human melanocytes. Pigment Cell Res. 1998;11:206. 23. Olivares C, Solano F. New insights into the active site structure and catalytic mechanism of tyrosinase and its related proteins. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2009;22:750.
Melanoma Res. 2009;22:750. 24. Tada M, Kohno M, Niwano Y. Alleviation effect of arbutin on oxida‑tive stress generated through tyrosinase reaction with l‑tyrosine and L‑DOPA. BMC Biochem. 2014;15:23. 25. Zhang B, Zeng M, Li B, et al. Arbutin attenuates LPS‑induced acute kidney injury by inhibiting inflammation and apoptosis via the PI3K/Akt/Nrf2 pathway. Phytomedicine. 2021;82:153466. 26. Choi S, Park YI, Lee SK, et al. Aloesin inhibits hyperpigmentation induced by UV radiation. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27:513. 27. Ertam I, Mutlu B, Unal I, et al. Efficiency of ellagic acid and arbutin in melasma: a randomized, prospective, open‑label study. J Dermatol. 2008;35:570. 28. Morag M, Nawrot J, Siatkowski I, et al. A doubleblind, placebo ‑controlled randomized trial of Serratulae quinquefoliae folium, a new source of beta‑arbutin, in selected skin hyperpigmentations. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2015;14:185. 29. Hori I, Nihei K, Kubo I. Structural criteria for depigmenting mechanism
of arbutin. Phytother Res. 2004;18:475. 30. Polnikorn N. Treatment of refractory melasma with the MedLite C6 Q‑switched Nd:YAG laser and alpha arbutin: a prospective study. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2010;12:126. 31. Boissy RE, Visscher M, DeLong MA. Deoxyarbutin: a novel reversible tyrosinase inhibitor with effective in vivo skin lightening potency. Exp Dermatol. 2005;14:601. 32. Chawla S, de Long MA, Visscher MO, et al. Mechanism of tyrosinase inhibition by deoxyarbutin and its second‑ generation derivatives. Br J Dermatol. 2008;159:1267. 33. Frias MA, Winik B, Franzoni MB, et al. Lysophosphatidylcholine arbutin complexes form bilayer ‑like structures. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008;1778:1259. 34. Li Y, Li F, Cai HY, et al. Structural characterization of inclusion com‑plex of arbutin and hydroxypropyl β‑ cyclodextrin. Trop J Pharm Res. 2016;15:2227. 35. Wen AH, Choi MK, Kim DD. Formulation of liposome for topical delivery of arbutin. Arch Pharm Res. 2006;29:1187.
of arbutin. Arch Pharm Res. 2006;29:1187. 36. Liang K, Xu K, Bessarab D, et al. Arbutin encapsulated micelles improved transdermal delivery and suppression of cellular melanin production. BMC Res Notes. 2016;9:254. 37. Jones K, Hughes J, Hong M, et al. Modulation of melanogenesis by aloesin: a competitive inhibitor of tyrosinase. Pigment Cell Res. 2002;15:335.
Page 38 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  38. Huang Q, Chai WM, Ma ZY, et al. Antityrosinase mechanism of ellagic acid in vitro and its effect on mouse melanoma cells. J Food Biochem. 2019;43: e12996. 39. Yang HL, Lin CP , Gowrisankar YV, et al. The anti‑melanogenic effects of ellagic acid through induction of autophagy in melanocytes and suppression of UVA‑activated α‑MSH pathways via Nrf2 activation in keratinocytes. Biochem Pharmacol. 2021;185: 114454. 40. Al‑Niaimi F, Chiang NYZ. Topical vitamin C and the skin: mechanisms of action and clinical applications. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2017;10:14. 41. Ros JR, Rodríguez‑López JN, García‑ Cánovas F. Effect of l‑ascorbic acid on the monophenolase activity of tyrosinase. Biochem J. 1993;295:309. 42. Espinal‑Perez LE, Moncada B, Castanedo ‑Cazares JP . A double ‑blind randomized trial of 5% ascorbic acid vs. 4% hydroquinone in melasma. Int J Dermatol. 2004;43:604.
Int J Dermatol. 2004;43:604. 43. Handog EB, Galang DA, De Leon‑ Godinez MA, Chan GP . A randomized, double ‑blind, placebo ‑controlled trial of oral procyanidin with vitamins A, C, E for melasma among Filipino women. Int J Dermatol. 2009;48:896. 44. Saeedi M, Eslamifar M, Khezri K. Kojic acid applications in cos‑metic and pharmaceutical preparations. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019;10:582. 45. Saghaie L, Pourfarzam M, Fassihi A, Sartippour B. Synthesis and tyrosi‑nase inhibitory properties of some novel derivatives of kojic acid. Res Pharm Sci. 2013;8:233. 46. Hollinger JC, Angra K, Halder RM. Are natural ingredients effective in the management of hyperpigmentation? J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2018;11:28. 47. Farshi S. Comparative study of therapeutic effects of 20% azelaic acid and hydroquinone 4% cream in the treatment of melasma. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2011;10:282. 48. Kircik LH. Efficacy and safety of azelaic acid (AzA) gel 15% in the treat ‑
ment of post ‑inflammatory hyperpigmentation and acne: a 16‑ week, baseline ‑controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10:586. 49. Zduńska K, Dana A, Kolodziejczak A, Rotsztejn H. Antioxidant properties of FA and its possible application. Skin Pharmacol Phys. 2018;31:332. 50. Nguyen NT, Nguyen MH, Nguyen HX, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitors from the Wood of Atrocarpus heterophyllus. J Nat Prod. 2012;75:1951. 51. Akazawa H, Akihisa T, Taguchi Y, et al. Melanogenesis inhibitory and free radical scavenging activities of diarylheptanoids and other phenolic compounds from the bark of Acer nikoense. Biol Pharm Bull. 2006;29:1970. 52. Wang HM, Chen CY, Chen CY, et al. (‑)‑N‑Formylanonaine from Michelia alba as a human tyrosinase inhibitor and antioxidant. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010;18:5241. 53. Wang JV, Jhawar N, Saedi N. Tranexamic acid for melasma: evaluating the various formulations. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2019;12:E73.
54. Sieber MA, Hegel JKE. Azelaic acid: properties and mode of action. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2014;27(suppl 1):9. 55. Kolbe L, Mann T, Gerwat W, et al. 4‑n‑butylresorcinol, a highly effective tyrosinase inhibitor for the topical treatment of hyperpigmentation. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013;27:19. 56. Huh SY, Shin JW, Na JI, et al. The Efficacy and safety of 4‑n‑butylres‑orcinol 0.1% cream for the treatment of melasma: a randomized controlled split ‑face Trial. Ann Dermatol. 2010;22:21. 57. Madan Mohan NT, Gowda A, Jaiswal AK, et al. Assessment of efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 4‑n‑butylresorcinol 0.3% cream: an Indian mul‑ticentric study on melasma. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2016;9:21. 58. Mann T, Gerwat W, Batzer J, et al. Inhibition of human tyrosinase requires molecular motifs distinctively different from mushroom tyrosi‑nase. J Invest Dermatol. 2018;138:1601. 59. Arrowitz C, Schoelermann AM, Mann T, et al. Effective tyrosinase inhibi‑
tion by thiamidol results in significant improvement of mild to moder ‑ate melasma. J Invest Dermatol. 2019;39:1691.
59. Arrowitz C, Schoelermann AM, Mann T, et al. Effective tyrosinase inhibi‑tion by thiamidol results in significant improvement of mild to moder ‑ate melasma. J Invest Dermatol. 2019;39:1691. 60. Philipp ‑Dormston WG, Vila Echagüe A, Pérez Damonte SH, et al. Thiamidol containing treatment regimens in facial hyperpigmentation: an international multi‑ center approach consisting of a double ‑blind, controlled, split ‑face study and of an open label, real‑ world study. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2020;42:377. 61. Chang TS. An updated review of tyrosinase inhibitors. Int J Mol Sci. 2009;10:2440. 62. Perugini P , Vettor M, Rona C, et al. Efficacy of oleuropein against UVB irradiation: preliminary evaluation. Inter J Cosmet Sci. 2008;30:113. 63. Hsu ML, Huang WC, Zhou YR, et al. Oleuropein protects human retinal pigment epithelium cells from IL ‑1β–induced inflammation by block ‑ing MAPK/NF‑κB signaling pathways. Inflammation. 2022;45:279.
64. Mao GX, Xing WM, Wen XL, et al. Salidroside protects against premature senescence induced by ultraviolet B irradiation in human dermal fibro ‑blasts. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2015;37:321. 65. Yuan XY, Pang XW, Zhang GQ, Guo JY. Salidroside’s protection against UVB‑mediated oxidative damage and apoptosis is associated with the upregulation of Nrf2 expression. Photomed Laser Surg. 2016;35:49. 66. Ding XJ, Zhang ZY, Jin J, et al. Salidroside can target both P4HB‑mediated inflammation and melanogenesis of the skin. Theranostics. 2020;10:11110. 67. Ratz‑Łyko A, Arct J. Resveratrol as an active ingredient for cosmetic and dermatological applications: a review. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2019;21:84. 68. Boo YC. Human skin lightening efficacy of resveratrol and its analogs: from in vitro studies to cosmetic applications. Antioxidants. 2019;8:332. 69. Afaq F, Adhami VM, Ahmad N. Prevention of short ‑term ultraviolet B radiation‑mediated damages by resveratrol in SKH‑1 hairless mice.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003;86:28. 70. Farris P , Yatskayer M, Chen N, et al. Evaluation of efficacy and tolerance of a nighttime topical antioxidant containing resveratrol, baicalin, and vitamin E for treatment of mild to moderately photodamaged skin. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13:1467. 71. Shin NH, Ryu SY, Choi EJ, et al. Oxyresveratrol as the potent inhibitor on dopa oxidase activity of mushroom tyrosinase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;243:801. 72. Shimizu K, Kondo R, Sakai K, et al. The inhibitory components from Artocarpus incisus on melanin biosynthesis. Planta Med. 1998;64:408. 73. Lam RYY, Lin ZX, Sviderskaya E, Cheng CHK. Application of a combined sulphorhodamine B and melanin assay to the evaluation of Chinese medicines and their constituent compounds for hyperpigmentation treatment. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010;132:274. 74. Britto SM, Shanthakumari D, Agilan B, et al. Apigenin prevents ultravi‑olet‑B radiation induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers formation in
human dermal fibroblasts. Mutat Res Gen Tox En. 2017;821:28. 75. Abu‑ Yousif AO, Smith KA, Getsios S, et al. Enhancement of UVB‑induced apoptosis by apigenin in human keratinocytes and organotypic keratinocyte cultures. Cancer Res. 2008;68:3057. 76. Mary Britto S, Shanthakumari D, Radhiga T. Apigenin prevents ultravio ‑let‑B radiation induced oxidative stress and DNA damage. Int J Curr Res. 2016;8:32937. 77. Kubo I, Kinst ‑Hori I, Chaudhuri SK, et al. Flavonols from Heterotheca inuloides: tyrosinase inhibitory activity and structural criteria. Bioorg Med Chem. 2000;8:1749. 78. Kubo I, Kinst ‑Hori I, Ishiguro K, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitory flavonoids from Heterotheca inuloides and their structural functions. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 1994;4:1443. 79. Xie LP , Chen QX, Huang H, et al. Inhibitory effects of some flavonoids on the activity of mushroom tyrosinase. Biochemistry. 2003;68:487. 80. No JK, Soung DY, Kim YJ, et al. Inhibition of tyrosinase by green tea
components. Life Sci. 1999;65:PL241.
the activity of mushroom tyrosinase. Biochemistry. 2003;68:487. 80. No JK, Soung DY, Kim YJ, et al. Inhibition of tyrosinase by green tea components. Life Sci. 1999;65:PL241. 81. Kim YJ. Rhamnetin attenuates melanogenesis by suppressing oxidative stress and pro ‑inflammatory mediators. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36:1341. 82. Zheng ZP , Tan HY, Chen J, Wang MF. Characterization of tyrosinase inhibitors in the twigs of Cudrania tricuspidata and their structure activ‑ity relationship study. Fitoterapia. 2013;84:242. 83. Tan X, Song YH, Park C, et al. Highly potent tyrosinase inhibitor, neorau‑flavane from Campylotropis hirtella and inhibitory mechanism with molecular docking. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016;24:153. 84. Ko HH, Chiang YC, Tsai MH, et al. Eupofalin, a skin whitening flavonoid isolated from Phyla nodiflora, downregulated melanogenesis: role of MAPK and Akt pathways. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014;151:386.
85. Arroo RRJ, Sari S, Barut B, et al. Flavones as tyrosinase inhibitors: kinetic studies in vitro and in silico. Phytochem Anal. 2020;31:314. 86. Wang YN, Wu W, Chen HC, Fang H. Genistein protects against UVB‑induced senescence ‑like characteristics in human dermal fibroblast by p66Shc down‑regulation. J Dermatol Sci. 2010;58:19.
Page 39 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40   87. Terra VA, Souza‑Neto FP , Frade MAC, et al. Genistein prevents ultraviolet B radiation‑induced nitrosative skin injury and promotes cell prolifera‑tion. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol. 2015;144:20. 88. Amer M, Metwalli M. Topical liquiritin improves melasma. Int J Derma‑tol. 2000;39:299. 89. Kim SJ, Son KH, Chang HW, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitory prenylated flavo ‑noids from Sophora flavescens. Biol Pharm Bull. 2003;26:348. 90. Hyun SK, Lee WH, Jeong M, et al. Inhibitory effects of kurarinol, kuraridi‑nol, and trifolirhizin from Sophora flavescens on tyrosinase and melanin synthesis. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008;31:154. 91. Fu B, Li H, Wang X, et al. Isolation and identification of flavonoids in licorice and a study of their inhibitory effects on tyrosinase. J Agric Food Chem. 2005;53:7408. 92. Jun N, Hong G, Jun K. Synthesis and evaluation of 2′,4′,6′‑trihydroxy‑
chalcones as a new class of tyrosinase inhibitors. Bioorg Med Chem. 2007;15:2396. 93. Philips N, Samuel M, Arena R. Direct inhibition of elastase and matrixmetalloproteinases and stimulation of biosynthesis of fibrillar col‑lagens, elastin, and fibrillins by xanthohumol. J Cosmet Sci. 2010;61:125. 94. Goenka S, Simon SR. Depigmenting effect of Xanthohumol from hop extract in MNT ‑1 human melanoma cells and normal human melano ‑cytes. Biochem Biophy Rep. 2021;26: 100955. 95. Takahashi M, Takara K, Toyozato T, et al. A novel bioactive chalcone of Morus australis inhibits tyrosinase activity and melanin biosynthesis in B16 melanoma cells. J Oleo Sci. 2012;61:585. 96. Lee HS, Shin KH, Ryu GS, et al. Synthesis of small molecule peptide conjugates as potential whitening agents. Bull Korean Chem Soc. 2012;33:3004. 97. Azhar ‑Ul‑Haq A, Malik A, Khan MT, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitory lignans from the methanol extract of the roots of Vitex negundo Linn, and
their structure ‑activity relationship. Phytomedicine. 2006;13:255. 98. Lembo S, Balato A, Di Caprio R, et al. The modulatory effect of ellagic acid and rosmarinic acid on ultraviolet ‑B‑induced cytokine/chemokine gene expression in skin keratinocyte (HaCaT) cells. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014: 346793. 99. Avila Acevedoa JG, Castañedaa CMC, Beniteza FJC. Photoprotective activity of Buddleja scordioides. Fitoterapia. 2005;76:301. 100. Ahmad VU, Ullah F, Hussain J, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitors from Rhodo -dendron collettianum and their structure ‑activity relationship (SAR) studies. Chem Pharm Bull. 2004;52:1458. 101. Karthikeyan R, Kanimozhi G, Prasad NR, et al. 7‑Hydroxycoumarin prevents UVB‑induced activation of NFjB and subsequent overex ‑pression of matrix metalloproteinases and inflammatory markers in human dermal fibroblast cells. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol. 2016;161:170. 102. Pratchyapurit WO. Combined use of two formulations containing
diacetyl boldine, TGF‑β1 biomimetic oligopeptide ‑68 with other hypopigmenting/exfoliating agents and sunscreen provides effective and convenient treatment for facial melasma. Either is equal to or is better than 4% hydroquinone on normal skin. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;5:131. 103. Bazela K, Solyga‑Zurek A, Debowska R, et al. l‑Ergothioneine protects skin cells against UV ‑induced damage: a preliminary study. Cosmetics. 2014;1:51. 104. Obayashi K, Kurihara K, Okano Y, Masaki H, Yarosh DB. l‑Ergothioneine scavenges superoxide and singlet oxygen and suppresses TNF‑α and MMP ‑1expression in UV ‑irradiated human dermal fibroblasts. J Cosmet Sci. 2015;56:17. 105. Taofiq O, González‑Paramás AM, Martins A, Barreiro MF, Ferreira ICFR. Mushrooms extracts and compounds in cosmetics, cosmeceuticals and nutricosmetics: a review. Ind Crops Prod. 2016;90:38. 106. Villarama CD, Maibach HI. Glutathione as a depigmenting agent: an overview. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2005;27:147.
overview. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2005;27:147. 107. Davids LM, van Wyk J, Khumalo NP . Intravenous glutathione for skin
106. Villarama CD, Maibach HI. Glutathione as a depigmenting agent: an overview. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2005;27:147. 107. Davids LM, van Wyk J, Khumalo NP . Intravenous glutathione for skin lightening: inadequate safety data. S Afr Med J. 2016;106:782. 108. Sonthalia S, Daulatabad D, Sarkar R. Glutathione as a skin whitening agent: facts, myths, evidence and controversies. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2016;82:262. 109. Jerajani HR, Mizoguchi H, Li J, Whittenbarger DJ, Marmor MJ. The effects of a daily facial lotion containing vitamins B3 and E and provitamin B5 on the facial skin of Indian women: a randomized, double ‑blind trial. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2010;76:20. 110. Boo YC. Mechanistic basis and clinical evidence for the applications of nicotinamide (niacinamide) to control skin aging and pigmentation. Antioxidants. 2021;10:1315. 111. Torres A, Enk CD, Hochberg M, Srebnik M. Porphyra‑334, a potential
natural source for UVA protective sunscreens. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2006;5:432. 112. Fuentes‑ Tritan S, Parra‑Saldivar R, Iqbal HMN, Carrillo ‑Nieves D. Bioin‑spired biomolecules: mycosporine ‑like amino acids and scytonemin from Lyngbya sp. with UV ‑protection potentialities. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2019;201:111684. 113. da laCoba F, Aguilera J, Korbee N, et al. UVA and UVB photoprotective capabilities of topical formulations containing mycosporine ‑like amino acids (MAAs) through different biological effective protection factors (BEPFs). Mar Drugs. 2019;17:55. 114. Jin KS, Lee JY, Hyun SK, Kim BW, Kwon HJ. Juniperus chinensis and the functional compounds, cedrol and widdrol, ameliorate α‑melanocyte stimulating hormone ‑induced melanin formation in B16F10 cells. Food Sci Biotechnol. 2015;24:611. 115. Kanlayavattanakul M, Lourith N. Plants and natural products for the treatment of skin hyperpigmentation—a review. Planta Med. 2018;84:988.
2018;84:988. 116. Lee HY, Jang EJ, Bae SY, et al. Anti‑melanogenic activity of gagunin D, a highly oxygenated diterpenoid from the marine sponge Phorbas sp., via modulating tyrosinase expression and degradation. Mar Drugs. 2016;14:212. 117. Ullah F, Hussain H, Hussain J, et al. Tyrosinase inhibitory pentacyclic trit ‑erpenes and analgesic and spasmolytic activities of methanol extracts of Rhododendron collettianum. Phytother Res. 2007;21:1076. 118. Lee DY, Lee J, Jeong YT, Byun GH, Kim JH. Melanogenesis inhibition activity of floralginsenoside A from Panax ginseng berry. J Ginseng Res. 2017;41:602. 119. Lee CS, Nam G, Bae IH, Park J. Whitening efficacy of ginsenoside F1 through inhibition of melanin transfer in cocultured human melano ‑cytes–keratinocytes and three ‑dimensional human skin equivalent. J Ginseng Res. 2019;43:300. 120. Maeda K, Naitou T, Umishio K, Fukuhara T, Motoyama A. A novelmelanin
inhibitor: hydroperoxy traxastane ‑type triterpene from flowers of Arnica montana. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007;30:873. 121. Ando H, Ryu A, Hashimoto A, Oka M, Ichihashi M. Linoleic acid and α‑linolenic acid lightens ultraviolet ‑induced hyperpigmentation of the skin. Arch Dermatol Res. 1998;290:375. 122. Ando H, Funasaka Y, Oka M, et al. Possible involvement of proteolytic degradation of tyrosinase in the regulatory effect of fatty acids on melanogenesis. J Lipid Res. 1999;40:1312. 123. Ando H, Watabe H, Valencia JC, et al. Fatty acids regulate pigmentation via proteasomal degradation of tyrosinase. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:15427. 124. Chen HW, Chou YS, Young TH, Cheng NC. Inhibition of melanin synthe ‑sis and melanosome transfer by chitosan biomaterials. J Biomed Mater Res Part B Appl Biomater. 2020;108:1239. 125. Kim K, Huh YJ, Lim KM. Anti‑pigmentary natural compounds and their mode of action. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:6206.
mode of action. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:6206. 126. Yu P , Sun H. Purification of a fucoidan from kelp polysaccharide and its inhibitory kinetics for Tyrosinase. Carbohydr Polym. 2014;99:278.
mode of action. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:6206. 126. Yu P , Sun H. Purification of a fucoidan from kelp polysaccharide and its inhibitory kinetics for Tyrosinase. Carbohydr Polym. 2014;99:278. 127. Wang ZJ, Xu W, Liang JW, Wang C‑S, Kang Y. Effect of fucoidan on B16 murine melanoma cell melanin formation and apoptosis. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2017;14:149. 128. Hu SH, Huang JH, Pei SY, et al. Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide inhibits UVB‑induced melanogenesis by antagonizing cAMP/PKA and ROS/MAPK signaling pathways. J Cell Physiol. 2019;234:7330. 129. Yang SH, Liu HI, Tsai SJ. Edible Tremella Polysaccharide for Skin Care. U.S. Patent US20060222608, 5 October 2006. 130. Zhang K, Meng XY, Sun Y, Guo PY. Preparation of Tremella, Speranskiae tuberculatae and Eriocaulon buergerianum extracts and their perfor ‑mance in cosmetics. Deterg Cosmet. 2013;36:28. 131. Wu YZ, Choi MH, Li J, Yang H, Shin HJ. Mushroom cosmetics: the present and future. Cosmetics. 2016;3:22.
and future. Cosmetics. 2016;3:22. 132. Chiang JH, Tsai FJ, Lin TH, et al. Tremella fuciformis inhibits melanogen‑esis in B16F10 cells and promotes migration of human fibroblasts and keratinocytes. In Vivo. 2022;36:713.
Page 40 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  133. Liu ZJ, Wang YL, Li QL, Yang L. Improved anti‑melanogenesis and antioxidant effects of polysaccharide from Cuscuta chinensis Lam seeds after enzymatic hydrolysis. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2018;51: e7256. 134. Rout S, Banerjee R. Free radical scavenging, anti‑ glycation and tyrosi‑nase inhibition properties of a polysaccharide fraction isolated from the rind from Punica granatum. Biores Technol. 2007;98:3159. 135. Tominaga K, Hongo N, Karato M, Yamashita E. Cosmetic benefits of astaxanthin on human subjects. Acta Biochim Pol. 2012;59:43. 136. Thomas NV, Kim SK. Beneficial effects of marine algal compounds in cosmeceuticals. Mar Drugs. 2013;11:146. 137. Juturu V, Bowman JP , Deshpande J. Overall skin tone and skin‑lightening‑improving effects with oral supplementation of lutein and zeaxanthin isomers: a double ‑blind placebo controlled clinical trial. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2016;9:325.
Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2016;9:325. 138. Maharshak N, Shapiro J, Trau H. Carotenoderma—a review of the cur ‑rent literature. Int J Dermatol. 2003;42:178. 139. Kimbrough‑ Green CK, Griffiths CE, Finkel LJ, et al. Topical retinoic acid (tretinoin) for melasma in black patients. A vehicle ‑controlled clinical trial. Arch Dermatol. 1994;130:727. 140. Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, Leyden JJ. Topical tretinoin for photoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;15:836. 141. Zasada M, Budzisz E. Retinoids: active molecules influencing skin structure formation in cosmetic and dermatological treatments. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2019;36:392. 142. Qiu J, Chen M, Huang X, et al. The skin‑ depigmenting potential of Paeonia lactiflora root extract and paeoniflorin: in vitro evaluation using reconstructed pigmented human epidermis. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2016;38:444. 143. Daphne Lin MS, Wang SH, Song TY, Hsieh CW, Tsai MS. Safety and effi‑
cacy of tyrosinase inhibition of Paeonia suffruticosa Andrews extracts on human melanoma cells. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2019;18:1921. 144. Konno K, Ono H, Nakamura M, et al. Mulberry latex rich in antidia‑betic sugar ‑mimic alkaloids forces dieting on caterpillars. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;103:1337. 145. Nattapong S, Omboon L. A new source of whitening agent from a Thai Mulberry plant and its betulinic acid quantitation. Nat Prod Res. 2008;22:727. 146. Kim YM, Yun J, Lee CK, et al. Oxyresveratrol and hydroxystilbene com‑pounds, inhibitory effect on tyrosinase and mechanism of action. J Biol Chem. 2002;277:16340. 147. Lee SH, Choi SY, Kim H, et al. Mulberroside F isolated from the leaves of Morus alba inhibits melanin biosynthesis. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002;25:1045. 148. Kim JH, Yun EJ, Yu S, et al. Different levels of skin whitening activity among 3,6‑Anhydro ‑l‑galactose, agarooligosaccharides, and neoaga‑rooligosaccharides. Mar Drugs. 2017;15:321.
rooligosaccharides. Mar Drugs. 2017;15:321. 149. Yoshimori A, Oyama T, Takahashi S, et al. Structure ‑activity relation‑ships of the thujaplicins for inhibition of human tyrosinase. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014;22:6193. 150. Lv J, Fu Y, Cao Y, et al. Isoliquiritigenin inhibits melanogenesis, melanocyte dendricity and melanosome transport by regulating ERK‑mediated MITF degradation. Exp Derm. 2020;29:149. 151. Wang HM, Chen CY, Wen ZH. Identifying melanogenesis inhibitors from Cinnamomum subavenium with in vitro and in vivo screen‑ing systems by targeting the human tyrosinase. Exp Dermatol. 2011;20:242. 152. Liang CH, Chou TH, Ding HY. Inhibition of melanogensis by a novel origanoside from Origanum vulgare. J Dermat Sci. 2010;57:170. 153. Lee DY, Jeong SC, Jeong YT, et al. Antimelanogenic effects of picri‑onoside A isolated from the leaves of Korean Ginseng. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38:1663. 154. Homma T, Kageyama S, Nishikawa A, Nagata K. Anti‑melanogenic activ‑
ity of salacinol by inhibition of tyrosinase oligosaccharide processing. J Biochem. 2020;167:503. 155. Jeong YT, Jeong SC, Hwang JS, Kim JH. Modulation effects of sweroside
ity of salacinol by inhibition of tyrosinase oligosaccharide processing. J Biochem. 2020;167:503. 155. Jeong YT, Jeong SC, Hwang JS, Kim JH. Modulation effects of sweroside isolated from the Lonicera japonica on melanin synthesis. Chem Biol Interact. 2015;238:33. 156. Wang ST, Chang WC, Hsu C, Su NW. Antimelanogenic effect of urolithin A and urolithin B, the colonic metabolites of ellagic acid, in B16 mela‑noma cells. J Agric Food Chem. 2017;65:6870. 157. Badreshia‑Bansal S, Draelos ZD. Insight into skin lightening cosmeceuti‑cals for women of color. J Drugs Dermatol. 2007;6:32. 158. Shanbhag S, Nayak A, Narayan R, Nayak UY. Anti‑aging and sunscreens: paradiam shift in cosmetics. Adv Pharm Bull. 2019;9:348. 159. Makrantonaki E, Zouboulis CC. Molecular mechanisms of skin aging: state of the art. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007;1119:40. 160. Kong BY, Sheu SL, Kundu RV. Assessment of consumer knowledge of new sunscreen labels. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151:1028.
161. Mccullough JL, Kelly KM. Prevention and treatment of skin aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1067:323. 162. Masaki H. Role of antioxidants in the skin: anti‑aging effects. J Dermatol Sci. 2010;58:85. 163. Si H, Liu D. Dietary antiaging phytochemicals and mechanisms associ‑ated with prolonged survival. J Nutr Biochem. 2014;25:581. 164. Mussard E, Jousselin S, Cesaro A, et al. Andrographis paniculata and its bioactive diterpenoids protect dermal fibroblasts against inflammation and oxidative stress. Antioxidants. 2020;9:432. 165. Zhan JYX, Wang XF, Liu YH, et al. Andrographolide sodium bisulfate prevents UV ‑induced skin photoaging through inhibiting oxidative stress and inflammation. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:3271451. 166. Huh WB, Kim JE, Kang YG, et al. Brown pine leaf extract and its active component trans‑ communic acid inhibit UVB‑induced MMP ‑1 expres‑sion by targeting PI3K. PLoS ONE. 2015;10: e0128365.
167. Kerube M. Study on mechanisms of anti‑inflammatory action of glycyr ‑rhetinic acid. J Keio Med Soc. 1970;47:331. 168. Yu JY, Ha JY, Kim KM, et al. Anti‑inflammatory activities of licorice extract and its active compounds, glycyrrhizic acid, liquiritin and liquiritigenin, in BV2 cells and mice liver. Molecules. 2015;20:13041. 169. Lee SH, Bae IH, Choi H, et al. Ameliorating effect of dipotassium glycyr ‑rhizinate on an IL ‑4‑ and IL13‑inducedatopic dermatitis‑like skin‑ equiv‑alent model. Arch Dermatol Res. 2019;311:131. 170. Maruki Uchida H, Kurita I, Sugiyama K, et al. The protective effects of piceatannol from passion fruit (Passflora edulis) seeds in UVB‑irradiated keratinocytes. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36:845. 171. Cavinato M, Waltenberger B, Baraldo G, et al. Plant extracts and natural compounds used against UVB‑induced photoaging. Biogerontology. 2017;18:499. 172. Sobiepanek A, Milner ‑Krawczyk M, Bobecka‑ Wesołowska K, Kobiela T.
The effect of delphinidin on the mechanical properties of keratinocytes exposed to UVB radiation. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol. 2016;164:264. 173. Shin S, Kum H, Ryu D, et al. Protective effects of a new phloretin derivative against UVB‑induced damage in skin cell model and human volunteers. Int J Mol Sci. 2014;15:18919. 174. Park JE, Lee KE, Jung E, et al. Sclareol isolated from Salvia officinalis improves facial wrinkles via an antiphotoaging mechanism. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;5:475. 175. Bae JT, Sim GS, Lee DH, et al. Production of exopolysaccharide from mycelial culture of Grifola frondosa and its inhibitory effect on matrix metalloproteinase ‑1 expression in UV ‑irradiated human dermal fibro ‑blasts. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2005;251:347. 176. Fang CL, Paul CR, Day CH, et al. Poria cocos (Fuling) targets TGFβ/Smad7 associated collagen accumulation and enhances Nrf2‑antioxidant mechanism to exert anti‑skin aging effects in human dermal fibro ‑
blasts. Environ Toxicol. 2021;36:729. 177. Kumari M, Survase SA, Singhal RS. Production of schizophyllan using
mechanism to exert anti‑skin aging effects in human dermal fibro ‑blasts. Environ Toxicol. 2021;36:729. 177. Kumari M, Survase SA, Singhal RS. Production of schizophyllan using Schizophyllum commune NRCM. Bioresour Technol. 2008;99:1036. 178. Scapagnini G, Davinelli S, Di Renzo L, et al. Cocoa bioactive compounds: significance and potential for the maintenance of skin health. Nutrients. 2014;6:3202. 179. Ferreira MS, Magalhães MC, Oliveira R, et al. Trends in the use of botani‑cals in anti‑aging cosmetics. Molecules. 2021;26:3584. 180. Akhtar N, Zaman SU, Khan BA, et al. Calendula extract: effects on mechanical parameters of human skin. Acta Pol Pharm. 2011;68:693. 181. Mistry N. Guidelines for formulating anti‑pollution products. Cosmetics. 2017;4:57. 182. Juhasz MLW, Levin MK, Markus ES. The use of natural ingredients in innovative Korean cosmeceuticals. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2018;17:305. 183. Bonté F. Skin moisturization mechanisms: new data. Ann Pharm Fr. 2011;69:135.
2011;69:135. 184. Harding CR, Watkinson A, Rawlings AV, et al. Dry skin, moisturization and corneodesmolysis. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2000;22:21.
Page 41 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40   185. Verdier ‑Sévrain S, Bonté F. Skin hydration: a review on its molecular mechanisms. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2007;6:75. 186. Silva L, Rodrigues V, Schulman MA, et al. Hydrating effects of moisturizer active compounds incorporated into hydrogels: in vivo assessment and comparison between devices. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2009;8:32. 187. Sinico C, Fadda AM. Vesicular carriers for dermal drug delivery. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2009;6:813. 188. Patravale VB, Mandawgade SD. Novel cosmetic delivery systems: an application update. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2008;30:19. 189. Elias PM, Grayson S, Lampe MA, et al. The intercorneocyte space. In: Marks R, Plewig G, editors., et al., Stratum corneum. Berlin: Springer ‑Verlag; 1983. p. 56–67. 190. Knor T, Meholjić‑Fetahović A, Mehmedagić A. Stratum corneum hydration and skin surface pH in patients with atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2011;19:242.
Dermatovenerol Croat. 2011;19:242. 191. Fluhr JW, Elias PM. Stratum corneum pH: formation and function of the ‘Acid Mantle.’ Exog Dermatol. 2002;1:163. 192. Lee H, Lee S. Epidermal permeability barrier defects and barrier repair therapy in atopic dermatitis. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2014;6:276. 193. Kim H, Kim JT, Barua S. Seeking better topical delivery technologies of moisturizing agents for enhanced skin moisturization. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2018;15:17. 194. Meckfessi MH, Brandt S. The structure, function and importance of cera‑mides in skin and their use as therapeutic agents in skin‑ care products. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:177. 195. Brandner JM, Kief S, Wladykowski E, et al. Tight junction proteins in the skin. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2006;19:71. 196. Furuse M, Hata M, Furuse K, et al. Claudin‑based tight junctions are crucial for the mammalian epidermal barrier a lesson from claudin‑1‑deficient mice. J Cell Biol. 2002;156:1099.
1‑deficient mice. J Cell Biol. 2002;156:1099. 197. Draelos ZD. The science behind skin care: moisturizers. J Cosmet Der ‑matol. 2018;17:138. 198. Loden M, Andersson AC, Andersson C, et al. Instrumental and derma‑tologist evaluation of the effect of glycerin and urea on dry skin atopic dermatitis. Skin Res Technol. 2001;7:209. 199. Nenoff P , Donaubauer K, Arndt T, et al. Topically applied arginine hydro ‑chloride, effect on urea content of stratum corneum and skin hydration in atopic eczema and skin aging. Hautarzt. 2004;55:58. 200. Verkman AS, Mitra AK. Structure and function of aquaporin water chan‑nels. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000;278:F13. 201. Sougrat R, Morand M, Gondran C. Functional expression of AQP3 in human skin epidermis and reconstructed epidermis. J Invest Dermatol. 2002;118:678. 202. Sakai S, Yasuda R, Sayo T, et al. Hyaluronan exists in the normal stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol. 2000;114:1184.
corneum. J Invest Dermatol. 2000;114:1184. 203. Juncan AM, Moisă DG, Santini A, et al. Advantages of hyaluronic acid and its combination with other bioactive ingredients in cosmeceuticals. Molecules. 2021;26:4429. 204. Czarnowicki T, Malajian D, Khatrtri S, et al. Petrolatrum: barrier repair and antimicrobial responses underlying this “inert” moisturizer. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137:1091. 205. Rawlings AV, Harding C, Watkinson A, et al. The effect of glycerol and humidity on desmosome degradation in stratum corneum. Arch Der ‑matol Res. 1995;287:457. 206. Atrux ‑Tallau N, Romagny C, Padois K, et al. Effects of glycerol on human skin damaged by acute sodium lauryl sulphate treatment. Arch Derma‑tol Res. 2010;302:435. 207. Fluhr JW, Cavallotti C, Berardesca E. Emollients, moisturizers, and kerato ‑lytic agents in psoriasis. Clin Dermatol. 2008;26:380. 208. Chikuma HM, Verkman AS. Physiological roles of glycerol transporting
aquaporins: the aquaglyceroporins. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006;63:1386. 209. Zettersten EM, Ghadially R, Feingold KR, et al. Optimal ratios of topical stratum corneum lipids improve barrier recovery in chronologically aged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;37:403.
209. Zettersten EM, Ghadially R, Feingold KR, et al. Optimal ratios of topical stratum corneum lipids improve barrier recovery in chronologically aged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;37:403. 210. Byun HJ, Cho KH, Eun HC, et al. Lipid ingredients in moisturizers can modulate skin responses to UV in barrier ‑disrupted human skin in vivo. J Dermatol Sci. 2012;65:110. 211. Woelfle U, Laszczyk MN, Kraus M. Triterpenes promote keratinocyte dif‑ferentiation in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo: a role for the transient receptor potential canonical (subtype) 6. J Invest Dermatol. 2010;130:113. 212. Pereda Mdel C, Dieamant Gde C, Eberlin S, et al. Expression of differen‑tial genes involved in the maintenance of water balance in human skin by Piptadenia colubrina extract. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2010;9:35. 213. Bonte F, Barre P , Pinguet P . Simarouba amara extract increases human skin keratinocyte differentiation. J Ethnopharmacol. 1996;53:65.
214. Tanno O, Ota Y, Kitamura N, et al. Nicotinamide increases biosynthesis of ceramides as well as other stratum corneum lipids to improve the epidermal permeability barrier. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143:524. 215. Ponec M, Weerheim A, Kempenaar J, et al. The formation of competent barrier lipids in reconstructed human epidermis requires the presence of vitamin C. J Invest Dermatol. 1997;9:348. 216. Telang PS. Vitamin C in dermatology. J Indian Dermatol. 2013;4:143. 217. Kono T, Miyachi Y, Kawashima M. Clinical significance of the water retention and barrier function‑improving capabilities of ceramide ‑containing formulations: a qualitative review. J Dermatol. 2021;48:1807. 218. Garidel P , Folting B, Schaller I, Kerth A. The microstructure of the stratum corneum lipid barrier: mid‑infrared spectroscopic studies of hydrated ceramide: palmitic acid: cholesterol model systems. Biophys Chem. 2010;150:144.
2010;150:144. 219. Zhang J, Yuan B, Liu D, et al. Brasilianoids A‑F, new meroterpenoids from the sponge ‑associated fungus Penicillium brasilianum. Front Chem. 2018;6:314. 220. Rawlings AV, Harding CR. Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther. 2004;7:43. 221. Eckhart L, Tschachler E. Cuts by caspase ‑14 control the proteolysis of filaggrin. J Investig Dermatol. 2011;131:2173. 222. Babbush KM, Babbush RA, Khachemoune A. The therapeutic use of antioxidants for melasma. J Drugs Dermatol. 2020;19:788. 223. Chang TS. Natural melanogenesis inhibitors acting through the down‑regulation of tyrosinase activity. Materials. 2012;5:1661. 224. Park SY, Jin ML, Kim YH, et al. Aromatic‑turmerone inhibits alpha‑MSH and IBMX ‑induced melanogenesis by inactivating CREB and MITF signaling pathways. Arch Dermatol Res. 2011;303:737. 225. Weber GC, Buhren BA, Schrumpf H, et al. Clinical applications of hyaluronidase. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1148:255.
hyaluronidase. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1148:255. 226. GeRbalski J, Graczyk F, Załuski D. Paving the way towards effective plant ‑based inhibitors of hyaluronidase and tyrosinase: a critical review on a structure–activity relationship. J Enzyme Inhibit Med Chem. 2022;37:1120. 227. Piwowarski JP , Kiss AK, Kozłowska‑ Wojciechowska M. Anti‑hyaluro ‑nidase anti‑ elastase activity screening of tannin‑rich plant materials used in traditional polish medicine for external treatment of diseases with inflammatory background. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011;137:937. 228. Kim SY, Go KC, Song YS, et al. Extract of the mycelium of T. matsutake inhibits elastase activity and TPA‑induced MMP ‑1expression in human fibroblasts. Int J Mol Med. 2014;34:1613. 229. Onar HC, Yusufoglu A, Turker G, Yanardag R. Elastase: tyrosinase and lipoxygenase inhibition and antioxidant activity of an aque ‑ous extract from Epilobium angustifolium L. leaves. J Med Plant Res. 2012;6:716.
2012;6:716. 230. Thomas NV, Manivasagan P , Kim SK. Potential matrix metalloprotein‑ase inhibitors from edible marine algae: a review. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014;37:1090. 231. Elsner P . Antimicrobials and the skin physiological and pathological
ase inhibitors from edible marine algae: a review. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014;37:1090. 231. Elsner P . Antimicrobials and the skin physiological and pathological flora. Cur Probl Dermatol. 2006;33:35. 232. Alsterholm M, Karami N, Faergemann J. Antimicrobial activity of topical skin pharmaceuticals: an in vitro study. Acta Derm Venereol. 2010;90:239. 233. Ribeiro AS, Estanqueiro M, Oliveira MB, Lobo JMS. Main benefits and applicability of plant extracts in skin care products. Cosmetics. 2015;2:48. 234. Smit NP , Kolb RM, Lentjes EG, et al. Variations in melanin formation by cultured melanocytes from different skin types. Arch Dermatol Res. 1998;290:342. 235. Liu SH, Chu IM, Pan IH. Effects of hydroxybenzyl alcohols on mel‑anogenesis in melanocyte ‑keratinocyte co ‑culture and monolayer culture of melanocytes. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2008;23:526. 236. Greatens A, Hakozaki T, Koshoffer A, et al. Effective inhibition of
melanosome transfer to keratinocytes by lectins and niacinamide is reversible. Exp Dermatol. 2005;14:498.
Page 42 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40  237. Duval C, Smit NP , Kolb AM, et al. Keratinocytes control the pheo/eumelanin ratio in cultured normal human melanocytes. Pigment Cell Res. 2002;15:440. 238. Ni‑Komatsu L, Leung JK, Williams D, et al. Triazine ‑based tyrosinase inhibitors identified by chemical genetic screening. Pigment Cell Res. 2005;18:447. 239. Yamakoshi J, Otsuka F, Sano A, et al. Lightening effect on ultraviolet ‑induced pigmentation of guinea pig skin by oral administration of a proanthocyanidin‑rich extract from grape seeds. Pigment Cell Res. 2003;16:629. 240. Yoshimura M, Watanabe Y, Kasai K, et al. Inhibitory effect of an ellagic acid‑rich pomegranate extract on tyrosinase activity and ultraviolet ‑induced pigmentation. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2005;69:2368. 241. Choi TY, Kim JH, Ko DH, et al. Zebrafish as a new model for phenotype ‑based screening of melanogenic regulatory compounds.
Pigment Cell Res. 2007;20:120. 242. Kim JH, Baek SH, Kim DH, et al. Downregulation of melanin synthesis by haginin A and its application to in vivo lightening model. J Invest Dermatol. 2008;128:1227. 243. Sharmeen JB, Mahomoodally FM, Zengin G, Maggi F. Essential oils as natural sources of fragrance compounds for cosmetics and cosmeceu‑ticals. Molecules. 2021;26:666. 244. Babita S, Sellam P , Jayoti M, Puja R. Floral essential oils: importance and uses for mankind. HortFlora Res Spectr. 2014;3:7. 245. Pierce J, Halpern BP . Orthonasal and retronasal odorant identification based upon vapor phase input from common substances. Chem Senses. 1996;21:529. 246. Hoover KC. The geography of smell. Cartographica. 2009;44:237. 247. Kliszcz A, Danel A, Pula J, et al. Fleeting beauty‑the world of plant fragrance and their application. Molecules. 2021;26:2473. 248. Yousefi M, Rahimi‑Nasrabadi M, Pourmortazavi SM, et al. Supercritical
fluid extraction of essential oils. Trends Analyt Chem. 2019;118:182. 249. Shahsavarpour M, Lashkarbolooki M, Eftekhari MJ, Esmaeilzadeh F. Extraction of essential oils from Mentha spicata L. (Labiatae) via optimized supercritical carbon dioxide process. J Supercrit Fluids. 2017;130:253. 250. Elgndi MA, Filip S, Pavlic B, et al. Antioxidative and cytotoxic activity of essential oils and extracts of Satureja montana L., Coriandrum sativum L. and Ocimum basilicum L. obtained by supercritical fluid extraction. J Supercrit Fluids. 2017;128:128. 251. Singh A, Ahmad A, Bushra R. Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction of essential oils from leaves of Eucalyptus globulus L., their analysis and application. Anal Methods. 2016;8:1339. 252. Chemat F, Lucchesi ME, Smadja J, et al. Microwave accelerated steam distillation of essential oil from lavender: a rapid, clean and environ‑mentally friendly approach. Anal Chim Acta. 2006;555:157.
253. Moradi S, Fazlali A, Hamedi H. Microwave ‑assisted hydro ‑distillation of essential oil from rosemary: comparison with traditional distillation. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2018;10:22. 254. Sahraoui N, Vian MA, Bornard I, et al. Improved microwave steam distillation apparatus for isolation of essential oils: comparison with conventional steam distillation. J Chromatogr A. 2008;1210:229. 255. Lucchesi ME, Chemat F, Smadja J. Solvent ‑free microwave extraction: an innovative tool for rapid extraction of essential oil from aromatic herbs and spices. JMPEE. 2004;39:135. 256. Burger P , Plainfosse H, Brochet X, Fernandez X. Extraction of natural fra‑grance ingredients: history overview and future trends. Chem Biodivers. 2019;16: e1900424. 257. Paiva A, Craveiro R, Aroso I, et al. Natural deep eutectic solvents—sol‑vents for the 21st century. ACS Sustain Chem Eng. 2014;2:1063. 258. Kraśniewska K, Gniewosz M, Kosakowska O, Pobiega K. Chemical
composition and antimicrobial properties of essential oil from lavender (Lavandula angustifolia L.) in commercial available preparation. Adv
composition and antimicrobial properties of essential oil from lavender (Lavandula angustifolia L.) in commercial available preparation. Adv Phytother. 2017;2:113. 259. Simon DZ, Beliveau J, Aube C. Extraction by hydrodiffusion of the essential oil of Monarda fistulosa grown in the Province of Quebec: assay of geraniol in the hydrodiffused oil. Int J Crude Drug Res. 1986;24:120. 260. Chen W, Viljoen AM. Geraniol‑A review of a commercially important fragrance material. S Afr J Bot. 2010;76:643. 261. Akter S, Islam MT, Zulkefeli M, Khan SI. Agarwood production–a mul‑tidisciplinary field to be explored in Bangladesh. Int J Pharm Life Sci. 2013;2:22. 262. Buckle, J. Essential Oil Toxicity and Contraindications. In Clinical Aromatherapy (Third Edition) Essential Oils in Healthcare; Churchill Livingstone: London, UK, 2016; pp. 73–94. 263. Van Oosten EJ, Schuttelaar MLA, Coenraads PJ. Clinical relevance of positive patch test reactions to the 26 EU‑labelled fragrances. Contact
Dermat. 2009;61:217. 264. Sarkic A, Stappen I. Essential oils and their single compounds in cosmetics‑A critical review. Cosmetics. 2018;5:11. 265. Münch S, Wohlrab J, Neubert RHH. Dermal and transdermal delivery of pharmaceutically relevant macromolecules. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2017;119:235. 266. Yu YQ, Yang X, Wu XF, Fan YB. Enhancing permeation of drug molecules across the skin via delivery in nanocarriers: novel strategies for effective transdermal applications. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021;9:200. 267. Municoy S, Alvarez Echazu MI, Antezana PE, et al. Stimuli‑responsive materials for tissue engineering and drug delivery. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21:4724. 268. Kim B, Cho HE, Moon SH, et al. Transdermal delivery systems in cosmet ‑ics. Biomed Dermatol. 2020;4:10. 269. Gupta R, Dwadasi BS, Rai B, Mitragotri S. Effect of chemical permeation enhancers on skin permeability: in silico screening using molecular dynamics simulations. Sci Rep. 2019;9:1456.
dynamics simulations. Sci Rep. 2019;9:1456. 270. Haque T, Talukder MMU. Chemical enhancer: a simplistic way to modulate barrier function of the stratum corneum. Adv Pharm Bull. 2018;8:169. 271. Hasan A, Farooqui HA. Review on role of essential oil as penetra‑tion enhancer in transdermal drug delivery system. Syst Rev Pharm. 2021;12:439. 272. Pereira R, Silva SG, Pinheiro Met al. Current status of amino acid‑based permeation enhancers in transdermal drug delivery. Membranes. 2021;11:343. 273. Hattori T, Tagawa H, Inai M, et al. Transdermal delivery of nobiletin using ionic liquids. Sci Rep. 2019;9:20191. 274. Zhou Z, Liu C, Wan X, Fang L. Development of a w/o emulsion using ionic liquid strategy for transdermal delivery of anti‑aging component α‑lipoic acid: mechanism of different ionic liquids on skin retention and efficacy evaluation. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2020;141:105042. 275. Caparica R, Júlio A, Fernandes F, et al. Upgrading the topical delivery of
poorly soluble drugs using ionic liquids as a versatile tool. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:4338. 276. Chantereau G, Sharma M, Abednejad A, et al. Bacterial nanocellulose membranes loaded with vitamin B‑based ionic liquids for dermal care applications. J Mol Liq. 2020;302: 112547. 277. Rai VK, Mishra N, Yadav KS, Yadav NP . Nanoemulsion as pharmaceutical carrier for dermal and transdermal drug delivery: formulation develop ‑ment, stability issues, basic considerations and applications. J Control Release. 2018;270:203. 278. Shaker DS, Ishak RAH, Ghoneim A, Elhuoni MA. Nanoemulsion: a review on mechanisms for the transdermal delivery of hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs. Sci Pharm. 2019;87:17. 279. Alghaith AF, Alshehri S, Alhakamy NA, Hosny KM. Development, optimization and characterization of nanoemulsion loaded with clove oil‑naftifine antifungal for the management of tinea. Drug Deliv. 2021;28:343. 280. Smith CN, Alexander BR. The relative cytotoxicity of personal care
preservative systems in Balb/c3T3 clone A31 embryonic mouse cells
2021;28:343. 280. Smith CN, Alexander BR. The relative cytotoxicity of personal care preservative systems in Balb/c3T3 clone A31 embryonic mouse cells and the effect of selected preservative systems upon the toxicity of a standard rinse ‑off formulation. Toxicol In Vitro. 2005;19:963. 281. Kanwar IL, Haider T, Kumari A, et al. Models for acne: a comprehensive study. Drug Discov Ther. 2018;12:329. 282. Xia L, Zouboulis C, Detmar M, et al. Isolation of human sebaceous glands and cultivation of sebaceous gland‑ derived cells as an in vitro model. J Invest Dermatol. 1989;93:315. 283. Rosenfield RL, Kentsis A, Deplewski D, Ciletti N. Rat preputial sebocyte differentiation involves peroxisome proliferator ‑activated receptors. J Invest Dermatol. 1999;112:226.
Page 43 of 43 Liu  Natural Products and Bioprospecting           (2022) 12:40   284. Glasenhardt K, Erdei L, Bolla B, et al. Development of an in vitro follicle model to study the interaction of keratinocytes, sebocytes and Propi-onibacterium acnes. J Invest Dermatol. 2016;136:S223. 285. Esselin N, Capallere C, Meyrignac C, et al. Generation and quantification of oxidized squalene to develop an acne testing model in vitro based on skin tissue engineering. J Invest Dermatol. 2016;136:S173. 286. Cibula D, Hill M, Vohradnikova O, et al. The role of androgens in deter ‑mining acne severity in adult women. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143:399. 287. De Young LM, Young JM, Ballaron SJ, et al. Intradermal injection of Propionibacterium acnes: A model of inflammation relevant to acne. J Invest Dermatol. 1984;83:394. 288. Charny JW, Choi JK, James WD. Spironolactone for the treatment of acne in women, a retrospective study of 110 patients. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017;3:111.
Dermatol. 2017;3:111. 289. Bissonnette R, Poulin Y, Drew J, et al. Olumacostat glasaretil, a novel topical sebum inhibitor, in the treatment of acne vulgaris: a phase IIa, multicenter, randomized, vehicle ‑controlled study. J Am Acad Derma‑tol. 2017;76:33. 290. Appiah S, Lawley B, Vu M, et al. Evaluation of the effectiveness of Eladi Keram for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a randomised controlled pilot study. Eur J Integr Med. 2017;2:38. 291. Tsai TH, Chuang LT, Lien TJ, et al. Rosmarinus officinalis extract sup ‑presses Propionibacterium acnes‑induced inflammatory responses. J Med Food. 2013;16:324. 292. Natsch A. What makes us smell: the biochemistry of body odour and the design of new deodorant ingredients. Chimia. 2015;69:414. 293. Zeng XN, Leyden JJ, Lawley HJ, et al. Analysis of characteristic odors from human male axillae. J Chem Ecol. 1991;17:1469. 294. Natsch A, Gfeller H, Gygax P , et al. A specific bacterial aminoacylase
cleaves odorant precursors secreted in the human axilla. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:5718. 295. Gupta PL, Rajput M, Oza T, et al. Eminence of microbial product in cosmetic industry. Nat Prod Bioprospect. 2019;9:267.Publisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub ‑lished maps and institutional affiliations.
www.PRSGlobalOpen.com	 1In 1967, the zoologist Desmond Morris1 declared that “Flawless skin is the most universally desired human feature,” explaining the primordial human need to “advertise” health, well being, and fertility with an even-toned, clear, and radiant complexion. In the quest to achieve perfect skin, consumers of all ages are constantly searching for the “best” skincare products. Whether they shop at drug stores, department stores, or online, consum-ers are faced with a paradox of choice. They look to their friends, physicians, or favorite bloggers for independent recommendations, often purchasing expensive products that fail to live up to their reputed benefits.As reported in a market survey conducted in October 2015,2 consumers perceive that factors such as “regular  facial cleansing, lifestyle, sun exposure, diet, and compli-ance with a daily skin regimen” ranked higher and impacted their skin’s appearance more than “going to a dermatolo-
gist or getting professional skincare treatments.” Their observation has merit. Extrinsic aging, which includes ul-traviolet exposure, pollution, and lifestyle choices such as smoking, sleeping positions, diet, and daily skincare habits, is estimated to account for 80% of the visible signs of skin aging,3,4 whereas intrinsic aging, which is genetically deter -mined and subject to the influence of one’s overall health, stress level, and propensity to develop skin conditions such as acne, rosacea, or eczema, accounts for only 20%.The visible results of intrinsic aging of the skin include thinning, atrophy, fine lines, and dryness.5 By contrast,  extrinsic aging manifests as stratum corneum thickening, mottled pigmentation, dullness, dryness, wrinkles, and laxi-ty.6 A loss of elasticity leads to sagging, whereas a reduction in the rate of epidermal cell turnover causes prolonged wound healing, dryness, an overall dull appearance caused by thin-
ning of the epidermis, and thickening of the stratum corne-um.7,8 Complete renewal of the epidermis requires 40 to 60 days in the elderly compared with 28 days in young adults.9 Dermal collagen fibrils harden, and collagen production de-creases on average by 68% by age 80.10,11 An obvious clini-cal example of intrinsic versus extrinsic aging can be seen by comparing sun-exposed facial skin with the sun-protected skin of the upper inner arm. In most people, these 2 areas of the skin demonstrate profound differences in pigment, texture, tone, sagging, and wrinkling. It should also be noted that inflammation, whether from barrier disruption, allergic reactions, ultraviolet exposure, pollution, or the use of irritat-ing topical products, can accelerate skin aging.7Beyond serving as our “billboard” to the world, the principal functions of skin include protection, excretion, secretion, absorption, thermoregulation, pigment pro-
Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of The American Society of Plastic Surgeons. All rights reserved. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal.DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000001152Background:	 Although cosmetic procedures have a significant impact on certain aspects of aging, such as deep, wrin-kling, sagging, and volume loss, they fail to address the overall quality of the skin.Methods:	 Daily skincare routines potentially can have a significant long-term impact on the overall quality of a per -son’s complexion.Results:	 By expanding our product knowledge, we can help our patients individualize their at-home skincare routine
son’s complexion.Results:	 By expanding our product knowledge, we can help our patients individualize their at-home skincare routine using effective products and ingredients designed to address their specific skin concern and support the professional care we deliver.Conclusions:	 Here, we discuss the types of products and ingredients suitable for the most common dermatologic con-cerns, from wrinkling to skin sensitivity, acne to sun damage. (Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open 2016;4:e1152; doi:10.1097/GOX.0000000000001152; Published online 14 December 2016.)Skincare Bootcamp: The Evolving Role of SkincareKatie Rodan, MD; Kathy Fields, MD; George Majewski; Timothy Falla, PhDCosmetic Bootcamp: PRS Global Open proudly  publishes the proceedings from The Cosmetic Bootcamp  July 2016 meeting that was held in the St Regis Resort  in Aspen, Colorado on July 8-11th, 2016.From Rodan + Fields, San Francisco, Calif.Received for publication March 28, 2016; accepted October 11, 2016.
Presented at the The Cosmetic Bootcamp meeting, Aspen, Colo., July 8-11, 2016.Disclosure: The authors of this paper all have a relationship with Rodan & Fields, LLC, but none of the company’s prod-ucts are eluded to, cited, or referred to in this review article. The Article Processing Charge for this proceeding was paid for by Allergan plc, as part of an unrestricted educational grant to support the entire Cosmetic Boot Camp 2016 Supplement. Allergan plc had no involvement in the production, selection, or review of this proceeding supplement.Meeting Proceedings Cosmetic BootcampDownloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
2PRS Global Open • 2016duction, sensory perception, and the regulation of im-munological processes. Age-related physiological changes negatively impact these functions by impairing the skin’s barrier function, decreasing epidermal cell turnover, as well as keratinocyte and fibroblast proliferation, and re-ducing the vascular network responsible for delivering oxygen and nutrients to the tissues while removing meta-bolic byproducts.7,12A plethora of services, from rhytidectomies and blepha-roplasties to injections with volumizing fillers, neurotoxins, and laser resurfacing, are the bread and butter of plastic surgery or cosmetic dermatology practices. However, un-less we address our patients’ at-home skincare routine as part of our treatment plan, we are missing an opportunity to enhance the results of their cosmetic procedure.A great starting point is to help our patients pinpoint their primary complexion concern, whether it is acne, dis-
colorations, sun damage, sensitivity, or lines and wrinkles. Daily skincare routines potentially have the most signifi-cant long-term impact on the overall quality of a person’s complexion. By expanding our product knowledge, we can help our patients individualize their at-home skincare routine by using effective products that address their spe-cific concern and support the professional care we deliver. As a mirror of our overall well being, healthy youthful-looking skin improves the self-confidence and self-esteem of our patients and enhances their quality of life.SKINCARE:	CURRENT	STATE	OF	PLAYSkincare products can be composed of either cosmetics or Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved actives (this category includes drugs, whether over the counter [OTC] or prescription or even “cosmeceuticals”). Accord-ing to current FDA regulations, a purely cosmetic product or ingredient is defined by its intended use. In chapter VI of
the 1938 Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act, cosmetics are defined as “articles intended to be applied to the human body for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance without affecting the body’s struc-ture or functions.”13 In contrast, an FDA-approved OTC contains an “active” ingredient capable of altering the struc-ture or function of the skin. The term “cosmeceutical” is an ambiguous marketing term, coined by Dr. Albert Kligman, used to describe cosmetic ingredients that have biologically active ingredients.14 When used over time, the combination of cosmetics and OTC drugs in a skincare regimen has the potential to produce significant demonstrable benefits.The perception of youthful, healthy skin stems from a number of features of the epidermis and dermis, includ-ing the density and quality of the extracellular matrix, the distribution of cells within connective tissue, the appear -
ance of cornified cells at the skin surface, and variations in skin’s natural fluorescence.15–17 Alterations in skin physiol-ogy result in a number of visible skin conditions, including xerosis, acne, and abnormal pigmentation, that impact one’s appearance. A combination of OTC and cosmetic skincare products delivered in a regimen can play a sig-nificant role in assisting consumers to restore their skin’s health and beauty.Because cosmetic products and ingredients have  remained mostly unregulated, without the need of FDA premarket approval (with the exception of color addi-tives), the skincare industry has experienced a surge of new ingredients and delivery vehicles over the past 3 de-cades. This is exemplified by the expanding volume of in-gredient monographs added to the International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook managed by the Per -sonal Care Product Council.18 Improvements in skincare
18 Improvements in skincare ingredient technology and advancements in delivery and formulation designs have led to the creation of more ef-
sonal Care Product Council.18 Improvements in skincare ingredient technology and advancements in delivery and formulation designs have led to the creation of more ef-fective products, spurring the growth of the U.S. skincare industry from $10.7B in 2005 to $13.8B in 2015.19Basic	Skincare	NeedsProtection, prevention, cleansing, and moisturizing are the key components of an effective skincare routine. Because most sun damage results from everyday, inciden-tal ultraviolet exposure, rather than occasional bursts while on vacation, dermatologists recommend daily use of sunscreens. The most effective active ingredients for blocking out both ultraviolet A and ultraviolet B are either zinc oxide or avobenzone. Categorized as OTC drugs, sun-screens must undergo safety and efficacy testing and meet stringent labeling requirements.20 No new sunscreen ac-tives have been approved by the FDA since the 1990s, but advancements in formulation chemistry and technology
have improved sunscreen esthetics, ease of application, and performance in an effort to encourage consumer compliance. Sunscreen should always be a mandatory fi-nal step of every at-home skincare program.There is a dizzying array of cleansers for removal of makeup, pollution, and excess sebum and moisturizers for hydration and delivery of beneficial ingredients. Some contain FDA-approved active ingredients for restoration of the skin’s barrier function, but most do not. The formu-la’s vehicle should ideally support a specific skin type (oily, dry, or combination) and enhance the activity of an active ingredient if present. Formulas with similar or identical ingredients do not necessarily perform to the same de-gree. A formula is unique, like a recipe. The combination of eggs, sugar, flour, and butter, depending on the amount of each ingredient, as well as the mixing and cooking pro-
cess, can create either a pancake or a soufflé. The same is true when it comes to product formulations, and a misin-formed consumer can be fooled by the marketing tactics of competitive products. Clinical testing and before and after photos are your best guide for making specific prod-uct recommendations to your patients.In general, gel-based and bar cleansers are best for oily complexions, whereas cream or lotion-based ones are bet-ter for normal to dry skin. Moisturizers supply humectant agents, which draw water into the stratum corneum from the environment and dermis below. Moisturizers also in-clude occlusive agents that act as a barrier to transepider -mal water loss. In almost all cases, products contain both humectants, like hyaluronic acid, urea, and allantoin, and occlusives, including petrolatum, mineral oil, and lanolin. Humectants are present in the water phase of a formula; oc-clusives are in the oil phase. Oil in water formulations tend
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
3Rodan et al. • The Evolving Role of Skincareto be lightweight gels, lotions, and serums and are best suit-ed for normal to dry skin. Water in oil formulations may be ointments or creams and offer superior hydration for dry skin. Recommending the appropriate cleanser, moisturizer, and sunscreen for your patients will depend on their skin type, that is, normal, dry, or oily. The specific FDA-approved active and/or functional cosmetic ingredients that patients should look for in their products will depend on their pri-mary skin condition, concern, or goals, as outlined below.Improving	Texture	and	ToneThe key attribute of a youthful, healthy-looking com-plexion is radiance. Radiance is determined by light  reflectance from the surface of smooth skin. With age, radiance diminishes as the epidermal cell turnover rate slows down. This results in the buildup of dead keratino-cytes in the stratum corneum and follicular ostia, creating
the appearance of rough, dry skin, enlarged pores, and poor light reflection.Exfoliation, through chemical or physical means, is the process of removing excess corneocyte buildup, which in turn stimulates cell turnover, resulting in a more polished, smoother, translucent surface. Over the past 2 decades, exfoliation has gained in popularity because of its almost immediate demonstrable benefits and the ease and variety of available products.21,22Commonly used chemical exfoliants include glycolic, lac-tic, and malic acids, known as α-hydroxy acids (AHAs), and salicylic acid, which is a β-hydroxy acid. Concentrations in ex-cess of 10% to 15% in the case of AHA and 2% in β-hydroxy acid require professional administration; however, concen-trations below this threshold may be safely used at home on a regular basis.23 Exfoliating products continue to evolve as manufacturers seek the right balance of ingredients, gener -ally in concentrations ranging from 7% to 10% and buffered
to a pH above 3.5, to reduce the risk of burning and irrita-tion.24 Recent market introductions include polyhydroxy ac-ids, such as lactobionic acid and gluconolactone. Because of their larger molecular size, these acids are better tolerated. They also help to strengthen the skin’s barrier function and serve as antioxidant chelating agents, absorbing free radicals generated by ultraviolet exposure.21 Mandelic acid is a good choice for gentle exfoliation of sensitive skin.23 Finally, as our understanding of the relationship between desquamation and hydration advances, new strategies for exfoliation have emerged, including using glycerin to aid desmosomal diges-tion, thereby promoting keratinocyte desquamation through improved epidermal moisture levels.25Physical exfoliation is available for consumers in a wide
range of products as an alternative to or in combination with chemical exfoliation; these products include topical cleans-ing scrubs containing a variety of abrasive solid particulates, mechanical facial brushes, sonicating devices, and mildly abrasive cosmetic tools such as microexfoliating rollers. Physical exfoliation induces an immediate desquamation, which in some cases can produce a temporary disruption of the skin barrier, resulting in increased transepidermal water loss.26 Such products may not replace the need for professional peels, deep needle rolling, or laser treatments but can be helpful in maintaining visible radiance.RedensificationSkin that is well protected from extrinsic aging may ap-pear smooth and unblemished, but noticeable changes in contour, firmness, wrinkling, and loss of elasticity will nev-ertheless emerge with advancing age. Epidermal and der -
mal thinning, as keratinocyte and fibroblast replication slows, is a manifestation of intrinsic aging, which is further exacerbated by extrinsic factors, most notably ultraviolet exposure.27 Epidermal thickness decreases by approxi-mately 6.4% per decade28; this is because of  decreases in
exacerbated by extrinsic factors, most notably ultraviolet exposure.27 Epidermal thickness decreases by approxi-mately 6.4% per decade28; this is because of  decreases in the amount of glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronic acid, col-lagen, and elastin, resulting in an overall dermal thinning of 6% per decade.27A cornerstone prescription therapy since 1969 in the treatment of aging skin has been the topical, synthetic form of vitamin A, tretinoin. The effectiveness of retino-ic acid chemistry is derived from binding receptors that modulate the cellular processes of proliferation and dif-ferentiation, as well as immune function. The result is a redensification of extracellular constituents through the upregulation of collagen and glucosaminoglycans, lead-ing to improved mechanical firmness and elasticity.29 In a study published in the Journal of the American Academy
of Dermatology, the application of prescription 0.05% tret-inoin during a 12-month period resulted in clinical im-provement in photoaged skin by stimulation of dermal collagen synthesis and angiogenesis.30 These benefits of-ten come at a “price”—pruritus, application site irritation, erythema, and peeling are frequent side effects.29Nonprescription forms of retinoic acid precursors have given consumers access to this chemical moiety. At identical concentrations, the prescription all-trans retino-ic acid is approximately 10 times stronger than the com-mercially available retinol. Although less effective, retinol has the benefit of low irritation potential when used dai-ly.31 Retinol is inherently an unstable molecule, making it difficult to retain activity in product formulations. Other less biologically active but more chemically stable forms of vitamin A, such as retinyl-palmitate, are commonly used skincare ingredients, often at low concentrations for the
sake of marketing claims.Progress continues in the creation of novel vitamin A delivery systems and stabilization techniques to allow maximum benefit with minimal side effects. Retinalde-hyde, which requires only one enzymatic conversion to metabolize into the active form of vitamin A, is one such example.32 Studies have demonstrated that retinaldehyde is well tolerated, yielding significant improvement in epi-dermal thickness and activating markers, such as cellular retinoic acid binding protein type II and keratin-14, which are also activated by retinoic acid.29 On the horizon are other commercially available derivatives, including hy-droxypinacolone retinoate, that similarly promise an ef-fective and easily tolerated form of retinoic acid.33New and improved active forms of topical vitamin A provide consumers access to products based on their  desired level of efficacy, tolerance for side effects, cost, and convenience. A retinoid-containing product should
be included in everyone’s skincare arsenal to address the signs of skin aging.Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
4PRS Global Open • 2016Managing	SensitivitySensitive skin is a self-diagnosed condition. It is esti-mated that 50% of women and 40% of men view them-selves as having sensitive skin to some degree.34,35 They describe their skin as highly reactive, itchy, uncomfort-able, red, and dry and that it is exacerbated by the envi-ronment (ultraviolet radiation, temperature, and wind), topical medicinal and cosmetic products, pollution, stress, and hormones.36Although the exact pathophysiology of sensitive skin is not fully understood, there is evidence that 3 broad ar -eas may be involved: barrier function, inflammation, and sensory nerve abnormalities. The barrier function is com-promised in sensitive skin compared with normal skin,37 allowing allergens and irritants into the skin.36,38 Inflam-mation ensues, escalating the cycle of sensitivity, damage, and inflammation. The neuropathic origin of sensitive skin may be a result of degeneration of intraepidermal nerve fibers.39
39In treating a patient with sensitive skin, it is impor -tant to repair and maintain barrier function and reduce inflammation. Barrier repair is best performed with the delivery of moisture through humectants, such as glycerin and hyaluronic acid, and prevention of transepidermal water loss with the use of barrier molecules, including petrolatum and dimethicone. In addition, natural mois-turizing factors, lipid complexes, and ceramides all act to strengthen the skin’s barrier function. Preventing contact with known irritants, allergens, solvents, surfactants, and sensitizing preservatives40 is also important in allowing the skin to recover. The use of topically applied chamomile has been reported as a beneficial antiinflammatory ingre-dient to soothe sensitive skin.41 As a general rule, it is wise to recommend products with a limited number of ingre-dients.Maintaining	Blemish-free	SkinAcne is a medical condition that undermines a per -
son’s confidence and impacts his/her quality of life. For both teens and adults, acne is stigmatizing. Acne suffer -ers are often viewed as unhealthy, unattractive, unclean, and unlovable. The spectrum of breakouts ranges from blackheads and an occasional pimple to chronic, wide-spread nodulocystic lesions, with scarring potential. The darker one’s skin type, the more likely one is to experi-ence postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. These dark marks often last from months to years, frequently causing as much psychological distress as the inflammatory lesion that preceded it.The role of OTC products in managing mild to moder -ate breakouts is significant and continues to evolve. OTC medications include salicylic acid (0.5%–5%), benzoyl peroxide (2.5%–10%), and sulfur (3%–10%). The kerato-lytic activity of salicylic acid helps to unclog pores and ex-foliates the stratum corneum. Benzoyl peroxide provides broad-spectrum antimicrobial action against P. acnes with-
out the risk of resistance, and sulfur has a mild inhibitory action on bacteria and modest antiinflammatory benefits.A meta-analysis comparing the efficacy of a combina-tion prescription medicine containing benzoyl peroxide and clindamycin with that of benzoyl peroxide and sali-cylic acid demonstrated that, at weeks 10 to 12, benzoyl peroxide plus salicylic acid had the best treatment profile for acne vulgaris.42Research today suggests that acne is a complex con-dition involving hyperkeratinization, excessive sebum production, bacterial proliferation, and an inflammatory immune response.43 Acne is incurable and commonly per -sists in adult women for more than 20 years.44 It can be ef-
production, bacterial proliferation, and an inflammatory immune response.43 Acne is incurable and commonly per -sists in adult women for more than 20 years.44 It can be ef-fectively managed with a combination of medicines (OTC and/or prescription) specifically targeting each step of the underlying pathogenesis. The drawback of topical acne medications is the dryness, redness, and irritation they often cause, making daily compliance a challenge. In particular, adult women find that the chronic irritation caused by topical acne medications is at cross-purposes with their desire to address their concerns regarding skin aging.To ensure patient compliance with a treatment regi-
men for mild to moderate adult acne, products must be hydrating, be effective, and cause minimal to no irritation. Formulations should be esthetically pleasing, without a medicinal odor, and ideally contain antiaging ingredients. Sulfur is difficult to tolerate in a leave-on product because of its offensive smell. Therefore, sulfur masks left on the skin for 10 to 15 minutes before washing off are a rec-ommended alternative to a leave-on product. Exfoliating cleansers with small grains that mechanically slough off dead cells and unclog pores or those with salicylic acid are worthwhile choices. Benzoyl peroxide at a low strength (2.5%) is generally effective for long-term treatment and prevention of breakouts. Retinoids, either prescription or OTC, offer benefits for acne and aging. Because many acne treatment actives, including retinoids and benzoyl peroxide, are slightly sun sensitizing, daily sunscreen must be used in conjunction with these ingredients and is es-
pecially critical to address concerns about skin aging. In acne-prone skin, noncomedogenic, oil-free products with either zinc oxide or avobenzone as an active ingredient are recommended. Topical antioxidants, including res-veratrol, quercetin, and cinnamic acid, provide potential benefit for both the inflammatory components of acne and photodamage.45,46 Finding the “best” medicated acne skincare products for an individual depends on their un-derlying skin type (oily, dry, or combination), disease se-verity, and the specific secondary issues they wish to treat, including aging, sensitivity, or pigmentation. Recognizing that the majority of patients self-treat their acne, helping your patients select an appropriate regimen will improve their overall appearance and increase their satisfaction with the services you provide.43 A referral to a board-cer -tified dermatologist is highly recommended for moderate to severe acne.43Creating	and	Maintaining	an	Even	Skin	Tone
43Creating	and	Maintaining	an	Even	Skin	ToneIn many cultures, an even-toned, fair complexion is a prized attribute. Hyperpigmentation, in the form of postinflammatory dark marks, melasma, or solar lentigi-nes, increases the perception of an aged appearance to a greater degree than wrinkles.47 Subsurface pigmentation Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
5Rodan et al. • The Evolving Role of Skincarecreates “dull” skin and a loss of radiance, in the same way that particulates floating in a lake absorb light, blunting light reflection, and causing the water to look “muddy” rather than clear.Most females deal with dull and unevenly pigmented skin through the application of camouflage (makeup foun-dation). In-office procedures, such as lasers, peels, or mi-crodermabrasion, are generally effective; however, there is a risk of causing postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. In addition, unless properly counseled about continued sun protection along with the use of skin-brightening prod-ucts, patients become frustrated when their pigmentation reoccurs.A topical at-home medicated skincare system is a safe, effective, and low-risk alternative or complement to  resurfacing procedures. Used daily, a combination of products containing a prescription or nonprescription strength hydroquinone and retinoids, along with exfolia-
tion and sun protection, generally yields overall lighten-ing of abnormal pigmentation within 8 to 12 weeks. One study concluded that a combination of prescription 4% hydroquinone with 0.3% retinol achieved superior results in comparison to 0.05% tretinoin for improving photo-associated hyperpigmentation.48A uniform complexion can be maintained with “bright-ening” agents that include ingredients like kojic acid, AHAs, licorice root, and water-soluble derivatives of vitamin C, found in a variety of products from cleansers to toners and moisturizers. The development of new cosmetic-grade functional brightening agents, such as hexylresorcinol, pterostilbene, and 1-methylhydantoin-2-imide, is ongoing as cosmetic companies seek well-tolerated, effective alter -natives to hydroquinone, the FDA-approved lightener.CONCLUSIONSAs we grow older, our skin’s inherent antiaging mecha-
nisms diminish: defenses weaken, critical processes slow, and the rate of breakdown of key constituents increases. Although cosmetic procedures have a significant positive impact on specific aspects of aging, such as deep wrinkling, sagging, and volume loss, they do not necessarily address the overall quality of the skin. Recommending an at-home skincare regimen based on your patient’s individual needs is synergistic with the services cosmetic dermatologists and surgeons provide. Clinically proven products, formulated with the right ingredients for a specific skin concern and delivered in an esthetically appealing system, will both maximize the outcome and increase the longevity of ben-efits from the treatments we provide while empowering the patient to personalize and control their skincare journey.Timothy Falla, PhDRodan + Fields60 Spear StreetSan Francisco, CA 94105E-mail: tfalla@rodanandfields.comREFERENCES
E-mail: tfalla@rodanandfields.comREFERENCES 1. Morris D. The Naked Ape: A Zoologist’s Study of the Human Animal. London, England: Jonathan Cape; 1967. 2. Mintel Skincare Ingredient and Format Trends – US - December 2015. Available at: http://store.mintel.com/skincare-ingredient-and-format-trends-us-december-2015. Accessed February 10, 2016. 3. Flament F, Bazin R, Laquieze S, et al. Effect of the sun on vis-ible clinical signs of aging in Caucasian skin. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2013;6:221–232. 4. Cevenini E, Invidia L, Lescai F, et al. Human models of aging and longevity. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2008;8:1393–1405. 5. El-Domyati M, Attia S, Saleh F, et al. Intrinsic aging vs. photo-aging: a comparative histopathological, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin. Exp Dermatol. 2002;11:398–405. 6. Kligman LH. Photoaging. Manifestations, prevention, and treat-ment. Clin Geriatr Med. 1989;5:235–251.
ment. Clin Geriatr Med. 1989;5:235–251. 7. Ganceviciene R, Liakou AI, Theodoridis A, et al. Skin anti-aging strategies. Dermatoendocrinol. 2012;4:308–319. 8. Gosain A, DiPietro LA. Aging and wound healing. World J Surg. 2004;28:321–326. 9. Sadick NS. Futuristic approaches to skin care. In: Sadick NS, Lupo
8. Gosain A, DiPietro LA. Aging and wound healing. World J Surg. 2004;28:321–326. 9. Sadick NS. Futuristic approaches to skin care. In: Sadick NS, Lupo M, Bersen DS, et al, eds. Cosmeceutical Science in Clinical Practice. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010. 10. Varani J, Dame MK, Rittie L, et al. Decreased collagen production in chronologically aged skin: roles of age-dependent alteration in fibroblast function and defective mechanical stimulation. Am J Pathol. 2006;168:1861–1868. 11. Bonta M, Daina L, Muţiu G. The process of ageing reflected by histological changes in the skin. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2013;54(3 Suppl):797–804. 12. Kelly RI, Pearse R, Bull RH, et al. The effects of aging on the cuta-neous microvasculature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995;33(5 Pt 1):749–756. 13. Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act. 1938. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/legislation/federalfooddrugand-cosmeticactfdcact/. Accessed February 10, 2016.
14. Farris PK. A Critical Look at the Term Cosmeceutical: Descriptive or Deceptive? Dermatology Times. Available at: http://dermatology-times.modernmedicine.com/ dermatology-times/content/tags/cosmeceutical-products/critical-look-term-cosmeceutical-descrip-tive-o. Accessed February 10, 2016. 15. Gilchrest BA. A review of skin ageing and its medical therapy. Br J Dermatol. 1996;135:867–875. 16. Leffell DJ, Stetz ML, Milstone LM, et al. In vivo fluorescence of human skin. A potential marker of photoaging. Arch Dermatol. 1988;124:1514–1518. 17. Hofmann B, Adam AC, Jacobs K, et al. Advanced glycation end product associated skin autofluorescence: a mirror of vascular function? Exp Gerontol. 2013;48:38–44. 18. Personal Care Product Council: Available at: http://www.person-alcarecouncil.org. Accessed February 10, 2016. 19. Beauty and Personal Care. Euromonitor Passport Database 2015. Chicago, IL: Euromonitor International Ltd; 2015.
Chicago, IL: Euromonitor International Ltd; 2015. 20. Dale Wilson B, Moon S, Armstrong F. Comprehensive review of ultraviolet radiation and the current status on sunscreens. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2012;5:18–23. 21. Green BA, Yu RJ, Van Scott EJ. Clinical and cosmeceutical uses of hydroxyacids. Clin Dermatol. 2009;27:495–501. 22. Mintel. Mintel Beauty Devices-US-March 2015 Report. London England; Mintel Group, Ltd. Available at: http://www.mintel.com/press-centre/beauty-and-personal-care/one-in-five-us-wom-en-use-a-cleansing-brush-skincare-device 23. Rendon MI, Berson DS, Cohen JL, et al. Evidence and consider -ations in the application of chemical peels in skin disorders and aesthetic resurfacing. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2010;3:32–43. 24. Rizza L, Frasca G, Bonina C, et al. Comparative in vivo study of the efficacy and tolerance of exfoliating agents using reflectance spectrophotometric methods. J Cosmet Sci. 2010;61:247–258.
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
6PRS Global Open • 2016 25. Rawlings A, Harding C, Watkinson A, et al. The effect of glycerol and humidity on desmosome degradation in stratum corneum. Arch Dermatol Res. 1995;287:457–464. 26. Rajan P, Grimes PE. Skin barrier changes induced by aluminum oxide and sodium chloride microdermabrasion. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:390–393. 27. Shuster S, Black MM, McVitie E. The influence of age and sex on skin thickness, skin collagen and density. Br J Dermatol. 1975;93:639–643. 28. Branchet MC, Boisnic S, Frances C, et al. Skin thickness changes in normal aging skin. Gerontology. 1990;36:28–35. 29. Mukherjee S, Date A, Patravale V, et al. Retinoids in the treatment of skin aging: an overview of clinical efficacy and safety. Clin Interv Aging. 2006;1:327–348. 30. Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, et al. Topical tretinoin for pho-toaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;15(4 Pt 2):836–859. 31. Oddos T, Roure R, Leyden J, et al. A placebo-controlled study
demonstrates the long-lasting anti-aging benefits of a cream con-taining retinol, dihydroxymethylchromone (DMC) and hyaluron-ic acid. J Cos Derm Sci Appl. 2012; 2: 51–59. 32. Saurat JH, Didierjean L, Masgrau E, et al. Topical retinaldehyde on human skin: biologic effects and tolerance. J Invest Dermatol. 1994;103:770–774. 33. Veraldi S, Barbareschi M, Guanziroli E, et al. Treatment of mild to moderate acne with a fixed combination of hydroxypinacolone retinoate, retinol glycospheres and papain glycospheres. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2015;150:143–147. 34. Willis CM, Shaw S, De Lacharrière O, et al. Sensitive skin: an epi-demiological study. Br J Dermatol. 2001;145:258–263. 35. Loffler H, Aramaki J, Effendy I, et al. Sensitive skin. In: Zhai H, Maibach H, eds. Dermatotoxicology. New York: CRC Press; 2004:123–135. 36. Muizzuddin N, Marenus KD, Maes DH. Factors defining sensitive skin and its treatment. Am J Contact Dermat. 1998;9:170–175.
37. Seidenari S, Francomano M, Mantovani L. Baseline biophysical param-eters in subjects with sensitive skin. Contact Dermatitis 1998;38:311–315. 38. Kligman A. Human models for characterizing “sensitive skin.” Cosmet. Dermatol. 2001;14:15–19. 39. Buhé V, Vié K, Guéré C, et al. Pathophysiological study of sensitive skin. Acta Derm Venereol. 2016;96:314–318. 40. Inamadar AC, Palit A. Sensitive skin: an overview. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2013;79:9–16. 41. Srivastava JK, Shankar E, Gupta S. Chamomile: a herbal medicine of the past with bright future. Mol Med Rep. 2010;3:895–901. 42. Seidler EM, Kimball AB. Meta-analysis comparing efficacy of ben-zoyl peroxide, clindamycin, benzoyl peroxide with salicylic acid, and combination benzoyl peroxide/clindamycin in acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;63:52–62. 43. Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74:945–73.e33.
2016;74:945–73.e33. 44. Dréno B. Treatment of adult female acne: a new challenge. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(Suppl 5):14–19. 45. Nguyen G, Torres A. Systemic antioxidants and skin health. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11:e1–e4. 46. Oresajo C, Pillai S, Manco M, et al. Antioxidants and the skin: understanding formulation and efficacy. Dermatol Ther. 2012;25: 252–259. 47. Vashi NA, de Castro Maymone MB, Kundu RV. Aging differences in ethnic skin. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2016;9:31–38. 48. Draelos ZD. Novel approach to the treatment of hyperpigment-ed photodamaged skin: 4% hydroquinone/0.3% retinol versus tretinoin 0.05% emollient cream. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31(7 Pt 2):  799–804.Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/prsgo by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 09/16/2024
